|| Read it before she does...
The
Blackman’ S
Understanding
| the
| Blackwoman
Shahrazad Ali
Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation
httops://archive.org/details/blackmansguidetoO000alis
For Solomon’s seven sons
THE BLACKMAN’S GUIDE TO UNDERSTANDING THE BLACKWOMAN
Written by Shahrazad Ali
Brought to you by
CIVILIZED PUBLICATIONS
Philadelphia, PA
© 1989
The Blackman’s Guide
To Understanding The Blackwoman
Copyright 1989 by Shahrazad Ali
First Edition
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
ISBN 0-933405-01-4 : $10.00 Ta ates
1. Afro-American women. 2. Afro-American men.
E185.86.A38 1989 90-1349
305.38'896073--dc20 CIP
Published by
Civilized Publications
2019'S) 7th St!
Phila., PA 19148
Al rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
or transmitted in any form by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any
information storage or retrieval system without written permission from the author, except for the inclusion of brief
quotations in a review.
Wholesale Rates Available
Other books by Shahrazad Ali
Day by Day © 1976
How Not To Eat Pork (or life without the pig)
© 1985
Future Books:
The Blackwoman’s Guide To Understanding The
Blackman © 1990
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to express her appreciation to, the
following persons who gave willingly of their patience and
support. It was their generous tolerance and valuable
cooperation that helped make this book possible.
Solomon’s seven sons; Zann, David, Rahim, Hassan,
Arshad, Khalid and Suliaman, whose developing manhood
inspired me to write this book.
My sisters Jewell, Akilah and Njemile for providing me
with love, confidence and time to write.
My daughters Pam, Fatima, Zakiyyah, Omara and
Tannur so they can have a better future.
The Moses of my life who led me to the promised land
of security across the rocky seas of my emotions.
My brother Faheem, for his special sensitivity and
comforting embraces.
My son-in-law Rashid, for learning the attributes of
successful husbandry.
Mr. Edward Goodall, Sr., who has lived the
personification of Black manhood for over 75 years.
Milton Keenan, my accountant and friend who keeps me
on target.
John Walker and Sam Bishop for their unselfish
assistance to imprisoned Blackmen in trouble.
Maurice Brian Henderson, a persevering poet,
playwright and actor who continues to support and inspire
me;
My friends Malika Love, Margaret, Alia, Tim and
Zakiyyah whose comradeship helped me to complete this
work.
And special thanks to Ginger and Lorraine for their .
expert copy services.
..and for Sandra Levy-Thornton
The Blackman and Blackwoman in America have a problem.
They do not get along.
Before the Blackman can devise a solution
he must know the components of the problem.
The first factor is that the Blackwoman is out of control.
She does not submit to guidance by her God-given mate
the Blackman.
Her intention to overpower and subdue the Blackman
is motivated by several factors,
the most prevalent being her self-inflicted
nearly psychotic insecurity.
Her disrespect for the Blackman is a direct cause
of the destruction of the Black family.
Contents
Title Pate cnc scccl scan cetos uence eee onee ten ge eee ee ee ee a
Acknowledgements...........scecrcrsseseecececeerescececeeeree coll
Opening statement. ...- 20... s,s canon eecnenescine even ues il
COMECTIOS 5.0025, ces see ns cece nicer Bence ie oe
Rreface: cs cccnk cs ccc cate e ee aes ieee renee vil
Chapter
1 Her Childhood - where she came from, what
made het... seh dhe Seas Sena 1
2 Teenage Years - what happened, what she
TOATNS 5. cacies So es 5. Site et ico i eee ee 2)
3. Adulthood - how she behaves, what she brings ... 10
4 The Wedding - the beginning, the middle and
CG ON ae re ono Pericse oe rr eect ean entire Se 35
5 Social Integration (Dating & Marrying the
Whiteman) @atcus ea eer Re 53
6 Communications - how she talks, what she
talks aDOUL WHY so .0 conse: cet rena vane erate eran 58
7 Family Relationships - who they are, their
influencesand DOWEL... seers ee en ee ye)
8 Money - how she spends, earns, feels about it..... 82
9 Housekeeping - what her home says, what
GOES OU AINSIVC Ngo oe eae ee 88
10 Raising Children - her standards and
techniques, and. methods. eens eee eee 99
11 How She Dresses - her motivations,
explanation, of her style. ....5) cee 112
12 Her Religion - dedication, adherence and
PULDOSC joes eek ote eae ee ee pal
13. Education and Career - behavior on the job,
Salary.and prestives Wie. 2 oi a ee 128
14 Her “Attitudes” - various moods, temperament
and EXPressionS...0. 3, «sens Peee Me Me 7
15 Sex - her feelings, bedroom protocol,
apprehensions andiiceasie <<... a ee 145
16 The Other Woman - jealousy, envy, trust and
ACCEPANC On cose. eee ies eee 154 17 Arguments - how she fights and why, causes
and solutions
vi
99° C169 66 B'S 670.0) 01816) 814 .6.016.6 60 01016: 0.6 18 6.058 6184.5. 61818 88
1S Tie Conc usta «eae wt ge era se aie’ 84 0% vin. sea aw Fela: 177
Something about the author
Each chapter in this book contains a vast amount of
information along with discussion and examples of the
heading. Topic comments, and/or instructions, are concise
and to the point. This book does not contain perfect
American English or grammar. The language often borders
on colloquialism to reflect current dialogue trends among
Blacks.
Re-Order Page for this book and others by Shahrazad Ali
PREFACE
The Blackman’s Guide To Understanding ‘The
Blackwoman is the culmination of many years of study,
observation and research. It is a forerunner, the first book of
it’s kind to realistically detail the problems between: the
Blackman and Blackwoman in America. It is designed to
enlighten the Blackman and create a revolution of positive
change in Black relationships. The major category addressed
is the Blackwoman’s emotional insecurity and related fears
and how they contribute to the problem. The Blackwoman’s
emotional distress is often highlighted during discussions
about the problem. But neither side admits the real deal. The
men protectively withhold their opinions and the women just
outright lie. Their discourse remains detached and superficial
with crucial issues delicately avoided by unspoken
agreement on both sides. Part of this is because the
Blackwoman does not know that she has an adjustment
problem. She certainly does not believe that her disrespect
for the Blackman is destructive, nor that her opposition to
him has deteriorated the Black nation. The other part is that
the Blackman has received no confirmation that what he
suspects is actually happening.
The Blackwoman’s misdirected intentions rob her of the
security and the satisfaction she longs for. And she
continues to lack the solution to repairing her damaged selfesteem by herself. Her confusion about her role and
purpose, and the interference of Western society have
produced her inappropriate behavior. Her main fault is that
she wants to have her own way. It is not an unfair
generalization to charge the Blackwoman with being out of
control due to her rebellion against the authority of the
Blackman. If the Blackman intends to be successful in
mating with the Blackwoman he must be aware of every
aspect of her nature. While this book is not an intentional negative portrayal of the Blackwoman, I will stay singularly focused on her problems - and I will tell the truth about her condition. Inside information which has never appeared in print will be revealed with clarity and speed. And I explain why the Blackwoman persists, in the face of repetitive error, to hold steadfast to the principles that cause her to fail in her
Vili
attempts to unite with the Blackman. I am breaking a
tradition of secrecy and cover-ups.
This book will be met with opposition and anger by the
majority of Blackwomen. They will charge me with betrayal.
Some will argue that my examples are inaccurate, or that my
samples are based solely on stereotypes and extrapolation.
Others will claim it a rude unwarranted attack on honorable
Blackwomanhood - and label me as a traitor. A few may
even swear that this document is autobiographic - which it is
not. We can expect the worse. But the time has come. The
Blackman can no longer be allowed to stumble around
blindly trying to overcome obstacles in a Blackwoman, he
knows little, if anything, about.
While this guide provides some answers, it is not to be
used as a weapon against the Blackwoman, or as cause for
dereliction of duty by the Blackman. And it is not a limited
work. The Blackman must take charge of and examine the
lives of every Black female in his domain. His wives, his
daughters, his sisters, his aunts and his mother. Any
Blackwoman or Black girl he comes into contact with or is
responsible for must be studied and corrected if she is found
to be out of order according to Black civilized standards.
These standards will be discussed.
This book is for every Blackman in America, and it
doesn’t matter who he is or what he’s got - his woman is his
problem. The Blackman has suffered and continues to suffer
in all aspects of his life generated by the problems he has
with his woman. He has endured rejection and failure in his
personal life almost as calmly as success and triumph.
Naturally, during these computerized fast paced times it is
not fashionable for the Blackwoman to be in submission to
the Blackman. In retaliation the Blackman has withdrew his
support - in all areas. He tries to work his life around the
scorn. Still, this report does not absolve or vindicate the
Blackman from his negligence in allowing the Blackwoman
to become distasteful. He cannot continue to shirk his
portion of the responsibility for her outrageous and
embarrassing conduct. And he is the only one qualified and
justified to put the Blackwoman back in order.
He must not strive for perfection in the Blackwoman.
This is the wrong generation for that. Instead he must strive
for effort and improvement and be insistent on progress.
When she learns better she must do better. Some of the
remedies in this book will seem harsh and unorthodox, but
pain is unavoidable preceding the birth of a new idea:that
will borne a new Blackwoman to live in peace with the
Blackman. The infected brain may take several generations
before the defects subside. But the work must begin now.
Today. The Blackman will never be able to excel until he
gets his woman under control. Currently he spars with the
white man to preserve his freedom while scuffling with the
Blackwoman to defend his wounded manhood. He has
become adept in both roles. His work to bring the
Blackwoman into submission must begin accordingly. It is
likened to stepping into the ring with a wild savage boar, a
reckless fire-breathing dragon that must be tamed if the
Black family is to survive. It is the Blackman’s
responsibility to win this battle.
And lastly, I have taken this unprecedented step because
of my love for my people, and my dedication to putting the
original man back on top. The Blackman must civilize the
Blackwoman before he can have peace with her, and before
he can stand up and reclaim his nation.
The Author
Shahrazad Ali
Chapter |
HER CHILDHOOD
From the very first moment she’s born she becomes
attached to her first teacher - her mother. Her eyes study her
mother constantly during the initial bonding process, she
learns to smile and form other mutual communication
techniques. She, as with any other cub, is taught survival
skills; how to eat, dress, bathe, use the toilet, general
manners and obedience - most implied by a look, or spoken
in a certain tone of voice. She is able to understand the
language long before she can speak it. She never stops
studying her mother. And she never stops learning from her.
If she is raised by two parents she studies them both,
since she is with the mother, or other females, she learns to
tune in to them emotionally. She learns to observe the other
adults in the same way. She can detect when they are happy,
at peace, or sadly restrained or mad. She also pays attention
to how her mother treats her father. She learns glances, body
language and moods. The spoken and unspoken messages
that her mother displays. As the cub, she mimics and
includes these practices, right or wrong, as part of her
survival skills from the very start.
She overhears conversations that her mother has with her
friends or relatives pertaining to the father. If all of the
mother’s comments are supportive and positive - good, but
since the habit of gaming on the Blackman is a 400 year old
tradition here, the inflections are for the most part negative.
She listens and she records. The first mental tapes translate
into pictures and forms and they cannot be erased - at least
not for many years.
What she overhears as a small child may go something
like this:
“T don’t care what your father said, I said...”
“I’ve got to cook and clean up this house before your
father gets home because I don’t want to hear his mouth.”
“Your father don’t run this house, I do.”
“He don’t know what he’s talking about”
“He don’t know that I know.”
“He don’t know what he’s doing,”
“John makes me sick, I get tired of picking up behind
him.” If the father requests something she may hear the mother
say“get it yourself’, or “You don’t tell me what to do, I do
what I want to do.” Every mother is guilty of using these or similar
terminology about her husband when she is tired,
exasperated or angry during the girlchild’s upbringing.
The training message from the mother (the teacher) is:
1) The Blackman “don’t know”
2) Certain references to the Blackman are made only
behind his back.
3) A woman has the option to choose what she
wants to obey
4) Aman isa bother.
After hearing various negative inferences behind the
father’s back, then the girlchild observes how the mother
may “front off’ when the father is present, pretending that
she is obedient and everything is fine. The girlchild, while
too young to actually distinguish between truth and
falsehood, watches how trusting and unaware the father is.
Soon she concludes that the mother is right - “he don’t
know” which must mean that he is dumb. And if he is dumb
and doesn’t know what’s going on behind his back it makes
the girlchild insecure. He’s physically strong but we live two
lives, one in front of daddy and one behind his back. Since
the mother is her mentor and they are alike, she agrees, you
can’t trust him. He is different from us. And the cycle starts.
On the other hand if there is no biological father or
stepfather on the premises whom the girlchild can relate to
and observe daily, the scenario may go something like this:
(especially if the single mother is periodically changing men
or dating around.) She may hear:
1) “I’m gonna get that niggah tonight.” ‘
2) “I keep calling him every night but he ain’t home.”
3) “Girl, don’t believe nothing he says, he just lies all the time.”
4) “I can’t believe nothing he says.”
5) “I’m gonna make him spend some money on me.”
6) “I gotta find me a man.”
*
7) “I want to see what he can do.”
8) “You can’t let a man know all your business.”
The training message from the mother in this instance is:
1) The Blackman is a liar.
2) Don’t believe in him, he’ll disappoint you.
3) The Blackman will desert you - no security.
4) Withholding information is a necessary practice
when dealing with a Blackman.
5) And if you’re gonna deal with a Blackman you
have to have a plan.
While the aforementioned statement examples may seem
trite or unimportant remember that they are of great
significance since they are a part of the first introductory
impressions on the girlchild about the Blackman who is
usually not present to defend himself or prove that the
charges are not true. To the girlchild these impressions
represent the pure truth from the person who takes care of
her. Her mother.
In the two parent home the girlchild has an easier time
learning how to “charm” the father and get him to cooperate
with her and grant her wishes. She adopts these skills to
manipulate a person whom she already believes is not too
swift mentally - according to mom. She also sees that the
father will give the mother a verbal order and later she sees
the mother do something else different or in direct
opposition. *
She also learns the politics of female survival regarding
chastisement. If the father tells her to do something or
reprimands her, she finds that she can go to the mother and
get the ruling changed or omitted completely. Above all, she
can usually get sympathy from the mother in words, or even
more powerful - from her mother’s eyes which say: “do it,
you know how he is,” or “Ill make it up to you later” or “I
agree with you, he’s wrong, but do it anyway.” In either
case the father’s word is deemed questionable and should be
examined and verified to determine if it’s wrong. Also that
his word can be opposed or rejected successfully.
If the father becomes vocally angry with the mother, she
may show her protectiveness by sending the girlchild from
the room or outside to play. If the father is rightfully angry
(unbeknownst to the child), the mother may be extra nice to
defer his attention from the issue to get his mind off of it.
The father may be right, but the teaching message is:
1) He’s dangerous and wants to argue but ‘I’ll
protect you from him.
2) This is something I have to endure, but you
don’t. 3) He can be swayed with a little kindness and
charm.
4) He’s our boss but we don’t like it because he’s
unfair.
The girlchild watches her mother simulate several
emotions; pleasure, admiration, enthusiasm, interest and
cooperation. But the cutting side of the issue is that the
mother, obviously, is projecting faked agreement - and it
seems to work.
In addition to these negative impressions about the
capabilities and inconsistencies of the Blackman, who’s
gone all the time anyway, the girlchild is introduced to fairy
tales as bedtime and story time reading. Some of the stories
are fantasy about the wonderful life whitemen and
whitewomen lead, they tell about how gallant the whiteman
is and how he always saves the day for the whitewoman.
Sometimes the stories are about Black people. Most of the
childrens’ books are written by Black females who present
the Blackman in superficial roles, or they are shown as
Blackmen practicing a white lifestyle. The descriptions are
usually vague - since the Blackwoman does not know or
admit the good values in the Blackman. One can only
describe with words what one knows or discovers, and the
Blackwoman is hard pressed to dig up good renditions about
the Blackman and put it into words. Since she doesn’t live it
she can’t report about it.
If the books are about Africa the girlchild still cannot
really identify or mesh the African king idea with her daddy.
down in the living room sprawled in his favorite chair - while she watches her mother work in the kitchen. Her small mind cannot assimilate well enough to distinguish a routine setting from the artificial pictures shown in storybooks. The Black mother thinks that fairy tales are harmless entertainment for her daughter (and son) and have no other intrinsic value to the development of the child. A new brain, not yet equipped with the psychological tools to filter or
disseminate information, accepts any and all information it is
programmed with as the truth. Fairy tale characters, cartoons
and talking animals represent the truth to them and judging
the outcome, are very detrimental to the child’s development
in reality recognition. Consequently when the girl child
arrives at school she has already been programmed with a
bushel of false ideas about what is “real” and “unreal” - and
what is “for play” and what actually exists. Between seeing
and touching real flesh and blood people and being
introduced to Mickey Mouse (a talking rat), Cinderella,
Snow White, Superman, Cookie Monster, Big Bird, Donald
Duck, Casper, Bugs Bunny, the Smurfs, The Muppets and
Garfield and a host of other cartoons, she is quite confused.
She carries these fantasies into the future and they govern
many of her emotions and ideas. They become deeply rooted
in her psyche and will override true information from other
sources. She is not just looking at the cartoons she is also
listening to their dialogue and copies their responses. She is
taught to love these artificial personalities. During this time
she is also introduces to Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny,
Cupid and the tooth-fairy. All of these “toy” animals and
people are presented to her as “good” and none of these first
heroes - which she is taught to love and admire, are Black.
Other than possibly her girl baby dolls she is not introduced
to her own culture.
Be awaré that all of the misinformation imparted in this
chapter is transmitted to the Black female child - usually
from the mother - by the time she is five years old. What a
beginning.
Chapter 2 TEENAGE YEARS
By the time the Black girlchild reaches teendom she is
fully schooled in the various manipulative skills available to
be used on the Blackman. The fact that these opinions have
been formed from her emotionally wrought mother,
television soap operas, Hollywood movies, true romance
magazines and love songs does not matter to her. She
believes these are documents of truth that she must adhere to
to be accepted into the womanhood club.
By this time she is eager to learn all she can about the
opposite sex with. a single motivation of getting the
Blackman to literally “eat out of her hand. Keeping certain
secrets from the teenage boy as a way of life is already
established as the norm.
It is during this time that the Black teenage girl forms a
special bond with her mother regarding Blackmen - a type of
in-house conspiracy that may include:
1) A warning from the mother about not telling the
father how much an item of clothing really costs.
2) Not letting the father know that the mother had an
accident or forgot to pay an important bill.
3) That the daughter is dating prematurely or came
in late.
4) That the daughter is on birth control.
5) Keeping quiet about the girl failing a test in
school to keep her from being punished or
grounded.
Any topic discussed that begins with “don’t tell your
father - ” is wrong. This kind of conspiracy between the
Blackmother and the Black teenage girl seals their secret
relationship - one where information is withheld in the name
of keeping the peace. A seemingly honorable intention.
Lies operate on the domino principle - if one lie is told
the teller is forced to tell another and another and another. At
the time the lie may seem harmless enough. They are
considered a necessity.
Thus by using these tactics the Black teenage girl
continues to prove to herself that the Blackman can be manipulated by:
1) Instructing her mother to tell her boyfriend that
she’s not home in order to make him jealous. Thex*
mother will usually comply and relate the lie to
the Black male caller. 2) Pretending she is not ready when her date arrives to make him wait, sweat or worry a little. 3) Using her feminine attributes of flattery or a swivel of the hips to get his attention. She practices how to use sexual innuendo.
4) By talking to another boy to make him upset or
as a threat to test him to see if he’s really serious
about her.
The indirect lessons the Blackmother is teaching and
agreeing with is:
1) It’s okay to lie to the Blackman if you’re doing it
to check his level of affection for you.
2) It’s permissible to withhold the truth from the
Blackman if the truth will make him displeased
with you.
3) There are some issues that the Blackman just
doesn’t understand, and some that are just not his
business.
4) Artificial flattery will take her far.
All of this reaffirms for the Black teenage girl that:
1) The Blackman is easily seduced, will believe
whatever you tell him, and that she can get back
at him by giving him anxiety.
2) All girls play the same games with their
boyfriends so it’s obviously just the way things
are - and will be.
3) The easiest way to get a Blackman’s attention is
to cause him some kind of frustration resulting
from a carefully executed plan.
4) And if she doesn’t tell him, he’ll never know.
The teen’years are thus spent trying out various schemes
on the Black male to test his reactions, sincerity, and level of
interest. She is well versed by this time to sift through
whatever the Blackmale says out of his mouth and decide
what he really means and what her reaction should be.
Part of this is explainable. Psychologists agree that no
human being views the world through pristine eyes. What
we see is edited by a definite set of predetermined rules and
values that help create a certain viewpoint on various
subjects and situations. The very concept of reasoning that
the Black teenage girl uses to determine what is right and
wrong are derived from a tainted set of traditionally learned
wickedness passed on from one Black female to another.
Her mother or female guardian.
Often the girl will make up wild stories, create false
emergencies or intentionally stand up the boy or tease him
with sexual promises until he vows everlasting love. She
may also demand expensive gifts or costly outings. To have
the Blackman crawling at her feet, worshipping her eternally
is worth any and everything to her. Plus, she confirms that
he definitely should pay for the privilege of her company.
The means are always justified by the hoped for and
predictable end: she gets the Black boy in the spot where she
wants him to be. She does not know that she is learning to whore.
Up to and during teendom the Black mother, in rearing
the Black daughter, must explain sex to her and get her ready
to meet the world - which she realizes will evolve in some
way around the opposite sex: the Blackman. Her advice,
whether accepted or not, is given from her personal point of
view and is a result of her own experiences with the
Blackman. The same advice she herself took and used
throughout the lifetime of the Blackgirl, she passes on. Her
instructions, after she explains the anatomy part, may go
something like this:
1) Get a good education so you can get a good job
and take care of yourself so you won’t have to
count on no man. Make your own money so
you can be your own boss.
2) You know you can’t trust them so be careful.
3) All men want is to get into your pants.
4) Play the field for a while, find out what you
want.
5) Don’t just believe what he tells you, check him
out.
6) Don’t let him get you pregnant.
7) You can’t tell a man all your business.
8) Phir spend your own money, make him pay
or it.
9) Make him do something for you, don’t spend all
your time with him for nothing. .* 10) Get with the one who’s got the most money - and the rules go on and on.
I call them rules because while girls are often rebellious during this stage, when it comes to setting their own standards regarding whom they will date, they still hear the negative implications of the above instructions and apply them whenever they choose. This kind of teaching means: 1) Test his feelings anyway you can.
2) Sex is the only motivation the Blackman has.
3) Sex is a weapon use it to get what you want.
4) You can’t trust what he tells you.
6) He owes you something material or financial if
you go out with him.
7) Be promiscuous it’s a prerequisite to settling
down.
The Black daughter is compelled by nature to follow
without reason the example of the Black mother throughout
her life - which is called instinct. They do as the mother did.
By her example and teaching the character of the Black girl is
stamped with the characteristics of the Black mother.
Everyone is largely what the mother makes. The moral
precepts that the Black teenage girl adopts are not her own -
they are split between what she learned from her mother and
what white society preaches - certainly peer pressure is to be
taken into consideration. Mostly the peer pressure is from
other Black teenager girls who have been raised in a similar
opposing position to the Blackman. This is a standard
process which does not vary very much from household to
household.
The homemaking skills that the teenage girl picks up
from her mother may be adequate (cooking, cleaning,
laundry and shopping), or she may be brought up in an ultra
modern setting where it is thought to be cute for a girl not to
know how to cook or keep house. If the teenage girl has
been pumped up with ideas of being some kind of super
career woman then she will ignore housework altogether
believing that she will never have to attend to such menial
duties. Things like meal planning, sewing, taking care of her
man and her children and making a peaceful home for
husband are not taught. She watches the mother run the
house and, depending on the mother’s attitude about it she
forms the same opinion. If the mother acts like serving a
man is a bore, so will the daughter. If the mother does not
serve the man at all, the daughter will do the same. If the
daughter never witnesses the mother serving a man because
she is in a single parent household then she will deem such
action as demeaning or reserved for special occasions only.
It is unlikely that a girl raised in such a home will have a
natural inclination towards taking care of her man and home.
She has no model for it. Homemaking skills have to be
taught - at home, by the mother.
If the Blackman would like to have a visual picture of
what today’s Black teenage girls are doing and thinking, he
should take a few minutes out of his schedule and look at the
Soul Train dance/music show which comes on television
every week. This show gives vent to all the filth that ends up
causing the Blackman problems with the Blackwoman years
later. Of course, this is not the only example, it is the major
one that is televised. The style of clothing, the nakedness,
the lewd and shameful facial expressions and dance
movements demonstrate the low level of behavior of our
teenage Black girls - and Black teenage boys. Their dance
movements and faces are the result of an idea they have as
young women that to be seen and admired they must reveal
their bodies and twist and grind in a wild fashion in public.
Another Dante’s inferno.
Many of the Black teenage girls are able to pass for adult
women because of how they dress and carry themselves -
dedicating their entire existence to functioning in such a way
as to attract the sexual advances of a man. Many Black
mothers approve of this behavior and do nothing to control
or stop their daughters from such undignified behavior.
Most do not stop them because they do not know how.
Chapter 3 ADULTHOOD (SINGLE AND MARRIED)
As the Blackwoman grows and develops intellectually she eventually lands in a spot that her practices lead her to... There are several levels of Blackwomanhood that she can strive for. Each level of lifestyle choice is predicated solely on her desires. What she knows or earns is the result of how she has been raised and what she is willing to settle for in life. The higher her goals, the more sophisticated she is. Increased knowledge always expands the desires, be they material, sexual or otherwise. The Blackwoman is not
10
exempt from these rules albeit she is often a victim of them
due to being such a displaced female.
The Blackman must be aware of the various types of
Blackwomen available to him. His selection must be based
upon his own individual needs. It is entirely possible that
some of the traits of the Blackwomen in their respective
categories overlap. It has been proven that a Blackman is
capable of taking a woman and making her beautiful,
intelligent and wise. She is not able to create this same effect
by herself. She will have one of the three, or two of the
three, but she cannot achieve beauty, intelligence and
wisdom alone. The Blackman is her catalyst. Without his
spark of life and light she does not bloom. Blooming is quite
different from having a good paying job or a high class
education. Each of the Blackwomen discussed during the
next few pages can be taught to bloom.
Risking the threat of being further charged with overgeneralization and group stereotyping, the following lists
describe the three basic types of Blackwomen. They are
dissimilar only in the depth of their problematic behavior. All
are infected with the historic disease of cultural negligence.
They believe themselves to be living the right life - the one
that is the only lifestyle available to them in this country’s
setting, which most of them believe is the best place on
earth. Far be it from their considerations to take steps to
improve their psychological conditions because they
ironically do not know they are out of sync with their natural
role in the universe - even though across the board they are
not happy. The lives they live makes sense to them because
they have not been taught of any other kind that will provide
them with happiness.
Historically the Blackwoman has had access to lifestyle
choices not offered to the Blackman. And he is not tolerated
in showing moodiness, fickleness or pettiness. The
aforementioned emotional personality traits are indigenous to
the Black female gender. To describe these separate groups
of Blackwomen the use of colloquial language may seem
derogatory or insulting. It is not meant to be that way. The
special language is ethnically specific and recognizable to the
learned and unlearned Blackman. The terminology is not
meant to be humorous either. There are no age limitations on
the characteristics of these women.
11
The three types are predictably:
1) The lower grade
2) The average
3) The high class
1) The Low Life Blackwoman
This Blackwoman may have been subjected to abject
multi-generational poverty, illiteracy and shame as a child.
She works on the lowest rung of employment due to not
being properly educated. She dresses in inexpensive K-Mart
type styles and her face is greasy from wearing too much
cheap make-up. Her hair will also be greasy, perhaps have a
few specks of lint and may be plastered down around her
face in an unsuccessful attempt to create curls or the “baby
hair” look. She may sport a raggedy pony tail with a child’s
barrette or rubberband. Bathing is not that important. Her
bra strap may be gray from nonwashing and she may wear
her panties two or three days straight without changing
them, or wear none at all. She drinks alcohol to the point of
intoxication and curses loud in the public - real loud. She
hangs around weekly in common local corner bars and goes
out with strange men - who she fights with regularly. She
may have a main Blackman who she fights with at will. She
has battle scars on her face, neck, arms and hands from
warring with the men and women in her neighborhood or
night clubs. She goes along easily with immoral dares and
relates aggressively to her neighbors. She does not read the
newspaper and uses drugs when they are available. If she
does not work she is on the public dole - welfare. She may
dress her child or children in the latest styles and will spend
all of her welfare check on clothes and partying. She views
each check day as heaven on earth - a short lived time when
she has purchasing power to feed her tepid wishes. She
might have a gold tooth or a few teeth missing. Her nails are
conceivable chipped or broken. Her posture is that of a toad. \*
She may be overweight and an over-average breather with a
protruding pot-gut. She comfortably wears run-over shoes.
Her heels may be dirty and crusty. She borrows money and food from her neighbors. She uses deodorant occasionally and is overly impressed with fancy dressed Blackmen in big flashy cars with lots of gold. She is materialistic on a small scale and does not like to stay indoors. Even on cold winter nights she can be seen roaming the streets or going back and
12
forth to an after hour joint. She is not ashamed of her
condition or predicament and “appears” to be quite satisfied
during her sterile nonproductive days. Her time is made up
of gossiping with her neighborhood cronies, looking at
television, wish-shopping in near by malls, yelling at her
children, not keeping up with her children and walking back
and forth to the corner store. She shops above her means,
has no plans to change and attempts to use the Blackmen
available to finagle him out of money, drinks or car rides.
She has no idea what to do with a Blackman herself, and she
does not fantasize about a better life. She is looked upon as
shameful in civilized society and is considered a savage. She
often hates the Blackwomen in the higher social classes and
considers them conceited. Her world of thought is very very
small. Her ideas are simplified and she speaks the language
in flat abbreviated terms full of mispronunciations and
wrong tenses. She does not know any better and does not
think she is capable of learning better. She is in a pitiful state
of condition and if she has any dreams at all they are of a
Blackman rescuing her from her status. She is also inclined
to respond to the advances of whitemen looking for a good
time. She may sprinkle herself with cheap perfume
profusely. If a Blackwoman on this level is involved with
drugs or abuses alcohol she becomes a dreg of society and a
corrupt mother. Men do not matter to her at all on that level
unless they can provide her with money or contraband. This
group requires no further discussion. Other than that this
Blackwoman must be claimed, cleaned-up and returned to
her proper state of existence as a civilized woman.
2) The Average
This Blackwoman is an enigma somewhat. She surfaces
as a steady employee, enjoys weddings and birthdays and
may make big preparations for both. She is neat, probably
goes to church regularly, fixes her hair nicely and speaks
coherently. She is at least a high school graduate and may
have some college or special vocational training. She is not
overly ambitious but is an active participant in life and enjoys
many things. She is fairly clean and will celebrate and
participate in festivities with a zest. She is thoughtful,
mannerable and knows how to meet people. She is proud of
her level of sophistication and may party occasionally. Her
behavior with the Blackman is routine in that she experiences
13
a more controlled form of suspicion, doubt and fear. She
may be shy by comparison to the Blackwoman in the first
category but does tend to make her likes and dislikes known.
She is not always ‘talkative and can best be found and
examined in general office duty jobs. She is a step or two
higher than menial labor and could be referred to as corny.
She does not routinely abuse drugs although she might get
high every once in a while. Alcohol is her vice of choice.
She is capable of consenting to marriage for the perceived
security and to impress her friends and family. She remains
content to work from 9-5 weekly and will see her steady
beau on weekends or remain focused on her own priorities.
She dances at the nicer bistros. She is easier to get along
with than #1. Her most vicious reactions are brought on by
jealousy or being jilted. Her fantasies of what a relationship
should be like is patterned right off television or from True
Confession magazines. She is as traditional in her activities
as American apple pie. She does not ask deep questions and
is content to go along with the status quo. Her faith is
important to her and she mentions the good lord when
discussing certain topics. She is attracted to lower class or
upstanding Blackmen who are gainfully employed in the
work force. She may visit the fast lane but she is most
comfortable shopping at Lerner’s and cooking collard greens
for dinner. She has a few secrets but most of them are trite.
She is not necessarily an innovator. She is more of a
follower. She enjoys the Jheri-curl look and fancy cut
outlandish hair styles. She spends of what she has on
clothes, she might have a little car, is anxious to meet men
and exaggerates about her capabilities and accomplishments.
She tries to be entertaining and clever when she is with her
man. She is malleable.
3) The high class
This one is the smart possibly raging beauty - sexy -“
sexy - sexy. The Blackwomen in this category are the most
difficult to reach and train. She is confident, intelligent, attractive (at least by good quality standards), and wears the finest clothes, has a high price well paying position and prides herself on being state-of-the-art aware, reads books, looks at educational television and has a college degree of some sort. She goes to.church sometimes, may do volunteer work, and has a definite political party she aligns with and
14
may contribute heavily to special social causes if they appeal
to her. She is a member of a ritzy club and has some nice
jewelry, wears expensive popular perfume and is very
opinionated to a fault. Her alma mater is important to her,
she is amused by spectator sports - especially football, and
may play tennis or bowl. She curses more in private than in
public, likes to let her hair down with the girls and considers
herself a prize. She may be an entrepreneur, she may snort a
little coke or take a few puffs of reefer but she rarely gets so
out of control that she forgets her community standing and
professional responsibilities. She is familiar with intricate
banking systems, has a retirement plan, possibly stock and a
money market. She has an American Express Card. And
travels.
She likes L.A., the Bahamas, Europe and possible
Africa. She may frequent the health spa and buys expensive
gifts for her man and friends. She drives a nice car, maybe a
BMW or some other snazzy sports car. She may live a bit
above her means but manages to juggle her finances to get
what she wants. She is very head strong and delights in
demonstrating to the Blackman her wealth and vast
knowledge in a variety of things. She is the modern
girlfriend, believes she is completely self-sufficient, and is
not particularly interested in keeping house, cooking dinner
every night or treating the Blackman with special accord.
She is in favor of independence and boasts of doing things
for herself and thinks the Blackman should do likewise. She
performs beautifully in front of strangers or company,
makes a good impression and exudes sex at will. She is
greatly influenced by her peers or others whom she deems as
pacesetters. She adopts popular trends in attitudes about
dating or marriage which she gleans from magazines, news
programs, or the newspaper. She becomes ferocious when
she thinks her man is playing around on her and will fight
viciously to the end to prove the Blackman wrong. Because
she is so concerned about public opinion and what “they”
think she will customarily deal with a Blackman whom she
is not particularly interested in just to have an escort on her
arm. She is a rat who behaves like a dog while purring like a
cat. She is moody, disagreeable to live with in peace if
things don’t go her way. She believes her specialized
knowledge from her occupation qualifies her to be equal or
15
superior to the Blackman. She will tolerate a Blackman as
long as he fits her idea of what he should look like, dress
like, work like and act like. The #3 Blackwoman is. an
insecure wad of knots that she hides behind all of her good
education, fine wardrobe, shapely body and savings
account. 5
These explanations of the three major types of
Blackwomen are not all inclusive, some of their patterns
overlap, but these descriptions give a good perception of
what is available. There is another category of Blackwomen who are
available. They are the picturesque Blackwomen who dress
in African traditional garb. They wear brightly colored head
wraps and sandals, bold African jewelry and have
dreadlocks, more commonly called “dreads”. They may also
have a ring in their nose, possibly several holes in their ears
and they wear layers and layers of fabric wrapped like a
sarong around their bodies, often with no bra or underwear.
They may also wear a heavy laden head wrap twisted in
several attractive styles. Some of them are clean and
beautiful, others are not. From a distance it is hard to tell.
These Blackwomen portray a costume that implies they are
not with Western ideas of dress and give the impression by
their wardrobe that they represent the unknown African
culture and the very roots of the Blackwomen from the
homeland. The impression they wish to convey is that they
are in disagreement with European society and they want no
part of Americanism and bravely foster the ideas of “back in
the day”.
On closer examination the Blackman will find the
brightly colored garments are only an external facade and
when examined up close the outfits may be soiled and the
woman will have a foul body odor wreaking from under her
arms. Her feet may be ashy and calloused and her skin isx*
uncared for. Her unique hairstyle, her “dreads”, smell. It is
impossible for dreads not to have an offensive odor. Hair
breeds bacteria and Black hair that is not washed regularly, parted, scalp oiled and conditioned becomes matted because it cannot breathe, so it stinks. The actual major benefit for the Blackwoman who wear “dreads” is that she does not have to take proper care of her hair. No matter what kind of African science she expounds - she is just lazy and has
16
found a way to practice her laziness in the name of being
cultural.
She may also claim to be living some kind of primitive
existence wherein she survives with as few civilized
conveniences as possible. This means that the gas, electric or
water may be off in her home. She might bed down each
night on the hard floor on a pallet, and claims to be a
vegetarian or only eat health food or spew some other
specialized diet that matches her outfit and hairstyle. Her
religious views are complicated and confusing. Her home is
filled with African statues, African print fabrics and the redblack-green symbols and colors associated with the African
continent. She may smoke reefer.
If the Blackman questions her about her reasoning
behind wearing the “dreads” he will find that these sisters,
who may dress and look alike, do not have a unified main
doctrine or creed they believe in. Most of them have a
different explanation and belief about why they are involved
in this particularly unwholesome lifestyle. This group of
natural looking sisters practice the same deceit and mockery
of the Blackman behind his back as much as the
Blackwoman with permed hair or a Jheri curl. Her values
may even be considered more uncivilized because she is
living on a very low level of existence by choice. If she is in
rebellion, it is only against herself. She also does not teach
her children proper table manners or personal hygiene. They
are witnessed to be badly dressed, in need of a haircut or
hair combing and have no knowledge as to why their
Blackmother insists that they wear “dreads”. These black
children are shown by example that is is acceptable to live in
squaller and go without conventional conveniences that make
for a clean home environment. The sisters who propagate
this kind of life is most happy when she can find a Blackman
who will go along with her alleged cultural statement and
who agrees with her deplorable living conditions in the name
of rejecting American lifestyles.
These Blackwomen should realize that there are no
histories of Blackwomen who dress and live like she does
who represent the pinnacle of refined and admired
Blackwomanhood. The fact that she has no logical
explanation as to why she is wearing her hair that way, or
living that way, is another hint that she is confused and has
17
only found a way to be flashy, distinguishable and impact
her presence on onlookers. It is impossible to represent the
original queenly Blackwoman by living in filth and not using
deodorant. This Blackwoman thinks that by neglecting her
personal hygiene she is making an impression of originality.
Be aware that the only statement she is making is that she is
nasty and too lazy to take care of herself and her children, so
obviously she will have no interest in trying to help a
Blackman take care of himself. Dirty is dirty - make no
mistake about it.
The other Blackwomen who sport the “dreads” look
have no idea as to why they are wearing them other than they
get a lot of attention, and have just adopted this hairstyle
because it is popular and relieves them of going to the hair
dresser. Her idea is to appear to be “black” or natural. This
Blackwoman is very much in favor of being different to the
point of a fault. She doesn’t know that sometimes being
different means one has to look ridiculous or outlandish.
There were many levels of lifestyle in Africa too and the
tribes whose women wore dreadlocks represent one of the
small lower tribal classes and customs. There are much
higher standards of behavior the Blackwoman can emulate if
she studies the Blackwomen of over 6,000 years ago.
Her Imagination Of What Married Life Is Like
Most of the Blackwoman’s ideas concerning a happy
home is derived from television, paperbacks and the fairy
tales read to her when she was a child. She believes strongly
in the so-called American dream of a marriage; a house, a
husband whistling off to work, exciting trouble-free days,
vacations, a two car garage sheltering a Mercedes or Jaguar,
candlelight dinner, out often, fantastic sex, wardrobe and
popular friends...with her man right by her side. He’ll show
her special considerations, support her every aim, adjust his
personal wishes to match hers, be non-demanding, heap
beautiful gifts on her, flowers, escort her to elegant affairs
and constantly assure her of his undying love - and never
look at another woman again, and he’ll be home happy with
her every night. What a dream. What a crock.
This dream is destined to turn into the proverbial
nightmare. Even if the Blackman is able to do all of the
above except “be home with her every night”, she will wail
18
as if the world is ending. The Blackwoman is a rock like the
earth and she longs to settle down, the Blackman is an
exploring bird and has to soar. He’s out of there.
Blackwomen see marriage as a way to finally “own” her
Blackman. It’s not enough that the Blackman has been
forced to be a slave to the whiteman for over 400 years, now
the Blackwoman wants him to voluntarily enter into a new
type of slavery, one she claims is laced with love - called
marriage. As long as the Blackman stays right beside the
Blackwoman and is able to account for his every move and
provide an acceptable explanation for every moment spent
away from her - she is at ease. No Blackman can pass this
kind of a test. The Blackman is not even interested in
passing this kind of a test. He wants to be free.
Not free of responsibility and commitment, but freedom
of motion. He’s gotta go. If the Blackman starts out hanging
around incessantly with the Blackwoman, every night, every
weekend, calling everyday, all day, reporting his
whereabouts, explaining his absences and so forth, he will
be in for big problems. The Blackwoman is conditioned to
dealing on one level with everything. So if the Blackman
values his freedom of motion he must not spend every
waking moment sniffing behind his woman because after a
while she grows accustomed to this kind of company and
will bellow loudly when things change and go back to
normal. Marriage is not a club, the leading member does not
have to be present every moment for the other members to
benefit from his instructions of allegiance. Plus, in order to
continue to learn and secure information to benefit his family
the Blackman must go out into the world and check out
every aspect of it as it pertains to his existence. He must do
this to stay abreast of changing times, worldly activities and
trends. He is not remembered as staying in the house, the
hut, the tent or the tepee. It is his earth, his universe and his
decision about when he wants to stay in the house at home
with the Blackwoman.
Any Blackman who is living under a hassle from the
Blackwoman because she does not like him being away from
home will not have peace with her. The Blackman must
seek, maintain and insist upon his freedom of motion. The
Blackwoman thinks that every time the Blackman is absent
and unaccounted for that he is with another woman. The
19
Blackman has more interests in life than just running from
one Blackwoman to another. At least he should have more
interests than that. The Blackwoman must be taught to use
her mind in other ways to discover other needed ideas than
to just sit at home imagining all kinds of negative
occurrences every time the Blackman leaves the house. If
she would work harder to make his home heaven he might
want to stay there longer.
A Blackwoman/wife with a sense of humor is worth her
weight in gold. With a sense of humor and the ability to
laugh, laugh at mistakes, laugh at embarrassing situations
and laugh at fear when it’s discovered to be unfounded is
one of the best attributes the Blackwoman can have. She will
have to be coaxed out of her phoniness and seriousness
sometimes so she can laugh and release her tensions about
lifes
The Blackwoman must be taught the value of greeting
her man with a smile. She is a sourpuss and takes everything
so seriously that she robs herself of the pleasure and
entertainment of daily living. She gets uptight if a certain
thought passes thru her mind and she may suddenly change.
The Blackman will have no idea what caused her to change
her mood. Each day when the Blackman enters the presence
of a Blackwoman he does so with caution because he is not
sure what he will meet, he is not sure if it will be happiness,
sadness, anger, violence or neutrality. She is not consistent.
She is, in fact, consistently inconsistent. It requires a lot of
attention from the Blackman for him to keep up with her
many moods. It’s hard work. And work that most Blackmen
do not have time for.
The Blackwoman’s moodiness is another way she has of
controlling the Blackman. If she can keep him entwined with
dealing with her various moods she can keep his attention.
Soon the Blackman learns to recognize the Blackwoman’s
various moods and when he sees hell blowing in the air heS~
gets out of her way. When the Blackwoman is angry she
pollutes the atmosphere of the Blackman. When asked
what’s wrong she replies: “nothing”. It’s an outright lie
that’s designed to intrigue the Blackman into spending time trying to figure out what’s wrong. A lot of life can be used up this way. Life that could be spent grooving. There was a time when the Blackwoman planned to marry so she could
20
stay home, raise children and set up house keeping. Today,
the reverse applies. Few Blackwomen are willing to give up
their career goals to marry, settle down and raise a house full
of Black children. On the surface this may appear to be
modernized high intelligence and her innocent desire to
achieve occupational goals - but we know better. The
Blackwoman sees all around her Black children with
problems and the product of unhappy marriages/unions. She
sees children from the best of backgrounds with attentive
parents go astray. Disobedient and disruptive children on
drugs, in prison or pregnant and on the street. She sees what
she views as a hopeless situation that obviously is not
controlled by parental strictness or chastisement. She is not
eager to attempt to raise children on her own. It’s too much
trouble.
Another obstacle she’s confronted with is that she
doesn’t know of any different type of program to use to raise
her own children that would make them a success. What she
knows of just doesn’t seem to work. She is not aware of any
system with a low failure rate, or the ones that she knows of
would require her to make drastic changes in her own
behavior so she rejects those. The idea of taking on the
child-rearing hassle is repugnant to her. Since fear is the
major emotion she has learned, she reacts to child-rearing in
the same way. Of course, instead of admitting this to the
Blackman and seeking guidance, she claims she just doesn’t
want children because they would interrupt her lifestyle and
interfere with her independence. Plus, she thinks that when
she gets pregnant the Blackman will not want her anymore
because she will be fat, have swollen feet, morning sickness
and lose her shape. The Blackwoman is convinced that the
Blackman only wants her for her fine body or pretty face.
During pregnancy the fear of abandonment is fierce.
Additionally, she also realizes that once she is pregnant it
will slow her down from keeping up with the Blackman and
after she has the baby she will be out of commission for an
indefinite amount of time - and - will have the responsibility
of a squalling brat, from now on. All of this represents work
she does not want to do and a distraction from playing
games with the Blackman. She fears at that time that her man
will lose interest in her and seek out the company of another
21
woman who is free of the ties of small children. Of course
this is not true but this seems to be how she looks at it.
After childbirth she may become a little more ashamed of
her body. While the Blackman is known to prance around
nude comfortably, the Blackwoman is more hesitant. To be
naked represents vulnerability and helplessness to her. While
stark naked represents a freedom to the Blackman. Of
course, some modesty is preferred over brazenness.
The Blackwoman has been programmed visually by the
media to expect the reflection in her mirror to match those
portrayed by sleek white (and Black) female models who
have the beneficial touch of the photographic airbrush to
smooth out the natural images. Routinely there is usually one
part of the Blackwoman’s body that she absolutely hates. It
may be her legs, her ankles, her toes, her stomach, her neck,
chin, her breasts, her nose, hands, eyes, ears, knees, thighs
or buttocks. She never forgets whatever she decides her
physical defect is and her style of dressing will reflect her
attempts to cover it up.
When naked she is embarrassed about having small
breasts, varicose veins, sagging breasts, stretch marks, thin
legs, a fleshy stomach, or flat behind. She sees these natural
body differences as a turn off.
The human body, when inhabited by all the different
personalities and ideas it represents, always comes with
varied and differently shaped components. There is no
universal ruling that states any one design is better than
another. The Blackwoman secretly wants to be a clone of the
white woman and patterns her standards of form and beauty
after her. The whiteman has always photographed his
woman in the clothing and in the body shape the way he
likes and wants her to be. No one has ever asked the
Blackman to draw or take a picture of what he wants his
Blackwoman to be. Nor has the Blackman ever expressed a
collective definitive opinion or description of a particular
physical mold of what the Blackwoman must look like for
him to consider her beautiful. The Blackwoman does not
know that the Blackman thinks all Blackwomen are
theoretically beautiful. Certainly a Blackwoman who is in
agreement and submission to her Blackman is beautiful. Her facial expression is different. She has a glowing look of resignation to peace from being in her place. And her place is
22
a good place. A place of honor and enjoyment of life. She
receives respect and protection by her man. It comes with the
territory. And she is satisfied. And so is he.
Blackwomen do not know what satisfaction in life is.
They think that peace is not having to worry about money.
They do not consider having peace with the Blackman as
something that would bring satisfaction in life. Or that their
relationship is an important section of their lives that needs
improvement. It just doesn’t occur to her. When she
considers what it would take for her to be at ease with the
Blackman she thinks of all the changes she wants him to
make to get in line with her idea. She is not very negotiable
about making any changes in self. She cannot see how her
own behavior problems contribute to her problems because
she thinks that whatever she says or does is absolutely
correct.
There are certain qualities some Blackwomen have that
are a sign to the Blackman that the woman is good material
to try to make into a wife and mother. All Blackwomen are
certainly capable of having the basic nature to become a good
woman to the Blackman, but he must delve into her
personality and perform several indepth interviews if he is
considering her for companionship, a live-in, or marital
relationship. Certainly the considerations to be made should
not be limited to or based on sex alone. Sexologists report
that the total time man spends reaching a climax (ejaculating)
is approximately two and a half to three hours (a little over
10,000 seconds) in his entire lifetime. Obviously, compared
to the years, days and nights and all of life’s contests, the
ood times and the bad; mere sexual satisfaction cannot be & the motivatin woman for a
mate. The propagation of the Black nation to ensure it’s —_——" SF permanence and longevity must have priority over the
temporary thrill emitted from the loins.
As said, any Blackwoman can be transformed into a
good wife and mother, but the job is more difficult in some
than others. How much time and force the Blackman has to
expend to create him a woman is dependent upon the level of
understanding the Blackwoman has. Nothing is impossible
but some things do take longer than others. The Blackman
must treat the Blackwoman right and make her treat him
right.
23
The Blackwoman’s problems represent a challenge and a
responsibility. The challenge is to subdue her and put her in
her rightful place, and the responsibility is to rule the
Blackwoman, and be in charge of her in a civil and loving
way. He must give her what she needs which is quite different from what she wants. A good Blackwoman does
not come ready made.
The following hints are signs that a Blackwoman will
possibly make a good wife to the Blackman:
1) 2)
3)
4) 5)
6)
She is attentive and a good listener.
She enjoys going partying but has an equally
good time at home.
She will have a strong spiritual commitment that
helps her distinguish between right and wrong.
She will be partially modest in her style of dress.
She will like babies and children and include
them in her life.
She enjoys cooking and preparing special meals
or treats for the Blackman.
She will respect her parents, his parents and
older people.
She has good personal hygiene.
She does not wear a ton of make-up.
She is proud of her man and claims him no
matter who is present.
She keeps her house at least half-way clean.
She is not a flagrant spender and almost manages
her money.
She is trustful and freely expresses her sexuality
and desires when in private with her man.
She shares voluntarily and offers help when she
can.
She does not hold grudges too long and will
apologize when wrong.
She will go out of her way to do special things “
for the Blackman.
She will speak good of him when he is not
around.
She will defend him against verbal attacks from
others.
She does not show out or curse loudly in public: She smiles when she meets him.
24
21) She controls her anger and does not go wild
when angry
22) She will take instructions on some things without
being combative.
23) She is respectful of Blackmen in general.
The Blackwomen who choose to marry to have a home,
security and company - but - do not wish to have continued
regular intimacy with the Blackman have amazingly worked
out a lifestyle whereby they live with the Blackman in the
same household but do not have sex with him. They choose
perfect opportunities to implement this program, such as:
1) Immediately after she has had some type of
operation or a baby.
2) After or during some heavy emotional trauma
3) After an accident of some sort, or a back problem
4) By claiming that intercourse is too painful
The Blackwoman, counting on the Blackman’s Se empeee le aeRa medical problems, will use thesé illnesses, real or imagined, to deny the Blackman sex. She
will often talk to her friends and take their advice and “old
wives tales” and make up a lot of other flimsy excuses and
exaggerate her symptoms to defend, prove and justify her
denial. Some Blackwomen do not enjoy sex after marriage
or hate the thought of it after having children, will perform
all of the other wifely duties EXCEPT having sexual
Ee ee ey. is marital arrangement to live out the marriage without
sex is strangely accepted by some Blackmen. The women
who practice this forgery ignore or pretend they do not mind
their husband seeking sexual gratification elsewhere. The
scene, while weird to others who know of the situation,
works if both parties agree. Sometimes they sleep in the
same bed, or separate beds, or separate rooms. They share a
home, bills, children and other family activities but there is
no sex. And they are committed and love each other. This
Blackman smouldering with neglect and disappointment
seeks physical attention elsewhere.
In other not as drastic couplings the woman will just
pretend she is on her period, complain of a severe headache
or weariness, play like they are asleep, wait until the man
goes to sleep before getting in bed, wear bulky hair rollers
and cold cream on their face, or if forced, they will consent
25
but just lie there and be a non-participant in the act. All of
this is done to discourage the Blackman from approaching
her for sex. As a last resort they may make him beg for it.
And still say no. It’s a ridiculous situation for the Blackman
toolerate. Some ‘of the Blackwomen_brag to each other
about the tricks they employ to get ouf of having sex with
their men. It is often a big joke among them about how to
mask these maneuvers. Oddly enough, the Blackwomen
who do this think it is normal and necessary. They are full of
contradictions.
Since the full indoctrination of the women’s rights
movement, some Blackwomen have commenced to refusing
to give up their maiden names to accept their husband’s
name after marriage. They adopt titles like:
1) Martha Jean Williams-Smith
2) M.J. Williams-Smith
They are referred to as Mrs. Williams-Smith. This is not
their own idea. It is also another statement to demonstrate to
the Black husband that by refusing to give up their family
name and accept his as the tribal leader, they are exerting
their individuality. This is considered modern and gauche. It
is also a public reminder to the Blackman that he does not
own her. This system is especially popular among the socalled professional or corporate women. They believe they
must maintain a separate identity in order to get credit for
what they do.
During whatever kind of marriage or relationship the
Blackman manages to have with the Blackwoman there will
come times when the Blackwoman feels compelled to assert
herself about a particular issue. They refer to this as “I got
him told.” Black women admire and congratulate each other
when they get the Blackman “told.” It usually comes in the
midst of one of those “I’m sick and tired of your bull s---”
conversations. Many times the Blackwomen will listen to,
other women’s renditions of getting the Blackman “told” and
then go home and try it out on their own husband/man. If he
goes along with it she is confirmed in her position and she is convinced that if she presents it right she can have her way about anything. Blackwomen tend to think that the Blackman’s cooperation or agreement with her ideas is a sign of weakness - or - if they really are tripping they think he goes along because he’s just crazy in love with her.
26
Every once in a while a rebellious American
Blackwoman will marry a man from one of the African
nations or the middle east. Miraculously she treats him like a
king. She alters her wardrobe, diet, hair or other to make
sure she is in line with his requirements. She has been
known to try her Western rap on the African, and found that
the way she is used to treating the Blackman is unacceptable
to the African, and will not be tolerated. The African man
does not reign over the American Blackman. He is not better
looking. And the African man is not more intelligent. The
African just has another idea. So he functions on that. His
idea, which is incorporated into all his activities, is that he is
the boss and the woman must do as he says. He does not
deal with any doubt about it. He is firm and confident and at
ease with the idea that he has the authority and superiority
over his woman. By dealing out of that mindset he is able to
be successful with the American Black woman. Her games
and silliness do not work with him. She knows that the
African knows better. And she knows that he is right even if
the match fails.
It is not true that when opposites attract they are able to. _live in peace and harmony. Peace and success comes from
two people who are very much alike, people who are
attracted based on similar needs and ideas;
woman disagrees with him on his basic principles
concerning lifestyle, priorities and goals, he will not b
happy in his relationship with her, The Blackma
isk and a time-consuming chance by assuming that he wi “Be able to sway her to his way of thinking as time goes by. At first the differences may seem amusing or challenging but
as the seriousness of life prevails he will find thatitis no fun
bei disagrees with him. —S There is no
unity in that kind of a match. Things are only right to a
Certain extent so there will be some issues throughout the life
cycle that will have to be compromised. But the risk can be
minimized by interviewing the Blackwoman about her own
ideas and finding out why she thinks the way she does.
The Blackman must not be impressed with the initial
behavior presentation of the Blackwoman when he first
meets her. During the heated period of getting to know each
other the Blackwoman will pretend that anything the
Blackman says or does is okay. Yet later when familiarity
27
sets in she will present the real deal - that she lied about, and
explain fully why she doesn’t feel that way at all. With a
fervor. Love does not conquer all and love does not make
everything turn out all right no matter how hot the passion.
No matter how good the Blackwoman looks or what she
has, if she is not on her Blackman’s side and supportive of
him, then she is not his woman. The Blackman can tell
which woman is his by the way she submits to his ideas and
instructions. And by the way she works to make him happy.
His Blackwoman should take the position that his success is
her success - their success, and work as a team.
The particular type of marriage practiced in America does
not have a good success rate. It is reported that only one in
four marriages actually works in the terms of longevity and
happiness. These are the same odds at the Blackjack table in
Las Vegas. 1 in 4. Most people lose.
The reasons why American Marriage between Blackmen
and Blackwomen fail is threefold:
1) HYPOCRISY - neither the Blackman or the
Blackwoman are able to live up to the European
rules and expectations of marriage. Since neither
party is able to successfully obey the rules yet
spend their lives pretending to, the union is
doomed by hypocrisy. Both pretend to do what
they know full well is against their nature.
2) DISHONESTY - The Blackman, because of the
uncompromising rules of monogamy is forced to
lie to his wife because if he tells her the truth it
will put his home in hell and jeopardize his
peace. His dishonesty is rooted in his not
wanting to admit publicly that he cannot, and will
not, play the marital agreement by the current
rules.
3) DISENCHANTMENT - The Blackwoman
mainly suffers from disappointment and
dissatisfaction when her unrealistic dreams of
marriage are shattered. She has been taught to
expect the impossible and when it does not
materialize she becomes despondent and her
disenchantment colors every aspect of her
marriage. It does not turn out the way she
imagined or the way she was told it would be.
28
And she does not have a plan B. So she becomes
hostile.
The Blackwoman does not understand that all of her
ideas about marriage were given to her from another
people’s nation. She responds to situations according to
what she has been taught. According to what has been bred
into her brain to ensure that she gives up her birthright. And
to ensure that she cuts all ties with her original roots.
Periodically when the Blackman chooses the older
Blackwoman for his mate he can relax a little. The older
Blackwoman (about 39 to 50) has tried all the tricks and
games and accepts her failure rate. She is more apt to be
willing to try something different during her twilight love
years. As we have heard, she is more at ease sexually, may
be easier to talk to, and is more patient and tolerant. She’s
been there and while the men in her age bracket may be
breaking away from their own tradition and becoming more
interested in younger women, she is caught in a whirlpool, a
floating, sometimes detached, with a lot of life left in her.
While she may look adult and settled, and has claimed she
would never even consider a younger man, she can be
approached. The drawbacks are that she will not want to
bear children and she will not be as interested in juvenile
type activities and she may be shyer. She will also have a
multitude if old problems she may wish to discuss or receive
advice on. She is faithful and becomes energetic about her
new romance. During this span of life Blackwomen
commence to lie about their age. On the other side of this
group are the women in the same age bracket who remain
inflexible in their ideas about what they will take and what
they will not take off of a Blackman. They are firm and
brittle in their attitudes and swear they are better off without
a man. They masturbate or just dismiss sex completely. This
alone makes them bitter and hostile. Many of them take good
care of themselves and spend their time with children and
grandchildren, their jobs, short trips, clubs, or political
affiliates. They might return to school, take up a hobby or
become submerged in church activities. She is considered by
those who don’t have to live with her as a nice woman. A
decent woman. She may also drink alcohol and do volunteer
work to fill out her time. She is full of stories of failed
29
romances and bad Blackmen who she claims abused her
without reason or cause. She believes herself innocent.
The older more mature Blackwoman may do several
things as a last attempt to hold on to her fading youth and
beauty. She may wear heavier make-up, have breast or facial
augmentation (plastic surgery or silicon) to improve her
body form. And sadly sometimes she tries to wear youthful
looking styles of clothes. Whatever the younger people are
wearing she may try to wear it too. She will also try to fix
her hair in a more younger looking style. And reveal more of
her body with low cut tops, shorter skirts, mid-driff
blouses, low in the back and front dresses, high high heels,
shorts, mini-dresses and the like.
It is not hard to recognize this type of Blackwoman at the
disco or in bars. She is easily noticeable and is generally
commented on by onlookers with comments like: “look at
that old broad trying to be young,” or “she’s trying to hold
on,” or “she ought to be ashamed of herself,” and rightfully
so, she should. Of course other more crass comments are
made that do not need to be repeated here. The Blackwoman
when in this stage is very very unhappy, has low self-value
and is confused. She believes that the only way she can
attract a man is by pretending to be young and she is
mentally blind enough to believe that she can get away with
it and that no one can see that she is an old sister trying to be
young. The fact that she cannot recapture that part of her life
does not matter to her, she thinks that how she dresses or
dances will make her accepted by men. She does not know
that each stage of life can be beautiful and content if she
thinks right and behaves in such a way as to be viewed as
beautiful. The older Blackwomen want to be young and the
younger Blackwomen want to be old - or so it seems.
Actually, they would rather be anything than what they are.
xs
The Elderly Blackwoman (Aged 5Sish up to 100)
The senior Blackwoman, if she chooses, can be beautiful. If she has taken care of herself physically, eaten properly, had minimum substance abuse, and had pleasant positive thoughts, she is beautiful. If she has had a man, or still has one, she looks even better. If she has been a bonafide hell raiser, is.disappointed in her man, her children
30
and her life, her condition will reflect that accordingly. If she
is regretful of her life and has bad memories and grieves
over them, she will relate her misery to anyone who gives
her an ear.
Often the disappointed old Black woman can be found in
the community warning the young girls “don’t let no man
make a fool out of you,” or “all men want to do is use you,”
or “they only want one thing.” She may report to the other
older women in the neighborhood that she is doing better
than ever since she got rid of the man she used to have. She
might further tell them “I didn’t ever get anything out of it
anyway.” She is a sad sight. Black female elders wrought
with turmoil and regret relating lifetime memories about her
unfulfilled tenure. She will brag on how she has always
been headstrong and determined to do as she pleased. She
did. And now she is alone. Sorry that her life has passed and
wishing she had another chance to do it all over again.
The ones of them who are married and have been
basically happy for many years and who still enjoy the
youthful benefits of sex, will be glowing and satisfied. If
she has been having a man on a regular basis her body will
be more enticing than that of the Blackwoman who brags
about how she got rid of her man years ago. She will dress
better, take care of her hygiene better and be pleased with
herself and her life. She has pride and is respected for her
intelligent knowledge and advice to the young.
The older Blackwoman who is dissatisfied will have a
face that looks defeated, weary and worn. Her flesh will
hang looser on her bones and she has wrinkles from her
permanent frown and bad ideas. She may be careless about
her clothes, her home and will talk to herself - a habit she
develops out of loneliness - or a breakdown of her mental
abilities. She complains about the young people in the
neighborhood and carries gossip if she gets a chance.
Unfortunately, sometimes the older Blackwoman will give
negative advice to her grand-daughters about how to treat
their man. They advise them to live their own life, don’t get
tied down to no one man, keep something for themselves
and go when he goes. They might even explain to other
young women about how they were such a good wife for
30-40 or 50 years and didn’t get anything for it. It is not
exactly plain what the older Blackwoman expects for being a
31
good Blackwoman. There is no other reward except the
satisfaction of knowing she performed a job well done for a
deserving Blackman - and for herself. :
The older Blackwoman also sometimes thinks the
modern Blackwoman has more privileges than her because
she has the option of doing worldly things other than getting
married and having a family. She admires the idea of
independence and wishes she had thought of it.
Another group of older Blackwomen are equivalent to
the “dirty old man” and she is obsessed with sex -
discussing it - per se. She pries into the affairs of younger
people, openly uses raw language when referring to sex and
talks about her own conquests allegedly made when she was
young. She memorizes filthy remarks and may curse loudly
in public. Her personal hygiene is lacking and she may drink
a little wine on the side, or nurse hard liquor daily.
Sometimes the older Blackwoman, if she is blessed to
still be married and have man, is still bickering with her
Black husband about disagreements they had 20-30 or 40
years ago. The older Blackwoman can be just as rebellious
as the younger ones. They watch and play a lot of petty
childish games and complain a lot.
The older Blackwoman also remains jealous of her
Blackman deep into old age. She is jealous of younger and
older women whom she thinks is laying in wait for her man.
She raises big hell if she suspects her man of fooling around
on her. She does this in fear that he will have sex with
another woman, give her his money or leave home. She is
also more prone to want to accept being elderly or infirmed.
She is quicker to accept the idea that she has already lived
her life and now she can settle down and stay home most of
the time. The Blackman clings to life to the very end and
wants to enjoy the excitement and the activities for as long as
possible. Retirement, different from the Blackwoman, does .
not mean that productive life is finished, but started. His
woman will remind him that he is too old to do this or that
and he should sit down somewhere and let the young people take over. She wants him to believe he is old so that she no longer has to worry about him being attracted or attractive to a younger woman. Even in the older stages the Blackwoman persists in trying to block the Blackman from pursuing other
32
women. It makes her bitter and vindictive. It makes him
tired.
DIVORCE
As we all know, the Blackwoman becomes very
vindictive and hostile when she is divorcing the Blackman -
generally no matter what the reason for the separation. She
has learned a great deal from the blood sucking tactics of
attorneys who have perfected the ways to take everything a
man has when they divorce. The Blackwoman, in trying to
mimic them hires shyster lawyers to get the most that she can
from her divorce. She is not concerned with an amicable
parting, and she is not concerned as to whether or not the
Blackman has enough funds left to live on or to remarry and
start another family. She could care less. Her attitude is that
if he doesn’t want me, or did this or that to me, then he
doesn’t deserve to live. She wants him to suffer the kind of
pain of rejection she does, and if the only way to hurt him
permanently is in his wallet - then so be it. Certainly Black
children must be provided for and part of the provision is
money. Some of her stories of child support and living
expenses are often exaggerated to fit the situation. She wants
the Blackman to pay for not being with her. It should be
mentioned that if the Blackman divorces the Blackwoman the
reasons are usually not unfounded. She either did something
or wouldn’t do something. If he doesn’t want her anymore
it’s for a reason. A Blackman keeps a good woman who
pleases him no matter who else he meets or who else he adds
onto his life. On the other hand, if she divorces him, the
reason just might be anything, and are much too numerous
to list here. Any petty or long range grievance is used to end
what she believes is an unhappy union. While reasons of
insanity, extreme jealousy, batterment, drug or alcohol abuse
are considered justifiable, there are many other ones, mostly
based on her unwillingness to submit to the man as the head.
The sympathy always leans towards her.
When the Blackman’s family is weaseled away from
him, often by persons he has no control over, sometimes it’s
his mother-in-law, ex-friends, her girlfriends or a stranger; it
is a very emotionally sensitive time for him. It is always
worse when his woman falls out of love with him because of
rumor mongers and mis-advice by others. In this society all
33
of the sympathy and support is usually thrown towards the
woman, especially if she has children. Others become
concerned about where she will live, how she will support
herself, what will become of the children, will she have
transportation, does she have a baby-sitter, etc. These are all
questions considered by well-wishers or by standers. Little
concern is felt for the Blackman when he becomes ousted
from a love and/or marriage relationship. It is falsely
assumed that he will be able to instantly adjust and fit in
easily elsewhere. This consensus of opinion is formed
because most onlookers believe that since the man does not
have the responsibility of children that he can keep on
stepping and not miss a beat. This is not true. It is just as
harrowing an experience for the Blackman to have to
readjust and reorganize his life as it is for the Blackwoman.
He, too, has to first formulate and situate an entirely new
daily lifestyle that excludes his former mate and possible
their children. His tears and frustration must be shown only
in private - absolute privacy - when only he is present. It is
not definitely known exactly what the effect of displacement
is on a Blackman after he accepts the responsibility of being
a husband and father. When this is snatched from him he
shares the same outrage, the same pain and the same
confusion as the Blackwoman. His separation is not
different just because he does not have children. He is still
faced with the question of what to do with himself and who
can he be with while on the rebound. The Blackwoman
starts out disbelieving in the Blackman so for her a failed
marriage or relationship is expected, therefore when it
surfaces, she may congratulate herself on the fact that she
knew all along that it wouldn’t work. The Blackman, who
believes in the possibility of having a good woman and a
good home, is shattered when he must face the inevitable
end of a relationship. Especially one wherein he has invested .
time and trust. Additionally, he is often thudded with the
collapse of his rights as a full-time father. His pain on being
disconnected from his children is heart wrenching and
unbearable but he has to shake it off and go on. This is what is expected of him and he has erroneously grown to expect it from himself.
Try as he may, there are few cases where the father is awarded the custody of his children, and usually the court
34
fight is a long and dirty one - plus, it’s expensive. He has to
theoretically give up his children, and hope that his ex-mate
will keep his memory and presence alive, and that she will
be very careful in choosing another man so as to protect his
children. If they are girl children, it is extremely difficult for
him to maintain an attachment because girl children
historically take the side of the mother. Boy children while
more attracted to the father as a guardian, are generally
forced by the mother and the extended family members to
remain with the mother also. Many a Black father has to
watch his son crumble emotionally when he is raised solely
by the mother. Often the children are caught in a tug of war
between the parents who are both vying for the child’s
allegiance. Breaking up is a terrible ordeal for all parties
involved. Even if the partners both agree that the relationship
is over. The Blackwoman must understand that her pain is
no different form the Blackman’s and that he hurts just as
deeply when the love has faded.
Chapter 4
~ THE WEDDING - THE BEGINNING
Ahhhhhhhhhhhh, who can forget the beginning? That
wonderful start-up time referred to as the courtship and
“going together.” This is the period when the Blackwoman
is the most cooperative and malleable. It’s that wonderful
and glorious state when tender loving attraction is at its peek.
During this time the Blackman and the Blackwoman cannot
stay a part. It is too painful to be away from each other for
an extended period of time. Every touch is magic, every
glance ecstasy, and the delicious exploration of sex is brand
new. Spine tingling excitement. Overwhelming enjoyment.
How could it ever end? The fondling, the anticipation, the
perpetuating desire of new love. The Blackwoman stares
into the admiring eyes of the Blackman and reflects his
loving gaze with worshipping innocence. Her eyes give the
temporary and false promise that she will always remain in
submission and feel lucky to have her man’s love. She is
agreeable, complimentary, affectionate and giving. Nothing
is too good for her man during this period. Life and love are
35.
sterling pure. Magnetic attraction is in force and neither side
is able to withstand the pull because they created it. More lies
are told during this stage than will ever be told again. The
Blackwoman spares no expense or energy to convince the
Blackman that she is the mate for him. Naturally, he believes
her because he wants to. She makes him feel like a king. She
is alluring and soothing.
During a lengthy courtship she is available and willing to
try anything the Blackman suggests. She is thoughtful in
sending him cards or little love notes. Taking time to do
special little favors for him. His favorite meal, his favorite
color, his favorite treatment - expressed using her favorite
plot. Her flexible and happy behavior turns out to be a gross
misrepresentation of how she really is. After the point when
she feels confident she has the man she starts to take a kind
of inventory. She memorized and catalogued all of her man’s
little idiosyncrasies that she plans to change. She believes
she will be able to change the Blackman by subtle prodding
and sweet requests. Sometimes these changes are
monumental rearrangements of his personality that he has
had all of his life. Nevertheless, she thinks that he can
change and she does not doubt that she is the one to change
him. The Blackman knows nothing about this plan and
believes that she accepts him as he is, just as he has accepted
her.
It may take quite a while for the initial passionate
attraction to subside and it’s a fun filled time of dating,
dinners, travel, calls, and uninhibited sexual play. The
Blackman thinks that her attentions and interest will last
indefinitely, the Blackwoman knows that they will not. She
weans him slowly using excuses and justifiable sounding
explanations.
When the Blackwoman becomes busy with normal life
activities the first thing she gives up, eliminates or sacrifices
is loving attention to the Blackman. She believes that aftex*
she “gets” him he is expendable and adult, and should
understand when she has more pressing things to do. If
anything has to be squeezed in, it’s him. If anything has to
be squeezed out, it’s also him. Instead of his care being
paramount, it becomes something the Blackwoman does on
the run.
36
While it is a natural occurrence for work, the house and
the children to take up a certain amount of time, it’s not a
natural occurrence for the loving attention to the Blackman to
stop. The time may become shorter to express it but it should
not become more infrequent. If the Blackwoman develops
giving attention to the Blackman as part of her daily living it
would preserve the thrill of the relationship and establish a
closeness not always based on sexual intimacy.
It’s not that she necessarily takes him for granted, it’s
just that she does not place the right value on his presence.
In some homes he walks into the house and is completely
ignored. He is often made to feel like an intruder in his own
household. Someone who is sometimes in the way. In the
way of other things and people who are more important to
the Blackwoman than the Blackman.
In younger women the courtship may be altered a bit in
thematic arrangement. If she has ideas about having some
female macho-equality she might start out from the
beginning letting the Blackman know that she has no
intentions of catering to his every whim. Or any of his
whims. She doesn’t think it’s her responsibility and she
thinks that every man should do for himself like she does for
herself. She has very prolific sounding explanations about
why she feels the way she does. Take it or leave it. He
should leave it. She does not feel that her attitude will have
impact on the success of the relationship. She is just
exercising her options and believes her choices to be minor
and harmless. She is interested in having a Blackman but not
interested enough to put on any special act for him. Certainly
no encores or repeat performances.
THE WEDDING CEREMONY
For the contemporary Blackwoman big expensive
elaborate weddings are in. Their requirements are:
Big ceremony
Big Church
Big Reception
Big expensive wedding
Big floral arrangements
Big catered menu
Big matching wardrobes for the attendants
37
Big honeymoon
Big ego production
and Big cash expenditures :
But this is the ‘Blackwoman’s shining hour. She is the
center of attention, the star, and her wedding is the public
symbol of her wonderful life waiting ahead. It is a glorious
tribute to her big announcement that “I GOT HIM.” The
Blackman cooperates and participates in all of this hoopla
because he is prompted by both families and mostly because
he wants to please his woman. She not only wants it, she
demands it. Although his nature may tell him that this is too
much money to spend on publicly agreeing in front of
several hundred witnesses that they are now married.
Sometimes $5,000 to $50,000 or more is spent on the
wedding affair and a lot of this money comes out of the
Blackman’s pocket. Gone are the days when the woman
foots the bill for the entire wedding. The Blackwoman is not
concerned with the financial strain, will beg, borrow and
charge to produce this show. Later on when viewing the
videotape of this main event it may be difficult for the
Blackman to believe that his woman could orchestrate such a
synchronized attraction but now finds it impossible to get
dinner on the table every night at a reasonable time.
Sometimes the woman may look at the tape over and over
again remembering what she may describe as the most
beautiful period of her life. Sometime the man gets lost in the
shuffle of the wedding plans and finds himself standing
around trying to figure out his part in this. Usually several
family fights and disagreements occur on both sides before
the grand day takes place. They rumble. After the
honeymoon the couple returns home to start living out the
Blackwoman’s dream of married life. She immediately takes
on the rest of the job of trying to set her life in order. It is
also at this time she completely relaxes and lets the Blackman*
know bit by bit that she expects him to carry his part of the
load and make a few changes - now that they are really
married. Now comes the real deal. Few Blackwomen cross
the threshold of marriage without a carefully outlined mental plan of how she intends to change her man to suit her wishes. She sees marriage as the contract whereby she can
be herself. The wrong self. She believes that the only way to
38
maintain control of her life is to maintain control of her man.
This control starts by trying to keep up with him - to know
his whereabouts at all times. Often she’ll ask questions about
where he’s been and then sneakingly ask him the same
question at another time to see if he’ll give the same response.
One of the worst mistakes the Blackman can make when
living with a Blackwoman is to start out telling her every
step he takes when he’s not with her. The first time she
tricks him into answering she will expect an explanation
from then on. The reasons she uses to pry into his comings
and goings are:
1) I worry about you, you could at least call
2) You ask me where I go
3) Cause I have a right to know, I’m your wife
(woman)
4) Somebody was looking for you
5) So Ill know what’s going on or what’s
happening
6) “Cause I just wanna know”
Certainly if the Blackman desires to inform the
Blackwoman of his whereabouts he can do so, but the
problem in trying to comply with her slanted curiosity -
which is really interrogation - is that the Blackman can never
be sure of which point in the deposition he will give the
wrong answer and put her in a mental hell that may last for
days. Her questions represent distrust and insecurity. She
spends a lot of time during her day thinking up ways to bust
the Blackman, and she will worry over any unsettled details
and could the atmosphere with suspicion and doubt - the two
most baneful emotions in her relationship. Although she
won’t admit it, her position is that “if you ain’t with me or a
crowd of witnesses - then you must be doing something
wrong,” or “if you ain’t with me then you must be with
somebody else,” or “how come you can’t tell me where you
were?”. She does not really believe that what she doesn’t
know can’t hurt her. Everything hurts her. And she thinks
it’s the Blackman’s fault. If the Blackwoman would take a
moment to be truthful and admit her fears and the root of her
despair she would have better communications with the
Blackman. And honesty is what she says she wants. But she
only wants it from one side - his.
39
She is so angry with the Blackman that she does not
want him to have the glorious experience of having a good
woman. A good woman. The kind of woman who is in
submission to her man and loves it. The kind of woman who
obeys because she: wants to obey and not because she is
forced into doing so.
The current Blackwoman denies any notions of yearning
to be under the Blackman’s control. She pushes this idea out
of her mind by recalling that he doesn’t deserve it anyway.
Why? Because he will not do what she wants him to do.
She does not know the luxury of relaxing and living her
life for her Blackman and doing everything she can to make
him happy. By letting the Blackman be the head of the
family she could revive him, and by getting behind him and
supporting him he could be free. The Blackwoman cannot
know freedom until the Blackman does. The wise say a man
can rise no higher than his woman. Until the Blackwoman
makes a conscious choice to start respecting the Blackman he
will remain in his current condition and decline even more.
Some Blackwomen say they are satisfied with the status quo
of their relationships and wouldn’t have is any other way.
They are lying. They are just trifling and enjoy quibbling and
use these tactics to delay the inevitable for as long as
possible.
When the Blackwoman accepts her rightful place as
queen of the universe and mother of civilization the
Blackman will regenerate his powers that have been lost to
him for over 400 years directly. The Blackwoman should
not mimic the ideas and attitudes of Western civilization. The
whiteman clearly understands that the preservation of the
family order is what allows him to rule the world. This fact
is not hidden knowledge. When the standards that preserve
civilization are disregarded the result is a do-your-own-thing
reckless and disorganized existence. The domestic crime rate in America bears witness to the breakdown of the family * structure and the demise of the traditional values that preserve peace between women and men.
THE CEREMONY
There have arisen endless creative expressions of how to exchange the wedding vows and many are quite interesting,
40
but the standard theme contains the standard American
designed format. Little does the Blackwoman know the the
entire wedding ceremony was taken from the whiteman’s
history of being in the cave, which is referred to as
prehistoric times. It was out of the caveman period that they
devised the marriage rites and each segment of the ceremony
denotes a particular aspect of their life in the cave. It has no
Black cultural background in it.
Most have seen the pictures of the white caveman
walking with a club over his shoulder dragging the
whitewoman behind him. This picture is the brunt of many
jokes suggesting that this is how the whiteman claimed his
woman. The following definitions explain how they came to
use the seemingly timeless marital rites.
The ring... Is symbolic of the rope/cord or vine
used to tie up the woman (the bride) in order to conquer her
and it was used to bind her wrists and ankles while
kidnapping her from her tribe. This was done by the groom.
The ring bearer... Is the man who went with the
groom to steal the bride - he is the one who carried the extra
rope. It took 2 to 3 men to pull this heist. The attendants.
The Best man“ Was the man who went with
the groom to steal the bride.
The throwing of rice... Is symbolic of the
rocks and stones the family of the bride threw after the
groom when the brides screams awakened her family and
they saw she was being taken.
The honeymoon... Is symbolic of the cooling off
period that followed the taking of the bride. The groom
would take her up into the mountains or some far off place
and keep her up there until she came into submission to him.
Carrying over the threshold“... Symbolic of
the groom carrying the bride into his cave - her new home.
He had to carry her because she would not walk in
voluntarily.
The Maiden of honor“ Is the woman in the
groom’s tribe, usually his mother or a friend who helped the
new bride adjust to and learn the ways of life in the new
cave.
The veil... Came into practice around 1500 as a
form of spirituality which was designed to keep evil spirits
away from the face of the bride.
41
The bride used to throw her garter from around her thigh
(also symbolic of the rope/ring used to bound her when
kidnapped), but white men used to create such a brawl at the
weddings scuffling for the garter that this practice was
dropped and the bride took to throwing her bouquet to the
women who were more civilized in their participation.
Few Blackwomen know what they are doing when they
plan and host a big church wedding. She doesn’t care. She
should take the time to use her own history to have a
wedding ceremony and make up her own vows.
With all of the Blackwoman’s profundities about what
marriage means, it is just an agreement between a man and
woman to be together and work in the interest of one. It is a
commitment concerning daily living between both families.
The idea of separating, moving away “cleaving to each other
“is not an idea from the history of Blacks. Blacks used to
marry, set up housekeeping or expand their present
households into a larger base. Complete separation was not
necessary since the tribe continued to work together for
success in having food, clothing and shelter. Family ties
were very strong and it was not necessary for the man and
the woman to give up either of their families just so they
could be together. The extended family ties were kept intact.
This also allowed the elder women in the tribe to help guide
and assist the wife in adhering to the responsibilities of
marriage.
Today’s Blackwoman does not want nor seek guidance
about how to practice wifedom. She wants the separation so
she can have the freedom to run her house anyway she
pleases - right or wrong. She rarely takes instruction about
how to do this. She relies on the various electronic and paper
media to guide her along the marriage trail. When she
reaches bumps in the road she seeks out the advice of her
peers who are also failing at the job of being a good Blackwoman to a Blackman. When in a dead heat about” getting married the Blackwoman may feel the vibrations of
bursting surges of love for her man. A love she intends to carry balanced on the top of her head encased in a thin sheer sheet of glass. A love that will shatter and collapse at the slightest quiver.
When the Blackwoman commences to anticipate marriage she may make widespread changes which are a
42
trick. all of a sudden she may get real “wifey” - she’ll cook
homemade meals, clean the house a lot, and perform any
other feat designed to impress the Blackman into recognizing
her as a good woman who can perform the necessary duties.
She knows that this is the kind of behavior he wants
from a woman so she kicks in and does the things she is
sure will please him. And it does. Eventually he will pop the
question, except he really doesn’t pop the question as much
as the Blackwoman makes the suggestion and leans on him
until he agrees. This short period in which the Blackwoman
makes heaven for the Blackman proves that she knows how,
but she does the right things for the wrong reasons. Her
motivation is treachery and therefore short-lived. Her
sometimes abrupt halt to the good treatment is a normal
evolution to her, and she feels that he should have known
what the deal was from the git-go. When the Blackman
realizes he is not only being neglected but nearly ignored, the
good sister may go to “nut city” and appear baffled - she
doesn’t know what he means. Then she explains in great
detail why things have changed. She sometimes gives him a
choice between what duties he wishes her to perform, since
she can’t do both. This is wrong. The Blackman has every
right to expect and solicit the Blackwoman to perform her
wifely duties to him and the family. The Blackman and the
family (including the house) must have first priority. The
Blackwomen who believe themselves to be so modern as to
dismiss the home as a place to bathe and change are
suffering from a misunderstanding. The misunderstanding is
that they must change with the trends instead of creating the
trend that serves them best and protects the Black nation.
Any Blackwoman who is not concerned with the Black
nation as a whole does not deserve to have a Blackman.
THE GOOD WIFE SYNDROME
When the Blackwoman starts out trying to do right
regarding her man, her home and her family, she has a very
difficult time with the personal anguish she suffers from the
ridicule from other Blackwomen. They tease and mock her
for trying to fulfill her rightful obligations to her family. If
she works on a job outside the home but still attempts to
properly care for her family she will be verbally assaulted
43
and criticized for her efforts. Being a good wife is
considered dull and outdated by the modern Blackwoman.
Other Blackwomen will tell the good wife:
1)
2)
3)
8) 9)
10)
Le)
12)
You’re a fool for working all day and cooking all
night, he’ll eat if he gets hungry.
Why don’t you tell him to cook dinner, he gets
home before you do.
You’re a fool to give him all your money, you
worked for it, you got a right to spend it on
whatever you want to.
I wouldn’t take it.
Girl, you ain’t his slave.
Why don’t you go to this party with us this
weekend.
It may be for some people, but it’s not for me, I
just ain’t cut out for it.
God ain’t made the man I’d do all that for.
You ought to just tell him that you ain’t gonna do
at:
Girl I used to do that but I got hip.
You have to train a man to do what you want him
to do.
It’s not fair for him to expect you to do all that
The above 12 remarks are just a sample of what they say
in FRONT of her face. Behind her back they whisper:
That is the dumbest b---h I’ve ever seen.
did you hear that s--t.
Girl, I bet he’s having big fun while she’s stuck
at home.
I wonder what he’s telling her.
did you see how he looks?
He got her in a real trick bag.
I don’t know how they do it.
I ain’t working myself to death for nobody.
She don’t have no idea what’s happening. - “
I don’t know how she can go for that.
are just examples. Some are more cutting than
*
It is a travesty for Blackwomen to criticize other Blackwomen who are married and trying to be a good wife to their man. Being married and doing the right thing is looked upon as ignorant and old timey. Blackwomen make
44
erroneous charges against the righteous Blackwoman who is
trying to do her proper duty to her man, God and her nation.
She should not be mocked, but respected and admired for
her good works. Any woman who deprives herself of the
absolute thrill of serving and taking care of a Blackman is
depriving herself of a special award. The look of peace and
satisfaction on the contented face of a Blackman has no
equal. There is no better heaven for the Blackman than to
have his woman in order. A Blackman who has a supportive
woman feels good to go out to work, and his day is
productive if he is at peace with his woman. The only way
the Blackman can be at peace with the Blackwoman is when
she is doing what he wants her to do.
A Blackman who sees his woman trying to please him
will do everything he can to try to please her. He will make a
good husband and father if given the chance. A man is proud
of a good woman and a good home and it gives him the
incentive and confidence to be successful - no matter what
the odds are out there. If he knows that when he comes
home he has the tender touch and attention of his woman
waiting for him.
The Blackman is the only one who knows what it takes
to make the Blackwoman happy because she has no idea
what real happiness is. But she’s running so much
interference that the Blackman rarely gets a chance to be
himself and release the love and trust he has because of the
Blackwoman’s funky attitude. The Blackman cannot pattern
his life in such a way as to have time (or memory) to
constantly remind the Blackwoman that he loves her. Love is
not a sentence it is a demonstration. If the Blackwoman
doubts that her man loves her the doubt grows. It does not
matter after that what the man tries to do or what he says,
she will remain unhappy.
A Blackwoman who is relaxed at home, cooking,
planning a loving welcome for her man, making a dress, or
icing a cake is far happier than a Blackwoman sitting at home
alone, under great duress waiting on the phone to ring,
trying to figure out how to find a man, or chewing her nails
off wondering where he is. There is no comparison if
contentment and happiness is the goal. The Blackwoman’s
natural instincts have become so polluted and distorted that
45
she has rejected the plan that works for the one that fails.
She is on the wrong path and insists on stumbling on.
Is should be Black people’s greatest collective hope that
at some point the total affect of the mind tampering during
enslavement is understood. The genetic psychological
damage done to Blacks in slavery has been forgotten as light
weight action that’s over and past. It’s much more serious
and long lasting than that. It has caused the people to be
morally estranged form their past.
The Blackwoman must be reminded of her duties and the
Blackman must stop settling for the jumbled ideas she
expresses. She must accept her basic ideas from the
Blackman and improve on them instead of rejecting them in
the name of having her own way. It has been proven that she
does not know what she wants, nor how to get the things
she claims she does want. A big degree, a big job, a big car
and a big bank account does not compete with a big beautiful
Blackman. No way. No day.
The Blackman has allowed himself to be devalued by
Blackwomen who rank among the most confused species of
humanhood on the planet Earth. The Blackman knows that
she is confused about many topics and the Blackwoman
knows that he knows, but until she is stopped and called to
order she believes herself powerless to control how she is.
Her first career must be to raising her family and completing
the rearing work necessary to improve the Black nation. This
work cannot be done by anyone else no matter what they say
they represent. Yes, times are moving fast - it seems, and the
Blackwoman’s previous steady and sturdy values have
evaporated into the storm of American social politics. The
Blackwoman has attempted to grow and evolve like the
whitewoman except their history is not the same. The
Blackwoman’s growth has been retarded and thwarted
because she is trying to live her Black life based on the, values and standards of white life. She justifies all this based’
on her anger towards the Blackman for not defending
himself.
It’s entirely possible that hidden some place in the Blackwoman’s psyche is a tremendous fury and loss of confidence in the Blackman because he was unable to protect her during slavery. Slavery robbed the Blackman of his natural right to provide and protect his family. Again, she
46
doesn’t know what he should have done to stop slavery but
she thinks he should have done something. Of course, there
was nothing he could do. He felt as victimized as she. And
his brain was equally wounded.
The Blackwoman’s pain and frustration is so great that
the only vent she pursues for release is to fight against the
Blackman. The only man who really loves her. She battles
tooth and nail in a fight that she cannot win, and one that
destroys her spirit and makes her ugly to look at. It is
difficult to get her to listen to new information about a new
approach to living her life because she is so certain that she
is justified in being out of order. She knows that she is
difficult to tangle with but she thinks that this is what the
Blackman deserves for being so out of order himself. Part of
her discomfort is that she thinks she has the solutions to the
Blackman’s problems if he would only listen to her. By
nature the Blackman cannot submit to the woman.
When she considers the problems of the Blackman she
continually looks outward. She lists oppression, depression
and obsession as part of his failings. She compiles lists filled
with such topics as joblessness,, lack of political clout, lack
of historical knowledge, poor education, missing father
image and a host of other external mishaps that result in the
Blackman being disenfranchised. It never occurs to her to
look internally, at herself, and see what her role is in the
Blackman’s plight. If and when she does examine herself
she comes out clean. She can find no fallacy in her that helps
keep the Blackman down.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND TRUST
Blackwomen reveal all of the Blackman’s personal
business to her friends. If the Blackman has any special
information he tells his woman in confidence you can be
sure that her best friend or her family members know too.
She takes a special glee in letting her friends know the most
intimate details and secrets - even his antics in bed, and
anything else of a personal and confidential nature. She does
not consider that a confidence has been violated, nor that it is
unfair to the Blackman who entrusted her with the
information. No Blackwoman ever tells another
Blackwoman that she is wrong to tell her man’s business to
47
the public. This process is an agreed and acceptable dialogue
among Blackwomen. It is also certain that some of the
information she tells her girlfriends ends up getting
whispered into the ears of her girlfriend’s man. The
Blackman is betrayed twice this way. His business is all
over town and he doesn’t even know it. She tells everything.
Everything. No subject is too private or too sacred.
Many Blackmen think that the Blackwoman is
trustworthy with his innermost secrets but she is not. And
she expresses no guilt about it. Such is the warped
agreement between Blackwomen, and part of their secret
society with mutually agreed upon rules and by-laws. This is
a women-only club that thrives daily. The membership
consists of single and married women. They all do the same
thing. They tell. Whenever the Blackwoman suspects that
her Blackman has shared their business with another man or
his family she becomes appalled. How could he do such a
thing? Blackmen who tell are looked down upon with special
disdain. She thinks that a man is just not supposed to do
this. She is a hypocrite.
She has become so adept at attacking the Blackman for
whatever she decides is a good reason that she functions as
if he is her open enemy and she packs an arsenal of
ammunition to shoot him down at every turn. She is
calculating every word he says and every move he makes
examining him to figure out ways to get him to do what she
wants him to do. These constant calculations leave little time
for positive discoveries of ways to drop her defenses and let
her man lead the way. It is not easy for a Blackman to be
motivated if his woman doubts him, or if their relationship is
so stormy that it takes his head and robs him of the ability to
concentrate. For some Blackmen his woman is the only
ae wrong in his life. She has broken his spirit deep in his eart. :
Some have developed what appears to be a startling
attitude about the Blackwoman being out of order. They
have started to accept her disagreeable behavior as the norm and cooperate with her ignorance because he does not think he has any alternative. So many Blackmen have commenced to saying they want a Blackwoman who is:
1) financially independent
2) her own person
48
3) can do things on her own, and doesn’t count on me for everything
4) who makes her own decisions
5) is a professional career woman
6) likes to have a good time without becoming
attached
This is not what the Blackman really wants but he sees
no sense in swimming upstream against the apparent current
- if he wants to have a woman. It is obvious to him that the
Blackwoman wants a separate independent life while
claiming she wants peace and unity with the Blackman. It is
impossible for those two aspirations to occupy the same
space or be targeted at the same object at one time. One
cannot have separation and unity simultaneously.
The real Blackman does not want a woman who
professes any of the six aforementioned ideas. In his heart
he does not want this in his woman but he too is convinced
that this is his only option if he wants to be with her. And he
has proven that he wants to be with her. On closer
examination of the six postures of the new breed
Blackwoman it is found that:
1) “financially independent” Blackwomen make life
easier on the Blackman because her wants and
desires are so excessive - and - times are so
difficult for a Blackman to earn enough money to
support a wife and family that he generally agrees
that it is a good idea if she has her own money.
He doesn’t have enough for himself. He would
much rather be the breadwinner in charge of the
money but if he has a woman’who makes
outrageous demands on his wallet - he can’t
compete. He knows she will never be satisfied
with his provisions and therefore gives up his
rightful place as chief of finance and budget.
2) “Her own person” means she demands total
control of her own decision making processes. It
is part of her hard earned independence. Any
thing he tells her to do, or any advice he renders
comes under careful scrutiny. Many times the
Blackwoman will do the direct opposite of what
the Blackman tells her to do just to prove to him
that he can’t boss her around. Repetitive rejection
49
3)
4)
leaves him with no alternative but to stand back
and let her be “her own person.” Even if her own
person is a fool. He watches her floundering -
about.
“can do things on her own, and doesn’t count on
me for everything.” This includes her happiness.
Since the Blackwoman has proven by her
behavior and responses that the Blackman
doesn’t know what to do to make her happy, he
has nearly given up the desire to do so. He is
faced with the mental torment of knowing she
rejects his ideas but that her ideas are impossible
for him to execute and fulfill - so it is best if she
counts on her own self for her own happiness.
She calls it freedom of choice. The Blackman
calls it saving himself from endless hassles and
debates predictably ending with her having her
way.
“who makes her own decisions” - the Blackman
consents to allowing the Blackwoman to make
her own decisions. He has learned that if he
persists in trying to convince her to follow his
advice he has to be prepared to argue it out for
days - or - he can physically force his woman to
submit (physical force is covered in another
chapter). The Blackwoman’s loose and ruthless
tongue eliminates the Blackman’s alternatives.
He cannot out-talk her unless she stops to listen -
therefore he lets her have her way. A strange
thing happens next. Every time the Blackwoman
wins an argument against the Blackman she loses
further confidence in his ability to “handle her”
because she sees his acquiescence as weakness.
All every Blackwoman really wants is for her 4°
Blackman to tell her what to do, make her do it,
and take charge of the situation. The
Blackwoman involuntarily wants to be
overpowered by the Blackman albeit she screams
like a banshee while he’s doing it. Don’t believe
her. This is just another contradiction in her ever changing behavior. She wants to be conquered and whenever she is conquered she proudly
50
brags to her friends about the conquest. She
wants to lose but when she pits her will against
the will of the Blackman and he gives in, she
believes that if he can’t “handle” her then surely
he cannot handle other outside forces that come
against her. She first of all wants to be protected
against herself.
5) “is a professional career woman” this means she
has some type of high class title and job in some
big business company. She dresses in a certain
way and talks the language of whatever her job
represents. The so-called corporate world (if it’s
not a Black company) is the worst place for the
Blackwoman to be because she exhibits the
internal conflict of trying to live the impression
she gives on her job and live in the real world
that exists for her at home or outside the work
place. She, in making a few dollars more than
her often routine job holding counterparts
(Blackmen), is geared to compete. Sometimes the
competition is so aggressive (she calls it
assertive), that the Blackman experiences the
antagonism of being defeated by the
Blackwoman - in front of the whiteman. Her
independence, strained from her salary and circle
of friends, allows the Blackman the relaxation of
not having to worry about her needs. She’s on
the same track as he so he relieves himself of the
challenge since by the measures she uses she is
equal. So this is just another situation which
permits him to defer dealing with her personal
problems due to her insistence on occupational
and after-work equality. He knows she will not
let him infringe upon her high falootin’ work
decisions nor the ones she makes at home so
other than sex he has no responsibility for her.
It’s simpler. And she knows it..
6) “likes to have a good time without becoming
attached,” is prided by some Blackmen because it,
too, lets him deal any kind of a way he chooses
but avoid the responsibility of dealing with the
fallout of the aftereffects. Blackwomen allegedly
51
have become more careful in their sexual
involvements because of the AIDS and herpes
scare, but this kind of sexual election only applies
if it is a man she is not that fond of. If it is a man
she likes and wants to see more of, she still gives
up the sex or accepts the one-night-stand.
Sometimes she does this because she, too, does
not want to make a commitment, or have to
contend with anything else the Blackman has other
than his body. Her total statement gets reduced to
what she transmits in bed. And after that she may
have no further use for him. Partying, going out,
and sex are the only things a Blackman and
Blackwoman can have if they do not commit to
each other and try to build a lasting relationship.
The Blackman, who knows full well these days,
that the Blackwoman is filled to the brim with
personal problems, doesn’t always feel like going
through all the changes required of him to tame the
woman. So they both agree to just participate in
what they consider the good parts of a relationship
and dismiss the other parts as just a way to bust a
groove.
These few surface points are made to demonstrate that the
Blackman is in charge of the Blackwoman
anyway it’s examined because it is he who opens
the channels, by his permission, to allow her to
do the things that she does. This is a mistake
because a man can rise no higher than his
woman. The women in any civilization are
indicative of the condition of the men. The
Blackwoman is only reflective of the Blackman’s
failure to do his job, which is to take charge of
his woman. So if the Blackwoman is troubled-.
so is he, no matter how he sciences it up that he
doesn’t have anything to do with it, or that she
won’t give him permission to execute his will.
She has lost her memory and she does not
remember how to agree.
$2
Chapter 5
Social (ntegration
(Dating and Marrying the Whiteman)
The Blackwoman will date, and as reported daily, will
marry a whiteman. She finds in her relationship with the
whiteman perhaps the answer to all her dreams and
fantasies. First, he is removed from the Black experience,
and brings a new set of rules to the involvement. Second, he
represents the culmination of every movie and T.V. show
she has ever seen featuring a gallant white beau who knows
how to treat a woman and swoops in always coming to her
rescue. Third, he is an alternative set of men whom she
believes can be utilized because of the nonavailability of
Blackmen. Now that there appears to be fewer Blackmen,
and she can’t get along with any of them, she is perusing
other races to see what she can see.
When the Blackwoman gets with a whiteman she may
manufacture a complete new set of vowels which she uses to
construct her new light and airy “proper” voice. She
irresistibly becomes ever so amused by his jokes and
pretends to like the things he does. She becomes an actress
of sorts and she relaxes a bit because the whiteman does not
know the full story of her failure with the Blackman. Since
the whiteman does not know the ins and outs of Black
intimacy he is more tolerant of her and they both enjoy the
novelty. She can wear as much make-up as she desires and
to the whiteman this is normal.
While the Blackwoman is known to ignore a Blackman
on a Street corner, in an elevator or on the subway, she
seems always ready with an eager appealing smile when a
whiteman, especially one in a suit and tie, tries to make light
conversation with her. She appears to be flattered and falls
into her crisp bright personality. Her smile is sometimes so
instant it looks like a flash of sparkling white snow,
blushing and appreciative. If she decides to date him, later
on, she is seen to be overly affectionate in public. There may
be hugging, provocative kissing or fondling in public. She is
willing to ignore many of the whiteman’s shortcomings
regarding wardrobe, language, hipness, music, car, or job.
She convinces herself that he is normal and she must accept
53
him as he is, and above all, he is just another man. When
she is with him she thinks she is finally free. Free of the
Blackman’s hassles and free of her own history. She is
proud of him in front of her family and friends or on the
other extreme, she knows that her social integration
relationship will not be accepted, so she keeps it a secret. He
is considered special to her and automatically “knows how to
treat a woman.” Certainly better than a Blackman does - she
thinks.
She might be willing to fight for him, endure insults and
stares just to be with him, and she defends her right to love a
whiteman. She says she is not prejudiced, and pas back on Ot
_the same explanation that the Blackman has a opted; ted; that he her
articular whiteman had nothing to do with slavery - that
~ was before his time, She feels no guilt in messin a traitor to
the Blackman by accepting another race over him, She sees
guilt as an outdated hangover which has no business in her
modern “do what I wanna do” system. Loyalty to the
Blackman appears to her as static sentimentality wrapped in
shredded ribbons - and the glitter is all gone. Worn out from
the endless disagreements.
She believes she has tried in every way possible to be
with the Blackman and each time - he fails. And it’s all his
fault. To just stay with a Blackman because he is her natural
mate is absurd to her and as her history has proven, counterproductive. Even worse, the Blackman is irritating to her, he
just won’t do right. She is unwilling to accept a new
approach and allows nothing to cloud her fine perceptions.
She refuses to be governed by an obsolete set of standards
that imply unselfish conduct and actions made only if they
benefit the Black nation. That’s fine for the public but in her
private affairs she is coldly analytical about what she wants
personally and in that area is oddly detached from her
people. As a last resort she may explain “it just happened.”**
Nothing just happens. There is an explanation for
everything. Even if the explanation is not immediately
known it can be explained. And it is not new.
The Blackwoman believes that she has reached the ultimate pinnacle of personal developmental achievement
when she arrives at the point of seriously considering dating a whiteman. She pretends to herself that his color doesn’t matter - and to her, it doesn’t. For her to pick a whiteman as
54
her mate only demonstrates further her disdain for the
Blackman and her decision to not take it anymore. The
whiteman can give her new options, new freedom and new
notoriety. She finally gets her opportunity to “play” like she
is the kind of glamorous whitegirl she has seen on television
and in the movies all of her life. And if watched closely she
can be seen acting out the mannerisms of white women. She
has absolutely forgiven the whiteman for enslaving her
people, and the whiteman has forgiven himself for enslaving
Black people. But the poor Blackwoman has not forgiven
herself for being a slave. Her spirit was broken during that
time and the genetic psychological damage she suffered has
never been addressed or healed. Her suffering was
internalized and transmitted through fear and anxiety, and it
was the fear that resulted in her current insecurity in the
Blackman. She does not believe that she can count on the
Blackman to protect she and her babies. She views the
Blackman as weak and powerless in her world and easily
manipulated. She despises him for his so-called “big ego”
and does everything she can to tear him down and make him
forget that idea. She has never dealt with her attitude about
refusing to allow the Blackman to bask in the pride of having
a “big ego.” She does not want him to think well of himself
because she does not think well of herself. She wants him to
believe that he is unworthy. She has no idea what it would
feel like to agree with the Blackman about his “big ego.” She
might like it. She does not want to agree with him that he is
great. Instead, she chooses to take the white sociologists’
alleged research that reveals the bulk of the Blackmen as still
shiftless, uneducated and plain lazy. She thinks he wastes
times trying to do impossible things, and that his goals are
misdirected and futile. Believing this, it is not difficult for
her to renege on the men in her own nation and try to fit into
the race of another. And she is much more tolerant and
patient with Caucasians. Of every age.
It is most convenient for her to believe that there is a
shortage of Blackmen. Hopefully there will continue to be a
shortage of the type of wimpy, fearful Blackmen she is
looking for to control. Since she can’t have the kind of
Blackman she can rule, she is now pleading for social
empowerment. She wants authorized governmental
permission to achieve - and be strong. Stronger than the
55
Blackman. She has turned the process of personal growth
into a social activity instead of spiritual commitment. The
empowerment she seeks is really the right to devour the
remaining Blackmen who have refused to submit to her.
Dating and marrying the whiteman is another flimsy
excuse used to get out of the inevitable - submitting to the
Blackman. Her new political idea of empowerment gobbles
up and eliminates the rules that give the Blackman
superiority and the Black nation longevity.
In interracial dating she follows the women’s liberation
trend in an almost biblical divine adherence. She is
determined to stay right up on it politically and socially. She
wants special rights that will approve of her wrong behavior
against the Blackman. Her violent swaths against the
Blackman’s right to live the way he wants to are frequent
especially when looking back and comparing her new
relationship with a whiteman to her old failed relationships
with Blackmen.
Many Blackmen do not like it when they see a
Blackwoman pretending to be so happy and content with a
whiteman. But the mountain looks too high and the river too
long and wide for him to cross over and correct her. He has
had no one to publicly agree with him about the deplorable
behavior of the Blackwoman. It seems that Blackwomen and
white America are in cahoots with each other against the
Blackman. This is not the way it is supposed to be. The few
converted Blackwomen who know their place and respect
the Blackman as the head are few and quiet. He has needed a
louder supporting voice. One filled with the brightness and
resounding echo of pure truth. One outcry in the darkness
announcing before all the world that he is right, and he is
good will help him rise.
Certainly the whiteman’s free state of mind and open
approach to things appears more attractive to her. But the,
whiteman has never been a slave. A few cases of indentured
servitude did not impact on the psyche of the white male in a
destructive way as full slavery impacted upon the Blackman.
So the Blackman appears outclassed when compared to him.
The Blackman’s accomplishments over trillions and
trillions of years should not be compared to the measure of
success the whiteman has set in America. There are more
non-white (Black) people on the earth than white people.
56
The white race is not the pace setter and neither is the
Blackwoman. They are both the pace followers. The
Blackwoman who does not study or value history, does not
realize that the time she is living in now is not the sum total
of the time that she and the Blackman have inhabited the
earth. Her mega-generations have existed long before 2000,
4000, or 6,000 years ago. 6,000 years are but a drop in the
bucket when compared to the time that the Blackman has
walked the earth in peace. She has allowed her part to
become remote and irrelevant.
The Blackwoman sees the Blackman integrating too. She witnesses him dating and marrying the whitewoman so she
considers her part of the contribution to the 50,000
Blackwomen who date and marry whiteman as small
significance. And others of them complain that the Blackman _is with the whitewoman because she is easier to get along with, or that she gives him better sex, or that she respects
im more. She doesn't know that he 1s with her for one reason and one reason only, he is with her because she gives
him peace. However it is described, the end result he sees
for himself is peace. Of course there are a few who claim they
are with the whitewoman because_they are getting back at the
whiteman or that they want to possess her because they were _ denied her. These are all flimsy and flaky excuses for not
~peing familiar with the word peace. Certainly not all cases
are the same. But each race has behavioral traits that cannot
be classified as stereotyping due to the incidents that have
occurred in their evolution into who we see today. This is
referred to as the nature of something or someone.
It is not possible for a Blackwoman to be happy trying to
be a woman to the whiteman. Their natures are completely different. Certain Blackwomen, who go not ike the
Blackwoman being with a whiteman, know for an actual fact That this same rule applies to Blackmen who ai a Sate Aiea PTS pitifully unfortunate that the
Blackwoman believes that she can have a better life with a
whiteman than she can have with a Black one.
The truth be told, any Blackwoman can have a man. Any
Blackwoman can have any man she chooses. Of course her
requirements will have to be adjusted and she will have to
qualify to get one. The qualifications are standard, routine
and a necessity. She will have to unquestionably submit
57
herself to be ruled by the Blackman. She will have to allow
him to be the boss. No Blackman turns down a good
woman. It has nothing to do with how she looks, how she
dresses or otherwise. All of it has to do with how the
Blackwoman behaves and how much respect and care she
gives the Blackman. A good woman does not have a special
physical profile. When the Blackman finds a good woman
whose nature he is attracted to he will remain with her
forever. Maybe not just her alone. But he will include her in
his life. And what the Blackwoman wants is to be included
in the life of the Blackman. As soon as she realizes that she
can have a Blackman, but not on her terms, she will have
one. When she reaches this level of understanding she will
not even consider dating or marrying the whiteman. And she
certainly will not participate in the American conversational
habit of publicly criticizing her man. When the Blackwoman
attacks the Blackman publicly she inadvertently gives the
entire world permission to attack him also. Because
everyone knows that a man’s woman knows him better than
anyone else and if she says he ain’t nothing he’s not.
Chapter 6
COMMUNICATIONS
Today’s Blackwoman is forever complaining and
demanding that the Blackman communicate with her. By this
she means she wants the Blackman to talk to her and tell her
what’s on his mind. Despite the fact that whenever he
attempts to communicate his ideas to her she responds in the
wrong way. The burden of the Blackwoman’s complaints
rests on the premise that he does not like or accept the way*
she talks to him. If she comes at him wrong all systems shut
down and he does not talk to her at all. At least not in the
open forum type of discussion that she wants. The
Blackman is very vulnerable when he confides in his
woman. To do so he takes a step into what he already knows
is a dangerous arena because the Blackwoman is known to take information he gives her and use it against him at another time. She refers to him as unresponsive and
58
insensitive when he will not answer certain questions about
his personal feelings or views. The Blackwoman gets very
as when the Blackman refuses to let her inside his
rain.
The complexity of his views often do more to anger her
and harm the relationship than they do to promote open
communicative unity. The Blackwoman wants the Blackman
to talk, but if his talk is different from hers she has a
problem. If the Blackman is silent and unrevealing about his
innermost thoughts the Blackwoman becomes suspicious
and displays a generalized uneasiness. She can’t block his
idea if she doesn’t know it. She doesn’t realize it is because
of her strident attitude and unpredictable reactions that the
Blackman declines confiding his dreams in her. The
Blackwoman has emotionally dispossessed the Blackman,
he has lost the sure-footedness he was created with.
Therefore the often illuminating revelations he arrives at are
much too precious for the Blackwoman’s cynical ears. The
more the Blackwoman fusses and complains the quieter the
Blackman may become. The Blackwoman is accustomed to
speaking to and about the Blackman in a negative and
disparaging tone. She may even speak to strange unknown
men in a more civil tone. The harshness of her tone of voice,
the shrill grating impatience, her cadence and inflections
speak loudly of her disrespect. She sometimes appears to
glare at the Blackman as if she is on the brink of physically
attacking him. She interrupts his explanations with more
badgering, and her disregard for his ideas is so ingrained in
her psyche such as to be pathoscopic to her nature. When
she is really angry with him she will stand toe-to-toe, feet
apart, hands on her hips as if daring him to say another
word. She can fuss for hours, bickering, sneering, cursing
and competing to drive her point home with the highest
extreme of emotionalism. She absolutely demands to have
the last word.
She not only uses the sounds of disrespect to her own
man, but will use the same intonations when angry with any
Blackman. Her son, her neighbors, her father, her boss or
co-workers, her brother or others. She can become so
vicious sounding that sometimes it resembles a savage
animal barking. In her anger she will throw things, stamp
her feet, slam doors, snatch herself around and sometimes
59
go into neutral. Her non-acceptable ways of displaying her
anger are deeply rooted in her suspicions. Whenever she
catches the Blackman in what she deems as a wrongdoing
she uses that opportunity to vent all of her current
frustrations. She harbors grudges.
The Blackman may start out arguing with the
Blackwoman about one point and in the middle of the fracas
she throws in a few other topics, and by the end of the
argument he may find himself debating an entirely different
issue. She keeps a mental file on issues she is in
disagreement with. She maintains about 90,000 kilo bytes of
negative information and when she decides the right time she
springs them on her man.
The Blackwoman is not known to practice respectful
communication skills with the Blackman anyway. She
simply does not know how to talk to him. Oh yes, she’s a
great conversationalist when discussing other subjects. But
when trying to have a necessary one on one conversation
with her man about a disagreement, a choice, an action of a
fear, she has a complete breakdown of interpretation of the
English language. She can’t distinguish between a soft
comforting voice and scorn and contempt. She blows her top
loud and wrong. If she would present her ideas calmly and
unemotionally the Blackman could deal with them - and he
does. But since she is so irrational about being right she
does not focus very well on one point and her thoughts are
scattered and unfocused because she is trying to argue about
everything at once.
If the Blackwoman does not learn how to respectfully
talk to the Blackman there is little chance she will ever really
get to know him, nor of them ever coming together in
harmony.
Some Blackwoman talk all the time, about everything,
about everybody and usually in a critical and gossipy way.
Blackmen do not like to hear gossip. It is too base for him to
deal with. The Blackman will relate a story to his woman in
pure confidence and later find to his dismay she has told all
her friends and it’s public knowledge. Or, she will make up
a story and tell her man about it and pretend that an incident
happened to someone else just to see how he will react to it.
She tries out a lot of her own ideas on the Blackman in this
way by claiming someone else said or did it. The Blackman
60
has the boring job of paying attention to every point the
Blackwoman spiels. Any and all seemingly unrelated
information may come back to haunt him in another
variation. If she talks incessantly it is a sign of nervousness
and anxiety. She may be uncomfortable with silence. She
debates her points with a fervor and adjusts the language
craftily to salvage her own theories. If the Blackman is so presumptuous as to inform the Blackwoman that she talks
too much or that she should shut her mouth and listen
sometime, she becomes sullen and depressed. She will look
for faults in the Blackman to criticize and get him back. She
might poke out her lips or make her jaws tight. She resists
any information that requires her to change her behavior.
This resistance is nearly mechanical and kicks in whenever
she is under attack. She relies totally on her feelings to make
important decisions and arrive at correct conclusions.
She will hold fast to the most stupid ideology just for the
sake of claiming: “that’s how I feel about it...” If informed
that her feelings are strictly emotional and have no bearing
on reality she fortifies her opposition and says: “that’s your
opinion and I’ve got a right to mine.” Unfortunately this is
not an act, she actually believes that her “feelings” are the
truth. She will refuse to consider any actual facts presented
to her or anything else that conflicts with how she feels
about something. Her feelings are her beliefs and no matter
how farfetched from the truth her position is she holds fast
to it.
The psychic scars of accepting deception based on her
emotions are deep and lasting. She thinks that by agreeing
with the Blackman it puts her in a position to be subjugated.
She is under enormous pressure to maintain her independent
separate but equal identity. She views her difference of
opinion as traits that make her unique and interesting. She
cannot give in on issues that require her to change her
thinking. She continuously waves her banner of fear. She is
deathly afraid of being taken over. And being forced to
concede.
Often when the Blackwoman learns something,
completes a course or even reads an article she will attempt
to sound wise. She enjoys the feeling she gets when she
stumbles upon something she can wave in front of the
Blackman and claim she knows more about it. This is
61
particularly true of the economically elite Blackwoman. She
believes her textbook knowledge enables her to be over the
Blackman. The Blackman is not impressed with institutional
education in the same way that she is. He would much rather
hit the streets and learn things on his own rather than take
time out of his freedom to memorize a slew of
misinformation which he doesn’t believe will help him daily.
Some attend college, others attend life’s school of hard
knocks and gain equal knowledge. She will also try to ask
him complicated questions so he will admit that he doesn’t
know the answer. She revels in doing this. She thinks that
her big talk will impress the Blackman with how smart she is
and will make him look up to her. No Blackman is proud of
a Blackwoman who uses her education as a dagger, stabbing
him into admitting her superior intelligence. At the same time
no Blackman wants a dumb woman who is not striving to
better herself. Knowledge and wisdom is not always
measured by book learning. The life experience and raising
of consciousness is much more important to the Blackman
because he is basically searching for a way to have peace.
Daily. So when the Blackwoman talks down to the
Blackman it is designed to make him feel small, uneducated
and fundamentally stupid. She thinks her knowledge and
level of achievements mean that the Blackman cannot tell her
anything - about anything. She knows better.
Examples of the disrespectful language the Blackwoman
uses when speaking to the Blackman are as follows:
1) Shut up, you don’t know what you’re talking
about
2) | Why don’t you mind your own business
3) | You’re such a mama’s boy
4) You ain’t nothin’ and you ain’t never gonna
be nothin’
5) | You don’t tell me what to do
6) You do what you want to do and I’ll do iat
I want to do
7) Get it yourself
8) You think you’re right all of the time
9) I get tired of you trying to tell me what to do
10) Why don’t you act like a man?
11) You full of s---
12) That doesn’t make any sense
62
13) Don’t give it unless you can take it
14) You didn't have nothin’ when I met you
15) Yo’ family ain’t s--- and you ain’t either
16) Men are dogs
17) Ido what I wanna’ do
18) Imight and I might not
19) | Why don’t you hush?
20) Bequiet
21) Shut-up
22) You so stupid
23) | Youcan’t do that
24) Leave me the f--- alone
25) You mess up every time
26) I go where I wanna go
27) It’s my money and I spend it like I want to
28) You get on my nerves
29) Itain’t yo’ baby anyway
30) Itold you so
31) My mother said you wasn’t no good, I
should have listened to her
- 32) | You’ll know payback when you see it
33) If you don’t, somebody else will
34) | Youcan’t do nothin’
35) Stop 36) Get out of my face
37) | Idon’t want to hear that
38) Get out
39) Idon’t care what you do
40) Imtired of you
Of course these are just a sampling. There are others
which are more vicious and more degrading, and some too
filthy to list in print. It is safe to say that every Blackman in
America has been told at least two of these statements in
relationship with his woman or his mother. Most have heard
the majority of them. These remarks roll off the lips of the
Black female starting in elementary school so they are well
ingrained in her conversation by the time she is an adult.
Rare is there a Blackman who does not allow the
Blackwoman to speak to him in these derogatory terms. No
Blackman should tolerate being spoken to like this. He must
demand respect and deserve it according to his own
63
standards of being a man. He must require respect or reject
the Blackwoman from his circle of contact.
When the Blackwoman loves her Blackman enough to
obey him and do what he tells her to do she is looked upon
by other more progressive Blackwomen as a fool. She is
laughed at and pitied for letting her man control her and tell
her what to do. If she stays at home and waits for his call,
cooks him a special meal, cleans his house, washes his car,
shines his shoes, irons his clothes, loans him her car, lends
or gives him money, runs errands for him, picks up after
him, lets him choose her clothes, washes his hair, feeds
him, rubs his back, massages his feet, or does anything else
to help him or make him comfortable she is considered a nut
case and accused of spoiling the Blackman. She is further
charged with making it harder on other Blackwomen who do
not cater to their men in that way. The righteous woman is
asked by the rebellious woman: “what’s he doing for you
while you’re doing all this for him?”
If the Blackwoman just speaks to him in a civil tongue
she is charged with being weak willed. Blackwomen pride
themselves on being assertive (aggressive), and speaking
what she thinks is her own mind. When the Blackwoman
talks badly to the Blackman she is not speaking her own
mind. She is speaking from the artificial mind she has
adopted from western civilization (America). This is
something she learned first in slavery then from teachers,
politicians, the newspapers and television. The Blackwoman
has no history of speaking disrespectfully to the Blackman
before she came to America. Disrespecting the Blackman is
new to the Black nation. It developed in slavery and postSlavery. It is odd that the Blackwoman considers
downgrading the Blackman as advancement in her own
development of equality. The Blackman must not allow his.
woman, or any woman, to talk to him in a disrespectful tone
or way. He does not deserve it and he does not have to take
if
If, to defend himself, the Blackman develops a feminine
style of sparring with the Blackwoman and tries to go blow
for blow with her in insults, bickering and name calling, the woman will tell her family and friends that he just “bitches all the time.” She refers to his participation as bitching
because she knows her kind of talk is indicative to the female
64
gender only. She believes it to be a natural part of her nature
and wants him to believe that too. He should not.
If the Blackman loses his cool under pressure and
responds by flinging a string of colorful metaphors (curse
words) at her, she complains that “he talks to me like a dog.”
The fact that she is the one acting like an animal never comes
up. Sometimes the Blackman grows to respond to
everything she says in a harsh rebuttal tone. He becomes
accustomed to the rough talk and uses it as frequently as she.
This is wrong. It only convinces the Blackwoman that he
can’t handle her so he has joined her. She will drag him
under the earth if he allows it.
When a Blackman falls for a Blackwoman and begins to
demonstrate that he loves her more than he loves himself,
she recognizes this as a ripe stage for her to really let it rip.
The more he professes his love the worse she will treat him.
The more he tries to give her, the more she will demand.
And the more he tries to bed her down, the more she rejects
his overtures. The harder he tries to please her the more
critical she is of his efforts. This is a perfect example that she
does not know what to do when put in a position to rule the
Blackman. When she is allowed to rule she thinks the
Blackman must be weak or crazy or both. She cannot handle
it. She abuses him instead of progressively enjoying him
more. And the time is not far off when she will be looking
for another man.
Sometimes the Blackwoman speaks kindly to the
Blackman or does nice things for him for the wrong reason.
Sometimes her reason is just to make sure that he does not
fall victim to the attentions of another woman, so she “acts”
out the duties of being a good woman so her man can’t use
that as a reason to “fool around.” So she goes through the
motions so she can never be charged with not holding up her
end, or so she thinks, but true caring and affection cannot be
Faked. If there is no love and good spirit put into the care it
becomes dry and sterile. Bland and mechanical.
The Blackwoman must be made to understand that the
Blackman must first feel good about himself and that she
should help the Blackman to feel good about himself when
he is with her. That means that when the Blackman is happy
with a Blackwoman it does not necessarily mean he is happy
with her physical affection or exciting personality, as much
65
as with how she makes him feel about himself. He will
reciprocate. When the Blackman is pleased with himself and
feels good about himself his days are happy and he is
radiant. He is eager to go off to work and eager to come
home at night. In general he is more productive. This is
called satisfaction. Feeling good mentally, emotionally and
physically creates its own natural high. An elevation to peace
and freedom and confidence and courage. Anything can be
accomplished.
All of this is part of the Blackwomen’s responsibility to
herself. The blessings she will receive for making her
Blackman feel good about himself are unlimited. While she
has her own ideas about what the Blackman should do to
make her happy, she would be much wiser if she gave the
Blackman a chance to express his ideas about what will
make her happy. A Blackman can look at his woman and
decide what she needs.
Blackwomen have been known to treat the Blackman so
badly and talk to him in such a destructive way that he
becomes confused and angry and is literally driven to drink
or use drugs. She will prod him with her electrical shock
tongue until she pushes him over the edge into some deep
dark cavern of despair. When she tells her friends about his
condition they all agree that he got what he deserves for
letting her do it to him. It is their preconceived notion that if
a Blackman resigns himself to obeying the Blackwoman to
the point of self-debasement, he deserves whatever hell
awaits him. This is a cruel and unusual punishment that he
earns as a reward for having the kind of overwhelming
adoration of the Blackwoman - that she claims she wants.
She only wants it until she gets it and then she reverts to a
destroyer.
She will lead him into a trap by plotting to do everything
she can to make him fall in love with her. She will make hiny
feel better than he has ever felt in his entire life. At least she
makes him think he does. She will make him totally
dependent upon her affections and attentions. She will set
him up for the fall. It’s a game to her to see if she can make
or break him. As the game progresses she steps up her plan
to debase him and sometimes the change of tide is so
powerful in his life that he can’t concentrate enough to work,
eat, sleep or behave normally. She literally drives him crazy.
66
he cannot live with her and cannot live without her. The
more love. The more pain. And she heaps it by the shovel
full. This is a dangerous game the Blackwoman plays
because sometimes if the man cannot handle it emotionally
he may decide to kill her. Sometimes he does. When he
reaches his breaking point and becomes threatening she
scurries back in place and claims she doesn’t know what’s
wrong with him. She accomplishes these same deeds using
jealousy, sex or rebellion. While he explodes she implodes.
And she hates herself for not being able to control herself.
Therefore, the Blackman should never allow his love for
the Blackwoman to surpass his love for himself. This is not
being selfish. It is a raw necessity if he intends to survive his
relationship with a Blackwoman. He must never let her ego
get out of control to the point where she becomes the main
focus in the relationship. The Blackman must always be the
main focus of the relationship. This does not mean that the
Blackwoman’s needs should not be met, nor that she is
unimportant, but she is number 2 and the Blackman is
number 1.
The Blackman being number 1 and the Blackwoman
being number 2 is another absolute law of nature. The
Blackman was created first, he has seniority. And the
Blackwoman was created 2nd. He is first. She is second.
The Blackman is the beginning and all others come from
him. Everyone on earth knows this except the Blackwoman.
The only reason the Blackwoman rejects the idea that the
Blackman is first is because she does not think that he
deserves to be treated good. If examined, she does not really
know the details of why she does not want him on top. All
she knows is that she doesn’t want him telling her what to
do. She already knows that try as she may, she cannot
control the Blackman. Her frustration is that no matter how
hard she tries she cannot force the Blackman into the orderly
pattern mold she outlines for him. The Blackman, even in
his disorganized state, cannot be controlled. He is not
controllable. This is different from being out of control. This
means he is in control of himself. Others who have tried to
control him momentarily meet with the same frustration as
the Blackwoman. Failure. The Blackwoman, like America,
is afraid of anything she can’t control. The Blackman’s
chromosomes, evidently, are programmed to rule and be in
67
control, so he cannot submit to being controlled forever by
inferior unqualified beings. Wise scientists around the globe
know this. : Infrequently the Blackwoman comes up with a good idea
or renders some sensible advice to the Blackman. Whether
or not he accepts it depends on how she brings it to him. If
she does it aS \non-insulting respectful the Blackman is able
to hear her and take her comments under consideration. If
she delivers the information in the wrong tone of voice the
man rejects it and her. He must be careful in accepting
instructions or advice from the Blackwoman because she is
easily confused and will decide that he can’t make it unless
she tells him what to do. Making recommendations is her
insidious way of gaining control in a relationship.
If the Blackwoman is sincere in her affections and is
genuinely trying to help the Blackman he will be able to
accept what she says and implement it into their lives for
wider success. Of course, when the Blackwoman helps the
Blackman develop and reach his desired potential she
experiences fear that he will outgrow her and leave her for
another woman. She does not trust his motives when he
wants to expand. When he says “I’m doing this for us,” she
is not sure which “us” he is talking about. She may remind
him about what she has helped him do and that he would not
have been able to do it if it were not for her. She is ever
seeking opportunities to get the Blackman to bow down and
worship her for being her wonderful self. When she
accomplishes something free of ulterior motive her man will
recognize this and pile on the accolades. But if her idea is
anything but clean then he shouldn’t get too excited. She has
heard stories of women who help their men succeed and then
he leaves them. So she is afraid this will happen to her. If
she behaves right and does not create and problems or
become combative she will be well rewarded for her trust,
She will be taken care of and loved, and her children will be
fathered and become heir to the Blackman’s
accomplishments. This is how Black legacies are made.
Another reason the Blackwoman fails in her confrontations with the Blackman is because she attempts to use the white woman’s analyses and social priorities as her mentor regarding how she should get along with the Blackman. This is wrong. White American issues ‘are
68
completely different from Black American issues. The white
race understands the necessity for open forum discussion of
their relationship problems. Blacks are sensitive about the
defects in Black life and fly into a tizzy at the mere mention
of interpersonal problems indigenous to ex-slaves. This
refusal to acknowledge the nitty gritty problems have
resulted in them being ignored and assumed unimportant.
Even worse, it left the Blackwoman and the Blackman to
devise their own solutions. Blacks have no published
scholastic analogies about how the Blackman and the
Blackwoman should get along. The inside story of life
between Blackman and Blackwoman has been tiptoed
around as if it were a time bomb. These problems exist and
they are monumental. They hold the key to the Blackman
and the Blackwoman’s personal success.
A problem is only a question. Any problem can be
broken into a mathematical equation to which a formula is
applied. If the formula is applied, the answer will be
forthcoming. The answer is the solution. Blacks have not
approached their problems from a mathematical standpoint,
and assume there are too many variables for similarities to
exist. But there are similarities. The relationship problems
between Blackmen and Blackwomen are only different in the
degree to which they are demonstrated. And Blacks have
never honestly and descriptively addressed these problems to
the Black nation as a whole. The truth about the depth and
span of these problems is painful. This truth is also
embarrassing and unwelcome for public scrutiny. But the
Blackman has been negligent in his duty to control the
Blackwoman, and the Blackwoman has been scandalous in
her public and private dealings with the Blackman and his
offspring. The time is past when this topic can be swept
aside and replaced with other life priorities that are
impossible to attain anyway until the root of this situation is
addressed and remedied. Relationship standards have
changed, but change does not always mean better,
sometimes it just means different. Or worse. Companionship
between the Blackman and the Blackwoman has turned into ~
a living hell - whether they live together or not. The hell has
a pattern and affects the dwellers of every Black household.
And it must stop. The Blackman must communicate this to
69
the Blackwoman and she must hear him with her ears and
her heart.
In referring to the Blackman the Blackwoman has’ an
affinity to using the terminology “my man” and she prefers
to call the Blackman her “boyfriend,” “my date”, “my
honey,” “my friend,” or “my beau.” She has a difficult time
saying “my man” because she does not like the sound of
power that goes with the word “man”. The word “man”
makes her uncomfortable because it rings so superior and
authoritative in her ears. As a consequence Blackwomen in
the 30’s and 40’s and 50’s go around referring to the
Blackman as a “boyfriend.” The Blackman is not a boy. He
does not like being called a boy. It is a distasteful title he
prefers not to answer to. The Blackwoman in her
stubbornness still calls him her “boyfriend”. She should
refer to her Blackmate as her “man.” Because that’s what he
is. A man.
The language itself is euphoric. When the Blackwoman
speaks well of the Blackman it is elevating to all who hear
her, and it is contagious. Better yet, the Blackwoman should
try telling the Blackman good things about himself - to his
face, looking him straight in the eyes. She must learn a new
talk. Dialogue filled with Complimentary words.
The Blackman should commend the Blackwoman when
he see’s her demonstrating an attempt to make a positive
change in the way that she talks to him. At first she will be
very uncomfortable and uneasy and will feel out of kilter but
these feelings will subside as she relaxes. Prior to her giving
in she may try to use a reverse psyche and say: “why should
I do it, you don’t?” or “you don’t live up to such-n-such
yourself” or “what are you going to change if I do all that?”
or “look at what you do.” These kinds of flippant comments
can be answered by telling her “I’m a Blackman and I’m
taking responsibility for my family and my nation.’**
Responses like: “’cause I’m the man and I’m in charge” or
“cause I’m the boss here,” or “’cause I’m the man and
you’re gonna be like I want you to be or you ain’t gonna be
at all,” work just as well. Improvise.
The Blackman should not be ashamed to admit that he
does not have all the answers all at once. On examination the
Blackwoman does not have all of the answers either. She
usually does not have any of the answers. She will be
70
resistant against the man’s ideas and not have anything to
replace them with. She communicates most of her responses
by saying the word NO! When an unstoppable force meets
an immovable object friction ensues and they destruct. This
does not apply to the Blackman.The Black nation must
implement across the board standards of home life that
encompass every Black person and every Black family. The
plan must be the same throughout in order to see unified
progress. The result of not having a national formal plan
useful to all the people is the confusion and degradation we
have today.
The Blackwoman’s first change must be an oral one. She
must learn enough self control to keep herself from talking to
the Blackman like he ain’t nothing.
Many times the Blackwoman will refuse to cater to the
Blackman because she claims “he wants a mama” or “he has
a mother complex.” They make these charges because many
Blackmen want consolation. They want to be consoled and
there is nothing weak or lacking in them for wanting this.
The Blackwoman’s job is to be a consoler. Console means
to give comfort, solace and to make feel better -- less sad.
The job of the mother and the wife when it comes to
consolation is the same. It is not different or opposite. It is
the same expression that should be shown to the Blackman
and the Blackchild no matter what age they are. Consoling is
a female duty and one she is good at. Consolation and
stroking are a necessary means of communication just as the
desire for acceptance and approval. (Love and agreement).
Giving consolation is not mothering or wifeing - it is
womaning. Providing comfort to the nation. Instead of
ramshakling it.
Blackwomen withhold comfort for a variety of reasons
and meter it out as they feel it is deserved. The Blackman
who commits what the Blackwoman considers a sin is not
able to get consoled. Any failure that makes her feel
disappointed is not rewarded with consolation. Of course
when the Blackman fails his greatest desire is to be consoled
instead of hearing: “I told you it wouldn’t work anyway” or
“you should have known that wouldn’t work” or “why don’t
you stop and just get a job.” The Blackman is a recovering
slave and does not need a woman who is constantly saying
that he doesn’t amount to much. He is something good. And
71
if the Blackwoman talks to him right, supports him and
consoles him he will heal and show the world how really
great he is. But since he is virtually alone, abandoned and
disregarded he does not always have the spirit to go to work.
He needs a purpose. The Blackwoman is unaware that this is the major
continent where the Blackwoman is out of control. Where
she has rejected her responsibilities, and does not recognize
the man as the head of the family. Again, the memory of the
suffering of slavery takes its toll. Slavery was designed to
disconnect the Blackman and the Blackwoman. Today we
see long term effects of the disconnection on American soil.
Some Blackwoman are so removed from these types of
historical roots that they blame all of their problems on the
other victim of this racial conspiracy; the Blackman. They
are more concerned with dressing, jewelry, politics,
sororities, church, public opinion and job. It seems the
Blackwomen who boasts of holding the most prestigious job
title is the most difficult to reach. The so-called successful
Blackwoman who earns a gargantuan paycheck believes she
is the best with all her bases loaded. She doesn’t realize that
her choices leave her lonely and hostile and disliked by the
group she longs to impress the most - Blackmen. Oh she
may say she is having more fun without a man than she had
with one. Not true. There is no such existence for the
Blackwoman. She is not complete unless she has a man. She
is just a coward who does not want to deal with the
Blackman on his terms. And she is at her wits end to devise
a scheme that will make him surrender to her. She has a boss
complex and exaggerates her worth. She’s cute and
necessary but she is not more valuable than the Blackman.
No one is. The Blackwoman, deep inside her heart, wants to
surrender but she wants to be coerced. She wants to be.
convinced according to her own barometer that her man
really really loves her. Right now the only barometer she
examines is whether or not her man is seeing another
woman. When she is unsure of herself and teetering on
making a wrong decision about something, she wants the
Blackman to take charge of the situation and take
responsibility for her. It is very difficult for the Blackwoman
to have constant confidence in her own decisions because she knows she doesn’t see the road clearly. She is
712
unequipped to lead in that way so in her life travels she tries
to look at everything at the same time instead of recognizing
the clear path.
Things look different according to the point of view they
are seen by. Perception is the root of what the eyes see and
the ears hear.
If the Blackwoman would just change her perception of
what submission and surrender means she could have peace.
She cannot have this peace until the Blackman takes up the
banner of change. It is a massive undertaking that only the
wise will survive, but only the wise will survive anyway.
Those who can see no further than Gucci or Panasonic will
not make it. Material gain will not and has not solved the
problems between the Blackman and the Blackwoman. They
serve only as a temporary distraction. An expensive one.
Chapter 7
FAMILY RELATIONSAIPS
The family relationships of the Blackwoman must be
examined if the Blackman desires to know what
circumstances and personalities produced her. If her parents
and siblings were hell raisers, fighting and arguing all the
time, the Blackman can be sure it will be a rocky road living
with her.
The Blackwoman can only live what she knows and
there is no magic to a wedding ceremony or marriage
certificate that will instantaneously correct her ideas about
how life should be lived. Her home life and prior
relationships with men during her childhood will have great
bearing on how she treats her husband. Human behavior is
the result of training - repetitive instructions and familiarity
of environment.
The Blackwoman is known to take her family’s side
against the Blackman if push comes to shove. If a member
of her family does not like her man she will often ask the
man to be nicer to that particular relative so the relative will
form a better opinion and accept him. She is more apt to
concede that if a family member dislikes him there must be
73
legitimate reason, than to stick up for her Blackman and try
to get her family to change. She is easily swayed by her
family to believe that her man’s faults are so visible. that
everyone he contacts can spot them. She also has the
tendency to try to force the Blackman to live up to the
requirements of her family. She will consult them, confide in
them and take their advice. Sometimes she will refrain from
making a decision on her own until she checks with her
family. Many of them consult their family on every
instruction the Blackman gives.
She is known to take her family’s advice on everything
from keeping house to bedroom protocol. Sometimes if the
Blackwoman is angry with the Blackman her family will
adopt the same attitude and side with her against him without
even knowing his side. The Blackwoman also has a
tendency to take sides with her mother against her father.
After all, he is still just another man. The Blackman is
generally thought of as wrong no matter what the topic,
especially if he is not doing something the Blackwoman
wants him to do and does not have an acceptable reason for
abstaining.
The Blackwoman extends these same privileges to her
girlfriends. The relationships with her friends are of vast
priority and importance because she can count on them to
give her sympathy and understanding about her problems at
home. Blackwomen lie for each other when it comes to
covering up or supporting a story to the Blackman, and they
feel no guilt about it. It’s another club rule. It is a given
among Blackwomen that some things cannot be presented or
discussed in front of a Blackman. They call this “girl talk,”
the men prefer to call it what it is. Gossip. They will stay on
the phone for hours discussing and debating other people’s
problems. They will yak around the clock. But there is
another level of conversation that the Blackman does net
hear and does not know exists. Most of this is classified as
some more “girl talk” but it is of a more vile nature and filthy
language and references are exclusively reserved for the
discussion of Blackmen. This conversation is protected from
the ears of the Blackman because Blackwomen know the
subject matter would shock and appall him. It is during this conversation that Blackwomen laugh at and make fun of the Blackman and brag about the successes of their tricks played
74
on him. They laugh at how he talks, walks, dresses, what he
does for a living, and how he performs in bed. All Blackmen
get grouped together during these sessions and they have no
special loyalty to any man whether he is their husband or
not. The Blackwoman has perfected the art of deception and
she can fool the Blackman into thinking she admires
something and then later on with the girls she may go back
and tell them what a fool he is.
Whenever the Blackman manages to win an argument,
get his way, or make the Blackwoman submit to something
she calls in the troops to discuss the problem and get advice
on how to handle it. The worse result is that she will have to
admit the Blackman is right so she searches and researches
among other women until she finds a solution. She stops at
nothing to prove him wrong. It may be days later but she
will not drop the issue until she gets him to admit he made a
mistake or doesn’t know something.
They will also devise very intricate and deceptive tests
among their friends or relatives. They believe themselves to
be the ultimate test givers and the Blackman’s actions under
the rules of the test determine the grade he receives. She will
set the Blackman up to see if he will respond to the sexual
advances of another woman. She may use a family member
or a friend he doesn’t know. Whatever the appointed actress
reports is what the Blackwoman will believe. She naturally
believes a woman who claims that her man tried to seduce
her or made a pass at her. This confirms the suspicions she
has had all the while and all hell breaks loose. The Blackman
is so trusting that he is surprised that they actually set him
up. He must remember that he cannot trust her. Left to her
own warped devices she will create confusion and put the
Blackman in hell about it by blaming him. She cannot be
trusted, nor can her motives be trusted, until she is trained,
and she is hard to train, to behave properly.
Sometimes the entire family structure is tainted with
wrong ideas and wrong treatment of the Blackman. Her
family will show misplaced loyalty to her by using the
principles that blood is thicker than mud, men will be men,
and a nigger ain’t s--t. These principles are not always at
work in his family, but the Blackwoman is perfectly
comfortable saying negative things about the Blackman to
his mother, who also belongs to the Blackwomen’s secret
75
allegiance club. Sometimes the mother will agree with the
daughter-in-law, be sympathetic and tell her how to handle
him. All Blackwomen are familiar with the experience of
trying to get a Blackman to do something and he refuses to
do it, therefore all of them understand the predicament of
trying to live with a defiant Blackman. The one who is a
hindrance to the happiness of the Blackwoman.
While Blackwomen believe that they would change if the
Blackman would, they use the excuse that since he won’t
change, they won’t either. This attitude drains the lifeblood
out of the Black nation. The Blackman has a proven history
of being in charge of his woman and his nation and he does
not have to be ashamed of his nature just because the
Blackwoman claims she can’t follow him. She is the loser in
this.
The mystery, intrigue and suspense the Blackwoman
perpetrates must stop. She uses behavioral modification
techniques on the Blackman to force him to go along with
her ideas about how he and she should be. Her ideas are
clouded by Western society ideas. But she thinks that her
opinions and ideas come from herself. They do not. As a
result of not having any ties to her cultural roots she is open
to any and all suggestions from any other race. She thinks
that how she is is natural and that her ideas are from a
sequence of mathematical events which have evolved to
produce who and what she is today.
No nation can rise when the natural order of the behavior
of the male and the female have been altered against their
wishes by force. No species can survive if the female of the
genus disturbs the balance of her nature by acting other than
herself. The Blackwoman does not accept the real definition
of who she is. She thinks that she has several choices of
how she can be. She chooses randomly and if her choice
proves to be unsuccessful she chooses another. She may..
adopt several kinds of lifestyles and purposes during her™
adult tenure. She changes religions and opinions as easily as
she changes her shoes. She does not realize that her
floundering purposes destroy her nation and create unstable
offspring. No family can be successful if all the members
have different beliefs and value systems. There must be
agreement on the unity of purpose and goals. The purpose
must describe the principles by which the family will reach
76
the goals. What Blacks have in their family relationships
now makes for disconnection and scattered family ties where
there are no overall laws which are respected by all the
members. Thus, the Blackwoman, being the first teacher of
the family members, since they are all born of a woman,
must instill in the family children unified training and rules.
There are some Blackwomen, as a result of emotionally
traumatic childhoods, who do not get along well with their
parents - especially their mother. They have been known to
talk to her very disrespectfully and treat her badly. They are
inconsiderate to her wishes and desires, and have become so
used to talking to her roughly that they do so in front of
other people - who may be shocked and outraged that a
daughter would treat her own mother in such an awful way.
Many of these women are frustrated and blame their mothers
for being the reason they are so confused and/or
unsuccessful in their adult relationships. Others treat them
badly because they think they are in the way and try to butt
into their business too much. No matter what the reason, no
Blackwoman should treat her mother, the one who brought
her in the world, with disrespect. Albeit, there may be just
cause for the adult daughter to feel regret or hostilities, it is
not right to verbally or physically abuse old people. Many
older Blacks are financially unable to support themselves,
are too ill to live alone, or just desire to be with their grownup children. When it is possible, the older parents should be
allowed to have quarters in the same house, nearby, or even
in the attic or basement of the home of their children if they
have no place else to go. Extended family members should
not be rejected as useless because they are growing older,
have ailments or do not want to live alone.
Neither should the Blackwoman hassle the Blackman
because he treats his mother better than she treats hers. Life
long disagreements should be discussed and settled, with the
Blackman being the arbitrator, if necessary. The
Blackwoman can have no real peace in her own life if she is
carrying unresolved hostilities or grudges against her own
mother. This also goes for her relationship with her father.
Often Blackwomen who grew up without a fatherhead in
the house, or who grew up overhearing her mother defame
her father’s name, or who saw activities she deciphered as
bad treatment against her mother by her father, do not know
717
how to live with a Blackman in peace. She brings a hidden
agenda to the relationship of distrust and sometimes hate -
for all men, which may be deeply rooted in her childhood
experiences with her own father or other menfolk in her
household. A Blackwoman who was raised in a broken
home environment has no masculine mentor by which to
pattern her behavior towards her own man. In this kind of
situation the only example she has of how to treat a man
comes from television, movies, books and magazines - plus,
her friends experiences. She will have a tumultuous time
adjusting to living with a man daily and treating him
properly. She will be defensive, secretive and suspicious.
She will also be combative when challenged on her actions
towards her man. She will also have a difficult time raising
her sons and daughters because she will not know how to
teach them their proper and natural roles in life. Try as she
may, unless she is given new instructions and information
from another source, she will revert eventually to her own
mother’s behavior traits, even if she currently deplores the
way her mother raised her. It is all she knows. By the time
she studies, listens and learns how to behave to make her
relationship successful, or raise her children properly, it is
often too late. The relationship with the man may be
irretrievably damaged and the children may be grown. In
addition to the wasted life time spent fighting against her
man, she will be sending her own children off into the world
ill-prepared to get along with their mates. Thus, the
perpetuation of an inherited culture of family maladjustment
is passed from one generation to the next. And problems of
not knowing how to mate successfully are then compounded
by racism.
All of these habits result in the Black community being
disorganized because none of the inhabitants know what, they should be doing or why. The family structure remain
the primary institution of learning. The Black people in
America have commenced to recognizing and acknowledging
the fact that Blacks do not know their history (where they
came from) and therefore have no collective sense of direction about where they should be going. However, since no acceptable explanation or definition has been adopted as the official doctrine, Blacks remain emotionally disabled-and
psychologically disjointed. Over the years the terminology
78
has changed, the styles of expression have changed, and
each generation of Blacks continue to point outward -
blaming socio-economic pressures as the culprit. The last
three hundred years have theoretically been spent identifying
the problems. Little has been done to eradicate them. The
American government has been powerless to intervene on a
social level to straighten out the Black family. It is not their
responsibility anyway. It is the Blackman’s responsibility to
straighten out his own family - starting with the
Blackwoman. When he corrects her he corrects his entire
nation. He cannot do it alone because he does not raise the
children by himself.
He can set the example in his own home by treating his
woman and children right, being obedient and respectful to
his own mother and father, and becoming steadfast in his
determination to make a change. He and the men closest to
him must meet and honestly take a look at the status of the
Black family and their interpersonal relationships and
perhaps make agreements to make changes in their homes.
Back-peddling around the issues and continuing to be scared
of the Blackwoman has no place in getting this job done.
The Blackwoman is in shambles because she does not
understand the principles of familyhood.
FAMILY SECRETS
If the Blackman asks the Blackwoman too many
questions about her family background, or about what’s
going on in his own home or in her day to day life, he is
charged with being nosy or trying to “get in her business.”
Blackwomen keep secrets and assume that certain family
activities and information are none of his business and do
not affect him. If pestered they try to convince the Blackman
that his inquiries are connected to his nagging and prying
ways. The Blackman has every right to know what’s going
on in his own family and in his own home. If he does not
know the internal workings of his own household he is at a
disadvantage since he has a plethora of responsibilities to his
family from protection to support. He cannot do his part
when important minor or major information is kept from
him. Sometimes the only way the Blackman knows what’s
going on in his own home is to ask the children, or wait until
19
somebody on the outside tells him. He is sometimes treated
as an intruder in his own house.
Blackwomen enlist their families, children .and
girlfriends to keep information away from the Blackman.
Interestingly enough, they all cooperate in her scheme to
keep the Blackman from knowing the real truth about his
environment. The end result of a Blackman living and
sleeping in quarters where he is not privy to what’s going on
is chaos. Usually the man is aware of certain ideas or
activities floating in the atmosphere of his home, or her
home, but he does not know the origin. All of the involved
parties profess denial and remain close mouthed out of
loyalty to the woman. The more he presses to find out
what’s really going on the more determined she becomes to
keep secrets from him. Some are better at this than others.
Lying is a practice literally all Blackwomen participate in.
Some of the lying goes on for years. It is a foregone
conclusion that certain information and topics are purposely
adjusted for the ears of the Blackman. The Blackwoman
claims that she keeps secrets from the Blackman because he
doesn’t understand or can’t handle it, or that he won’t like
what’s going on and give her a problem about it. She knows
that certain kinds of foolishness and nonsense will be
unworthy of his support and he will fight against it,
therefore, she thinks the only way she can operate and do
her thing is to keep him from knowing about it.
The Blackwoman’s methods of depriving the Blackman
of necessary or crucial information are multifarious and
subtle. If she is lying about something all of her transactions
are predicated on the Blackman not finding out the truth. Her
ability to cover up lies and disguise the truth is impersonal
and matter-of-fact. She feels no guilt. Lies are a bleak
necessity in her life to continue her tragic defiance against the
Blackman. In rare moments she may look over at him ey
see him struggling to live with her lies and sneakiness an
may experience a glimpse of compassion. She knows she
has lied for so long about things that is is impossible to go
back and tell the truth or erase them. For as far back as she
can remember she has been tricking him and playing some kind of game on his mind. Sometimes she lies just to keep him busy trying to figure out the truth. It is like a game to
her. The winner gets to have his or her way.
80
Sometimes she lies because she believes that a few little
white lies spice up the relationship and make it more
interesting. She defends lying by claiming they add to the
excitement and intrigue of “keeping him guessing.” She
never considers the kind of unhappy miserable personality it
takes to need lies as a stimulus to make a relationship
successful. This is some more nonsense she learned from
television and magazine stories. In adhering to the theory
that lies are permissible she must also reject the authenticity
of right and wrong. Her modern state-of-the-art values tell
her that nothing is all right or all wrong. She deals with
situation ethics. She lies or tells the truth depending on the
Situation, she obeys or is disobedient according to the
situation and is agreeable or disagreeable according to the
situation. She has no overriding principles governing her life
whereby she is able to observe and make a determination
about validity and use that decision as a constant. Her
judgements are spontaneous and change. She is ruleless.
If she catches herself being too nice to the Blackman she
calls herself back to order because she does not want him to
take her for granted or to decide that anything he does is
okay with her. She has been told somewhere that Blackmen
like it when you treat them badly, and the fact that he keeps
coming back for more makes her conclude that this must be
true. She doesn’t consider that the Blackman keeps coming
back because he loves her and hasn’t given up on her. She
never really believes that he loves her because she thinks that
whether or not he loves her is dependent upon whether or
not he is attracted to another woman - and - if he does
become attracted to another woman that is the proof that he
doesn’t really love her. She doesn’t feel safe and she doesn’t
feel qualified to be completely loved for being her natural
self, so she keeps up a front around the Blackman because
she thinks that her front is better than the real her. She is a
strange human animal and a prime example, based on her
thinking patterns, of the remnants of the limited mental and
emotional development allowed during slavery, and the need
for complete secrecy of one’s ideas.
She represents the genetic mutation created from that
period. She naturally rejects any explanation offered to her
about the cause of her ambivalence. Yes. The job looks
insurmountable. Her problems are rigid and she is possessed
$1
by an evil that is not her own. She is held mentally captive
inside the barriers of Western civilization’s ideas and
practices. The mentally imprisoned Blackwoman must be
freed and called upon to rise and accept the reprieve offered
to her by the Blackman to reunite her with her nation.
The Blackman must be firm in this. He cannot practice
weakness or be wimpy. He must take charge with as much
force as required because it makes no sense to practice nonviolence during war. And there is a war of the worst kind
going on between the Blackman and the Blackwoman over
who is going to be the boss and who is going to lead the
way. There is a severe penalty awaiting the Blackwoman if
she persists in fighting her battle through the children and in
the bedroom. The Blackman must take on this challenge.
The Blackwoman’s voiceless brain is crying out louder and
louder for him to conquer her and to fight and destroy the
ferocious demons inhabiting her head. These demons are in
the form of bad ideas and bad morals. He must remember
that she is not as tough as she acts. She is mostly a lot of
mouth. She can be a number of things, as already proven,
but she cannot be a man.
If the Blackman commences a national project to put the
Blackwoman back in order and under his control he will not
be interfered with because the whole world knows that the
Blackwoman has been out of control for an inordinate length
of time. The Blackman is the only one on earth who can
restore her to herself, a beautiful righteous woman, wife and
mother.
Chapter 8
MONEY
As a rule the Blackwoman cannot be fully trusted in*
money matters between she and the Blackman. Somehow
she equates the amount of money a Blackman makes or
spends on her with how much he loves her. If he takes her
out she expects, from her fairy tale roots, for him to lay out
the red carpet. She expects to be entertained in the most
opulent fashion, ride in the most exclusive vehicle and be dressed to the hilt. If the man falters on any of the above he is considered to be cheap and classless and she will make a
82
bad report about him to her friends. Her meal may consist of
the most extravagant entree on the menu and she may not eat
a bite of it but she wants the Blackman to prove that he will
but it for her anyway. She wants to be wined and dined.
Wooed and cooed. Kissed and missed. Every weekend. She
has so convinced the Blackman that money is what
impresses her most that sometimes he too begins to believe
that with money he can get her to do anything. So near the
end of one of her expensive evenings out she may drop a
little hint to her date that she has no intention of bedding
down with him for the night just because he took her out to
dinner and spent a huge amount of money on her. If he
protests she becomes indignant and claims that she doesn’t
understand why he feels like that.
If the Blackwoman is married it is an old adage among
Blackwomen to advise each other to “put something on the
side or away for yourself, because you never know what’s
going to happen.” This is an old program recommending that
the Blackwoman steal a little money, a little at a time, and put
it up for a rainy day. The rainy day is considered to be the
day when the Blackman runs out on her and leaves her broke
and alone. Going into a marital or live-in relationship that
requires financial disclosure is therefore not a welcome
commitment to the Blackwoman because she believes she
must maintain some financial security of her own. She hides
a little money away but, of course, it requires her to lie, steal
and cheat. She may have to skim off the grocery money, the
charge accounts or the utility bills but she sneaks a few
dollars here and there until she has a nice little nest egg.
Generally not enough to do anything big, but enough to
perhaps do something special for herself. She repeats this
process several times during the relationship and then
launches into another lying process to explain where she got
the newly purchased item from, or to hide it away
completely. Wearing it or using it only when the man is not
present.
If she is working she does not like the Blackman to
know exactly how much she actually nets. She can’t let him
“count my money” so she slides around the topic whenever
it comes up or hides her pay stubs. She considers money as
a private matter not to be overly discussed or shared. As
long as she pays her part of the bills, or whatever the
83
arrangement, she believes he should mind his own business.
Disclosure would prevent her from manipulating the budget.
If she does put her money into the home community pot she
often maintains her ownership by referring to her
contribution as “my money.” Any money she earns she
considers “her money” instead of “our money.”
When the Blackman finds that a Blackwoman has these
kinds of ideas about money, ideas like the man has to spend
some money on her if he wants her to be pleasant and have a
good time, (or that money is the measure used to determine
if she will see him again and for how long), he recognizes
the root of her idea which is grounded in being a whore. He
may change his format and expect the bounty which in most
cases is sex (which makes him the trick). Plus, no matter
how it turns out she will call her friends and brag the next
day about how she made him take her out and spend some
money on her and that she didn’t do or give him anything
back in return. She made the rules and when it’s time for her
to pay the cost she reneges.
She also expects the finest of gifts for her birthday or
other holidays. She judges the Blackman’s sincerity by how
much he spent on her gift, or whether or not he had to
sacrifice to buy it. If the gift is unacceptable she calls her
friends and tells them about how jive it was. Usually in front
of the Blackman’s face she will feign surprise and happiness
and pretend to be thrilled with the gift. She will also buy him
expensive gifts as a way to set the scale on what he should
buy her when her turn comes around. If she is trying to
impress him or get him to care more about her she may
purchase expensive gifts for him without his knowledge or
request. She may buy him things to gain some leverage in
the relationship. To her gift giving is connected to
ownership. She thinks that if she does a lot of nice things for
him or spends a lot of money on him that he will remember
her kindness and not do her wrong. This is her own script
and the Blackman knows nothing about it and it is not used
as a reason for him to behave one way or another. She rarely
gets what she thinks she’s paying for, including no refund.
If the Blackman should have occasion to ask the
Blackwoman, even his wife, for money she will agree to make him a Joan, and woe to the Blackman who does not pay the Blackwoman back her money. She will nag and nag,
84
keep score and count of what he owes her until he pays her
back. She may keep a tally for a year, compounding interest,
reminding him almost daily about his debt to her. She
believes that the bottom line of everything is “the money”.
She will buy personal items, usually clothes, for herself, and
hide them in the back of the closet, at her mother’s house or
girlfriend’s house until she sees an opportunity to sneak
them in. A few weeks later she will ease them into her
wardrobe and if her man asks about them she will make up
some story about a sale, or that her girl friend gave it to her,
or her family bought it for her. She will hide the charge
account bills or receipts so that her man will never know
where the stuff came from. She is selfish when it comes to
cash.
The Blackwoman will spend umpteen dollars on clothes
if she is allowed. And beware of the nearly poor
Blackwoman who spends a lot of money on clothes or gifts
for her man because she may be neglecting her children to do
so in hopes of impressing the man with her love or richness.
She will also beg for or implore the Blackman to give her
money on clothes or other frivolities. The Blackman can
never be sure that the Blackwoman needs or uses the money
the way she claims she does. She hides money and
sometimes begs every time she sees her man, or any man
whom she knows well enough to ask for money. The
Blackman is sometimes better off actually paying the bills,
rent or buying the baby’s shoes himself. At least that way he
knows that the money is actually going for what she said she
needed it for. She is too slick to just take her word.
If the Blackwoman lives with a man, or spends the night
at his house, or spends the night at her house, she is known
to sneak and look in his pockets and/or examine the contents
of his wallet. Not always for money, but just to see what he
has. If he leaves her alone in his apartment or house she will
look into every drawer and cupboard, checking out every
name, address, bill or scrap of paper. She thinks that the
Blackman is holding out on her so every opportunity she
gets she checks him out to see what he has or holds dear.
She wants to look into anything that she thinks will help her
learn more about the Blackman, and she wants to find out
what makes him tick but she is unable to get the real story
because of her sneaky practices. Her whole life evolves
85
around trying to find out about the Blackman, she is just
going about it in the wrong way. When given the opportunity she might take a few dollars
out of his wallet without his knowledge. When asked to
contribute or share a part of “her money” she reserves full
cooperation because Blackwomen do not think highly of
each other when found to be giving money to the Blackman.
This practice is connected to them thinking that if a man asks
a woman for money and she gives it to him, then he is
making a fool out of her. Again, the money is the measure.
Sometimes Blackwomen will purposely devise some
elaborate scheme to meet a Blackman who has money, big
dough, or connections to other successful people. If the
Blackman has a lot of money and is rumored to spend it he
can just about have any Blackwoman he chooses. Even if the
woman does not want him she will consider dating him if he
is known to make a lot of money. The financially successful
Blackman can be ever so nice, but if he is noted for being
cheap, many Blackwomen will not go out with him. These
Blackmen who make or have what is considered big bucks
have to be especially careful of the sincerity of the
Blackwoman he is dating, because if not he is a prime
candidate to be ripped off, maybe not viciously, but ripped
off just the same. Many times Blackmen would like to give
the Blackwoman money for what she says she wants but his
other experiences have usually shown him that if he does so
she will start acting like a fool and try to take unfair
advantage of him. This knowledge prevents him from
sometimes sharing in the way he would like to. On the other
side, if she lives with him she will try to keep up with “his
money” as much as possible. She checks his receipts, his
credit card record of expenditures, his glove compartment,
his desk calendar at work and peeps in any other place that
she thinks might reveal what he is spending his money on.
She is never sure if he is spending his money on another
woman or not. She also checks to see if he is contributing
too much financially to his extended family members, such
as his mother, his brother or his sister. She makes a mental
notation if he spends money on his side of the family and
makes sure that soon after she spends some money on her side of the family - to keep it equal. She does not ever want to find out that she is covering home expenses with her
8 6
money while he is giving his to his family. Since she equates
control of her life with control of her man and control of her
money she is always on the lookout for suspicious looking
signs that hint that he has spent some money she is unaware
of. She will ask him how much did he pay for such and such
and then try to verify the price to make sure he is telling the
truth. She never just takes his word for anything. Sometimes
he lies because he knows that she cannot handle the truth and
will take him through a lot of hassles and changes about it.
So he may lie just to keep her mouth shut and to keep from
having a fight. In her psyche money often is the God of her
life and she monitors it closely.
Sometimes before marriage she will spend money like its
water and there is no end to its flow. She dresses
fabulously, drives a nice car, and has a nice place to live.
She has beautiful jewelry, credit cards and takes luxurious
vacations or trips. After marriage when she can no longer
hide the fact that she has been living on a thin line of
financial support, she is ready to dump the entire debt load
on her new husband. While he was thinking that she had
money of her own and is well endowed, she was only
gaming on him to impress him that she is independently in
the black.
Because times are so hard and it requires a great deal of
money to live comfortable, the Blackwoman sometimes
work outside the home. In other cases she devises her own
career goals and works because she enjoys it and has little
interest in staying home and raising a family as a daily
responsibility. Many times the Blackman, if it were not for
the financial strain it would put him under, would rather
have his wife a home in his house taking care of his children
and caring for him. The Blackwoman thinks that if she is not
outside in the world that she will not know what is going on
or what he is doing. Sitting at home in the house is not
appealing to her because it keeps her out of the limelight and
she has to totally rely on his reports about what’s going on
in the business and social world. Plus, she wants to have
fine clothes and lot of extras that the Blackman’s salary
usually cannot cover. She wants what everyone else has and
since these things cost money she is willing to work, work
overtime, beg, borrow, steal or trade her body for money
and what money buys. Many of her wants are superficial
87
and have no real value when it comes fo being a good wife
and mother.
Gratefully there have arisen a few Blackwomen who
realize that a few. dollars (or a lot of dollars) have little value
when compared to certain happiness. Of course there is
another group who insist on paying for dinner or the movie
so they can execute what they think is their equality. They
also do this to have more control of the outing. If she is one
of these types the proper action for her to take is to place the
money in the Blackman’s hand so that he can pay the tabs
personally. He must still stay in charge even if they are
wining or dining on “her” money. Money is not the measure
of who has the most power in a relationship. The power is
distributed according to gender.
Due to the Blackwoman not being able to get along with
the Blackman there are multi-million single parent
households today. They are run and operated by
Blackwomen with children. Unfortunately many of these
women believe that they are getting along better without a
man living with them. They are dead wrong. It is not an easy
job to haul groceries alone, pump gas, move furniture,
handle all her business affairs alone, foot the bill for every
item or activity in the house, watch television alone, pass up
concerts or affairs because she has no date, defend herself
and the house alone, attend P.T.A. meetings alone, travel in
the car at night alone or handle emergency repairs alone.
Although she won’t admit it there are many times during her
day and night that she longs to be with a man and to have
one with her to take care of things. But she weighs that idea
against what she thinks she has to go through about her
money, time and actions, she still concludes that she would
rather not have the hassle. She thinks she has more peace
without one. She is sad and she is lonely and she needs a eh to complete her world. Her big independent front is alka sham.
Chapter 9
HOUSEKEEPING
88
Another way the Blackman can access the mental
condition of the Blackwoman is to examine the way she
keeps house. Although traditionally a fine dresser, the
Blackwoman is subject to keeping a nasty house. She
dresses impeccable to go out in the most spectacular outfit
but her home or apartment may be a wreck. There may be
roaches, rats and bed vermin. Note that if her house is dirty
she can’t be right. She will continue to keep a dirty house if
the Blackman continues to act like it’s not important.
She will spend long grueling hours at her hairdresser and
not be willing to spend 30 minutes a day cleaning her living
quarters. She is known to try to entertain a man in the midst
of her messy house. She may blame her sloppily kept home
on the fact that she works, goes to school or just doesn’t
have time. These are all rank excuses which prove she has
her priorities in the wrong order. There is no excuse for
daily rumpled clothes strewn throughout the house, dirty
ashtrays, dusty furniture, a sink full of dishes, soiled bed
linen, spoiled food in the fridge or overflowing trash in the
kitchen. If the bathroom is littered with hair, ring around the
tub, crud in the sink or on the floor, the Blackwoman’s
activities and attentions are misplaced.
If her home is like any of the above descriptions, the
Blackman can be sure that she’s moving through life too
fast, running the streets too much and neglecting her home
duties. She must be reminded by the Blackman to keep her
house clean so that she will not think he is blind. When the
Blackwoman sees that the Blackman is observant and
dissatisfied with her housekeeping she may tighten up her
act - at least momentarily. Her habits are difficult to break.
If the Blackwoman lives with a Blackman sometimes she
starts out being on top of the house cleaning, her next step is
to ask the man to chip in and help, and the next step is to
stop doing it altogether. The Blackman has every right to
instruct his woman to clean up the house. If he complains
and she rebels her reaction may be to continue to let the
house go to hell until she is ready to clean it up - which will
not be when he tells her to. Blackwomen, and some
Blackmen also, consider the house as the woman’s domain
and whatever she does in the house is her business and her
responsibility. She is allowed to run it however she pleases.
The rule seems to be that she controls inside and he controls
89
outside. This is wrong. The Blackman has a right to decide
how he wants his home kept - both inside and out. Keeping
the house clean can become a real bone of contention
between Black couples. Blackwomen associate keeping
house for a man with being his maid - which has a
somewhat negative connotation due to her being forcedto be
a maid during slavery. Housekeeping represents hard work
that she is not interested in doing on a regular basis. She
doesn’t have time. If the Blackman expects the Blackwoman to hang up his
clothes or take care of them, and cook dinner on time, iron a
shirt every once in a while, wash or scratch his head, rub his
back or do any kind of wifely duty she may respond: “I ain’t
yo’ mama” or I’m not his slave” or “what’s wrong with you,
get it yourself,” or “I don’t feel like it, I’m tired.” If the
Blackwoman would spend more time making her home a
heaven for the Blackman he might want to stay in it more
instead of looking outside for peace of mind. Keeping the
house clean also gives the Blackwoman less time for the
other foolishness she practices that bogs her down and steals
her energy. No man wants to stay at home in a dirty house
where he can’t find a clean place to sit or lay. He also does
not like it when his clothes are not clean and in place. The
Blackwoman thinks that he should take care of himself. She
believes in unisex housekeeping, you take care of yourself
and I'll take care of mine.
If the Blackman should leave to go out to an
undesignated destination she believes that she has a right to
go out too. She will exert all kinds of time adjustments in
order to get dressed and leave when he does or shortly
thereafter. She may even follow the Blackman or try to show
up at the same place he hangs out and then act like it’s a
coincidence. The Blackwoman does not know that no
Blackman likes to look up in a club or bar and see his
woman there when he doesn’t expect her. This is one of the
times that she could be home cleaning the house. But her
anxiety tells her that if he can go out so can she. If she’s at
home she wants him to be at home too. When she is ready to
go to bed she want’s him to be ready to go to bed too. That
the Blackwoman wants the Blackman home with her all the
time is an absolute contradiction to her real desire because no
woman wants a man under her feet every moment of the day
90
every day. She has other women-type things to do. In spite
of this she remains determined to keep up with the Blackman
- even if it means she has to neglect the house or herself.
There is plenty for a woman to do at home on Friday and
Saturday night other than party.
When she does go out alone she likes to pretend that she
is unattached and unavailable, but mainly she likes to go out
so she can flirt a little and be flirted with. This reaffirms for
her that she is still attractive and still in demand. She does
this every once in a while as a test to see if she can still catch
the attention of a man. In order for her to be satisfied with
her survey the quality of the man must be good. If a jive or
square dude makes a pass at her it doesn’t count. She may
dance, act alluring or perform brazenly to get attention from
strange men - on the premise that she may just attract a good
one. She wants to always keep her options open since she is
admittedly dissatisfied with the Blackman she has. If she is
angry with her man she is more apt to go out nightclubbing.
She may return home later that night to her dirty house in
complete disarray. She may be half-drunk, stinking of
tobacco and reeking with sweat and never tell her man how
low down she behaved in public.
Blackwomen do not just go out with other women just to
have companionship or to be together. They can be together
at home. They sometimes travel in packs when they go out
so their motive will appear innocent enough. But if the
Blackwoman goes out clubbing at night alone or with her
friends she is looking for another man. Even if she only
intends to fool around for that evening she is up to no good.
Make no mistake about her low intentions. She does not
have any business being out at night by herself for the
purpose of entertainment or in the name of “having some
fun.” And she is wrong for trying to keep up with the
Blackman by following him around. And she should be
home before dark unless accompanied by a man or other
security - unless she is attending to an emergency. Certainly
an emergency could be classified as running to the store for
food or beverages or similar permissible trips. Blackwomen
think that staying in a night, especially on the weekends, is
an outdated old fashioned idea designed to hold the
Blackwoman down. The Blackman should hold her down
himself. Her so-called freedom and equality with the
91
Blackman has put the Black home in shambles. She can
relax at home doing womanly things. And if she wants to
dance or see dancing she can watch BET Video Soul or she
can join a women only aerobic class and dance up a storm
and keep in shape at the same time. There are many societal
rules that have not changed. They have remained: firm
because they create the desired result in the behavior of the
citizens who inhabit the land. The desired result for the
Blackwoman is to be satisfied with her home and her family
and commit herself to that establishment and not constantly
fly into a tizzy every time the Blackman walks out the door.
Her actions do not stop the Blackman from doing whatever
he wants to do, they just wear her out from trying.
There is another type of Blackwoman who is
meticulously clean. She might even be considered as too
neat. She is obsessed with the eradication of dirt. Her
nervousness makes her to possibly fix dinner and remove all
the food and dishes before everyone is finished eating. If her
man comes in late she has already cleaned the kitchen, put all
the food away and dares anyone to mess it up again. She
feels that if the Blackman stays out past the dinner hour then
he doesn’t deserve to eat. The too-neat Blackwoman wants
everything in place including the Blackman. Subconsciously
this kind of Blackwoman may try to clean up the external
fifth because of her high level of internal filth. She may brag
to her friends that “I got him trained” and he knows not to
mess up anything or I’ll have a fit. And to keep from hearing
her mouth sometimes the Blackman obeys her house rules -
as if he is a guest.
A Blackwoman who is usually very neat will use the
house as a battleground if she is displeased with the
Blackman. She will stop cleaning up, stop cooking and let it
all go to hell as a statement of her dissatisfaction - or to get
his attention. She calculates that when the Blackman géfs
tired of eating out, wearing dirty wrinkled clothes and not
having sex with her he will relent, give in and submit to her wishes. The Blackwoman gains confidence when she is able to successfully trick the Blackman. She loves the challenge when the Blackman recognizes her tricks and games and tries to work a game back on her. She delights in trying to out maneuver him. Albeit the Blackwoman practices larceny and some other kinds of nonsense, it is the Blackman who
92
must bust her, and bust her repeatedly until she gives up the
game.
Very few Blackwomen know the pleasure or thrill of
being in accord with the Blackman. All the good things she
says she wants would be immediately available to her if she
drops her defenses, drops her suspicions and allows herself
to melt into the waiting arms of the man who loves her. The
man who is man enough to provide and protect her and
deserve her love. The man who is the most beautiful, the
most regal and the most sought after creature on God’s earth
- the Blackman.
This position would increase her self worth and
gradually heal the psychological wounds of this wicked
society. Nothing she does takes the place of the Blackman.
Even when she convinces herself that celibacy is not only
healthy but desirable, she is lying. Blackwomen say they
want a man desperately but have given up because they can’t
find the one they want, so they would rather be alone. And
they are.
No idea or thing can replace the Blackman. He was the
first life to appear on the planet earth for as far back as can
be determined. His will has kept this whole thing going.
True, he is sometimes lost in the wilderness, battling beasts
flocked against him. The Blackwoman does not see him
fighting for his life, instead she sees him as interrupting
hers. He is a pain and he is a bother and he is not happy. No
man can be happy until his woman lets him be. Such a
powerful position the Blackwoman seems to be in. The fact
that her empowerment is self-destructive does not matter to
her. She is selfish. She does not even know who the
Blackman is. She does not know that she can have heaven
on earth if his will be done. She won’t even try it. She is a
braggart and thinks she is too good to submit. She thinks
she knows what’s best and has to look out for herself. She
lives in total fear that something might happen that she isn’t
ready for. She does not have to be on the front line. She can
follow in the footsteps of her guide, but she won’t let her
guide get in front of her. She is afraid she will lose her place
in line. She feels cornered.
She says she slacks up on taking care of the house or
caring for the Blackman because she gets bored and tired.
Tired of the same routine day after day. Day in and day out.
93
The general duties of doing for the Blackman get to be a
bother. Some Blackwomen will not even serve the Blackman
a plate of food. Some will not even cook the food. Her
modernicity tells her that if a certain activity gets old she has
to move on. It is odd that she bores of the regularity and
uniformity involved in maintaining day to day life.
The entire universe is built on harmony and
repetitiveness. The great ball of fire and light we call sun
rises every morning day in and day out. All life on earth is
generated from the dependability of the sun. It is certain and
reliable, committed to its responsibility to rise and set
everyday in some form. So are the moon and stars. So is the
earth and all the planets. The earth has been continuously
spinning for over 76 trillion years of recorded history. If the
earth stops spinning all life will commence to halt and fall
off. The 139,255,000 square miles of water would
overpower the 57,255,000 square miles of land. The
seasons of winter, spring, summer and fall also clock in
regularly within 12 months of every year. Every year.
Nature comprised this routine system to benefit the
inhabitants of each continent. Humans plan and survive
based on the daily dependability of certain happenings
established by nature. These routine occurrences give
security.
The Blackwoman is out of sync with the natural order of
the universe because she refuses to adhere to the principles
set forth in a systemized existence where repeat means
everything. The variations of daily life she craves is called
disorganization and confusion. She refers to and defends her
disorganization as doing things her own way. She maintains
the idea that freedom means she can do things any way she
pleases. There is no freedom without responsibility. Her
purpose has been reduced to her obligation to fight for her
rights of superiority over her man. aR
The mere idea of obeying a Blackman, doing what he
tells her to do, is considered as nonassertive. To work in
unity with him on an idea can frighten her because she sees it
as submersion of one personality into another. In business
this is called a merger. She does not want to merge with the Blackman to double his power because she wants individualism.
94
The Blackman, his woman and his children are
considered a nation. No nation can survive and exist trying
to cater to the individual needs of each member. There are
overriding rules that must be obeyed by every member to
ensure the success of the whole. The head of the nation must
be respected and must make these determinations and
enforce them. If the nation is wounded in the head because
the body is diseased it will soon be rendered invalid and
crumble. It is a slow and deadly process that is predictable
by learned social scientists. It is represented by what we see
today in the chaotic existence of the Black family.
The Blackman and the Blackwoman must become one in
their unit. They must become one by thinking in the terms of
one. They must be in agreement of the goal and work in the
interest of one. They are one. Nothing is more pleasing than
peace at home daily. If the Blackwoman works to try to
please the Blackman he will work to try to please her. By
nature the Blackman cannot submit to the Blackwoman. So
she is wasting everybody’s time trying to do so. On her
shoulders she has the original hard head. Hardened and
frozen against the warmth of the Blackman’s love. While the
Blackman is reported to be dying faster than the
Blackwoman, it is the Blackwoman who is helping him to
his grave. Most ill health is caused by diet. The main job that
women have always had is that of nutrition. Women prepare
the food. It is a very important position in any nation
because food is what sustains all life. Everything eats
something. Yet the Blackwoman complains about cooking
and feeding her family as if it were an unnecessary
assignment discovered to bother and repel her. She does not
see it as a life preserving duty. It is. The only connection to
diet she has is when she’s trying to lose weight. She is
known to slap a meal together in 15 minutes.
The Blackman must insist the Blackwoman study
foodstuffs and make determinations about which items are
best for digestion, growth and longevity of life. It is she
who can singlehandedly decide whether or not to extend the
life of her family with well planned nutritious meals - or - to
destroy it by delivering up quickly prepared, preservative
filled valueless food designed to just fill the stomach. The
only way the Blackman will live healthier and stronger is for
the Blackwoman to take over her responsibilities concerning
95
nutrition. The body is only a machine of sorts. Take care of
the machine and it will operate for a long time. If it is abused
for 30, 40 or 50 years it will decay and cease. Allowing the
children to eat junk food, forcing her man to eat out of
greasy restaurants and doing everything she can to keep
from cooking is horrendous. The Blackwoman must accept
her job just as the Blackman must accept his. There is a very
special equality in sharing in the necessary burdens of
nurturing the Black nation.
None of this means that the Blackwoman must dedicate
her life in its entirety to cooking and cleaning. She must train
her children to do their part and if the right effort and the
right spirit is shown, the Blackman is known to chip in and
do his part in taking care of the home. Keeping the house
clean is a shared responsibility of people who live together in
the same dwelling. Each person must do their part. Some
household duties are more tedious and unattractive appearing
than others but all are required to live in a clean environment.
Inside and outside. If the Blackman shows a little interest
and helps out she is more apt to do better than she has in the
past. Lastly, the Blackman should not allow the
Blackwoman to put him out or tell him to get out every time
she gets mad at him. If she’s mad, she should be the one that
leaves. It’s not “her” house, it belongs to them both.
The Blackman must start to take a positive firm look at
what goes on around his home, the condition of his children,
what his woman wears, what happens in his absence and
presence. Many Blackman take the position that certain home
activities or decisions are strictly up to the Blackwoman.
This is true only to a certain point. Whether or not the
Blackman is directly involved or not he should stay abreast
of everything from the children’s grades and recreation to his
woman’s menstrual cycle and what she cooks for dinner. He
must stop pretending that he is not interested in what goes én
with his woman and children. He has a right to know these
things and the Blackwoman has an obligation to make a daily
or nightly report of the day’s activities in the Blackman’s home. This includes Blackwomen who do not live with the man they belong to. Separate quarters has no bearing on the sharing of important information if a man and woman nave committed themselves to each other steadily.
96
Today’s relationship styles dictate that the man and the
woman maintain secret separate parts of their personalities
that they do not share with each other, or separate areas of
their desires. These mates believe that there are certain
special private things about them that their mate or other
intimate friends absolutely should not know. So they
practice the behavior of this part of them with others,
strangers or relationships manufactured and considered to be
distant enough from their day to day lives so as not to be
found out. There should not be anything, not any part of a
Blackman and a Blackwoman that they cannot share with
each other if called upon to do so. This does not just include
pleasure. Everyone has certain frailties hidden inside that
must be protected for fear of discovery and rejection.
If the Blackman should happen to stay away from home
(or his woman) for an ungodly length of time, such as
longer than over night. Two, three or four days, five, six or
seven days, etc., the Blackwoman may let the house
cleaning backslide a little bit. She at first worries alone, then
she tells her best friend, then she tells her family, then she
makes the usual calls around town to see if anyone else has
seen him. She may personally check out a few of his regular
hang-outs if he has any, and after she has exhausted all the
routine channels, she starts to get angry. She becomes
furious that he has disappeared seemingly without a trace
and not called to let her know where he is. She is more
concerned about where he is and who’s he with than what
his physical safety is. After about two days she decides that
he must be up to no good or he would call and check in.
It is difficult to describe the terroristic thoughts that flow
through her head at that phase. She imagines up the worst
catastrophes possible. Not tragedies about sickness or bodily
harm, but tragedies about him having gone for good, about
him being with another woman, and about him being off
somewhere not loving her anymore. Whenever the
Blackman is absent, the Blackwoman starts to consider that
he is gone because he doesn’t want her anymore. She can’t
begin to surmise how he could be away from her for any
extended amount of time and still love her. She thinks that if
he is not with her that she never crosses his mind. She
thinks he forgets all about her when he becomes involved
with other people or activities. She commences to plan how
97
she will handle it, how she will greet him when (and if) he
returns, and whether or not he will have a good excuse
explanation when he gets back. i
Actually, if ‘the Blackman stays away from the
Blackwoman for an extended stretch of time, it is better if he
stays away long enough for her to get over her anger. At
first she is worried, then she is suspicious, then she is mad,
then she is lonely without him, and decides she doesn’t care
what happened, she just wants him to come back. If he stays
away for at least a week, by the time he returns she will have
gotten past the anger and will just be glad to see him. This
may sound simplified but the stages of missing the
Blackman are very traumatic for the Blackwoman. It is a
period of extreme self examination and insecurity. She not
only may neglect the house, but she may neglect the present
time and place she is living in. Her concentrated worry is all
encompassing and takes up nearly her every conscious
moment. It is like a thud, a bitterness, a trembling in her
stomach. And a nagging pull in the center of her chest, a
constant ache, a longing for completion.
If she is wise she will use her time constructively,
overhaul the house, re-do her closets, make something, go
some place intelligent, or prepare a surprise for her man to
welcome him home. She would be fine if she just
remembers the good times, the dependability of her man’s
love, and that he is trustworthy with her love and would not
go away and leave her forever. She should trust in his
motives and know that if he is away, he has to be, and when
he gets finished with whatever he is doing he will come back
and continue to love her just as much and things will be fine.
She should continue on with her daily responsibilities using
her memory to remind her that a logical explanation will be
forthcoming. The Blackman should explain to the Blackwoman that sometimes he may have to be away, bit that he will always return to her and that he does not stop une her just because he sometimes has to be away from er
98
Chapter 10
RAISING CHILDREN
The children, like every other entity at the Blackwoman’s
disposal, are often used to attain certain goals with the
Blackman. The first and most important issue here is that the
rearing of children is the foremost responsibility of the
Blackwoman - not the day care center, not the grandmother
of the nanny. When the Blackwoman raises her own
children she imagines she is using modern methods that
create a well adjusted, well mannered, lovely child, but what
eventually creeps through, if she is not interrupted, is that
she raises her own children the same way she was raised.
Since the Blackwoman spends a lot of her mental
energies thinking about how to capture the Blackman and get
him to do her bidding, she is often frustrated with the
children. This frustration may take the form of yelling, being
verbally abusive, beating them, or leaving them with sitters
so she doesn’t have to deal with them. The Blackman, who
loves children, does not understand what all of the yelling
and screaming is about. He gets along fine with the children
and they obey and cooperate with him. But the
Blackwoman, who is impatient, will take out her hostilities
about her condition, on the children who in turn rebel, run
amuck and play all sorts of games on her just to irritate her
more. While not properly raising or teaching the children she
will sometimes dress them immaculately. She will also try to
get the eldest child, be it male of female, to take part or most
of the responsibility for caring for the younger children in
the household. When this redirection of duty is over used it
robs the older child of their own youth because they are
made to think like an adult parent in order to take care of
younger brothers or sisters. If the Blackman works late or is
out a lot she becomes more angry because she thinks he is
out having fun while she’s stuck at home with a bunch of
scrawling brats. If the woman is angry with the man she will
99
neglect the children in small ways. If the Blackman notices
this he will remind her that she should take better care of the
children and she might remind him that he ain’t the one
taking care of them - she is. She may stop cooking or
washing their clothes by claiming that she is exhausted and
can’t do another thing. Examine the situation. Some
Blackwoman have managed to work this game so effectively
on the Blackman that in many homes today the man is
cooking, cleaning, ironing, grocery shopping alone and
getting the children off to school, bathed at night and put to
bed - because the woman will either not do it or she has
convinced him that he should. It is her job to do the
mothering parts. He should assist.
If the man has a son (or daughter) who looks exactly like
him, remarkably like him, and the woman is constantly mad
at the man, she will sometimes unconsciously - or -
purposely mistreat the child. Since she cannot get back at the
father himself she will take it out on the child. This is a very
dangerous practice. The innocent child can be caught up in
this web of abuse and be at risk. It is impossible for a
Blackwoman to hate the father of her child and treat the child
normally. The child is a daily and nightly reminder of her
intimate relationship with the man. The baby may be a
novelty at first but as time passes and the child develops and
grows up it may be a problem to her because he or she
represents the father’s presence. Any behavior traits the child
displays that are exactly like the father’s makes her even
angrier and she will beat and punish the child to try to
remove the part that reminds her of the father.
If the Blackman is not present to defend himself she may
tell the child bad things about its father. This mostly happens
when she and the child’s father are not together in current
relationship. She will tell the child:
1) Your father don’t care nothing about you, I’m thé
one who loves you.
2) He don’t take care of you, I do.
3) If he wanted you, he’d be here with you.
4) He ain’t thinking about you, he’s out with his other
woman.
5) [can’t buy you that because your father won’t give me any money.
100
6) Your father is a bum, he ain’t got no job, he ain’t got
nothin’.
She says these and any other insult she can think of to
turn the child against the father because she is angry with
him. She wants the child/children to take her side against the
father to punish him. It is a given that the relationship
between the man and his children is directly related to the
relationship he has with the mother. The Blackman loves his
children but does not have the same maternal instincts of the
mother because it is not his nature. But when forced, he will
care for and raise the child himself.
If the father visits the child and the child is standoffish,
uptight, starts to cry or is hostile and combative, the
Blackman can be sure that it is because of something the
mother has told it about him. The small child’s mind cannot
decipher the information the Black mother tells it about its
father. The child does not know how to make the transfer.
They do not know how to front. They are happy or sad. The
poor Blackman does not know that all of this has taken place
behind his back and is baffled and may rebuff or spank the
child because of his whining or uncooperation. He does not
know that the entire act has been staged by the mother in the
background. The Blackwoman who is separated or angry
with her man is negative about him in front of the child. She
doesn’t realize how harmful this is because she is only
concerned with her own happiness or unhappiness. Secretly
she hopes that the child, although immature, will make a plea
for her in the father’s presence.
It is the Blackwoman who must teach the Blackchild to
love and respect the father. Just as she teaches it everything
else. It must be taught to love and respect its father - whether
he is financially taking care of it or not. The Blackwoman
removes the father figure from her child’s life because of her
own dissatisfaction without having anything to replace it
with. A Blackmother, no matter how much she tries, cannot
be a Blackfather to a Black child. There are many nonmonetary values that the Black father is capable of teaching
the child. The Blackman owns the child just as much as the
Blackmother. She does not have more ownership just
because she carried the baby in her womb. A woman cannot
have a baby without the aid of a man. He is equal owner of
the child and has an equal right to love it and care for it. The
101
parental coalition gives unity of direction and security to the
child. The Blackwoman is also too trusting of strangers with
her child. She does not know the personal quirks or values
of the people who work in the day care center. If a child is
with an adult for six to nine hours per day, Monday through
Friday, and sometimes weekends, some of the ideas and
attitudes of the sitter are being passed on to the child. Other
than occasional exceptions the Blackwoman should stay with
her own child. This is not saying that a qualified trusted
baby-sitter should not be employed, but to take an 8-week
old baby to a day care center and leave it there until it’s
school age is a mistake. The extended family on both sides
should take up the job of keeping the child, and they too
should be given explicit instructions about what to do or not
do and what to say or not to say in order to support the
parents’ ideas of child raising.
The Blackchild may also hear negative talk about the
Black father from the grandparents on the mother’s side, or
from the mother’s new man. Often arguments occur about
the child’s father between the mother and her new man. All
kinds of derogatory remarks may be made by the new man if
he is jealous of the biological father. Sometimes the mother
herself will make the comments to try to convince her new
man that she has no remaining feelings for the child’s father.
This is wrong and it confuses the child. Some children
defend the absent parent while others will agree with the
charges. Thus, the Blackman is not always unfeeling when
he does not maintain a flourishing relationship with his child
by an estranged mate. He continues to look for peace -
elsewhere. He may become single focused on trying to make
a new home for himself some place else. He is by nature
driven to mate.
The Blackman has the added pain of the Blackmother
refusing to allow him to discipline the child or have a say in
his activities. She claims that she is the mother and the child will do as she says. The Black father must insist on taking and active part, when possible, of raising the Black child. Certainly there are cases when the father’s presence is emotionally unhealthy for the child so separation must prevail. However, this decision should not be made based on money - dollars - cents. The Blackwoman is under the
102
misplaced notion that if the Blackman does not contribute
financially to the child that he can have no say-so in the
child’s rearing, or make any decisions conceming the child,
and in some cases she even refuses to let him see the child.
While it is certainly true that the Blackman should help to
take care of the material needs of his children, mere money
alone should not be the total measure as to whether or not he
can be involved in his child’s life. Black children are not for
sale between the parents and their emotional care should not
be based on who spends the most or pays the most for the
child. There are situations where the Blackman cannot
provide for himself or anyone else. The Blackwoman
charges him for being in the condition he is in and will
refuse his participation in the child’s upbringing based on
financial child support. It has been proven that money alone
is not sufficient to raise a well adjusted child. Their
emotional needs and mental stability must be met by both the
mother and father. Whomever is best qualified and suited to
contribute financially to the child should do so, whether it be
the mother, the father or both. The child needs both parents
regardless of how the parents may feel about it. The children
should not suffer because the parents do not get along as
husband and wife or lovers. A Black mother needs all of the
sincere input she can muster to help her raise her sons and
daughters. She is not qualified to do this alone. She has too
many emotional problems herself. She and the children need
a man. Daily. To help to support and steady them both. This
kind of needed assistance from the Blackman has nothing to
do with money. Needless to say, the Blackman’s
responsibility to his children is a real one and it is a
responsibility that should be accepted and respected. The
U.S. Judicial System and Courts should have nothing to do
with it. It is not their business or authority.
In the rearing of Black children the Black mother should
screen all T.V. shows, Cable, movies and social activities
before allowing the child to see or participate in them. The
values and judgements formed by children from external
sources play a major part in how the child will form
opinions. The Black mother must devise her own
entertaining activities whenever possible. Home games, arts
and crafts, field trips, family outings, story time, religious
training, chores, biking, cooking, picnics, the beach,
103
amusement parks, etc. are just a few social activities that
children can participate in - of course, they all require the
accompaniment of an adult. There is no end to the list of
interactive and entertaining socializations. But the
Blackmother must‘ join in herself and not leave it to the
creativity of others to amuse and teach her child. And it is
senseless to try to give a child each and every thing they
point at. Certainly not just to amuse it. She will often treat
the child or children as if they are an interruption in her life
instead of the reason for it. Raising the nation is the first
responsibility of the Blackwoman (after caring for her man).
If Blacks want better children there must be better mothers
who are genuinely interested in raising children and
concerned about the outcome of her child rearing tactics.
Another area of insensitivity the Blackwoman practices is
that she is too lax and careless with the child’s safety when
she has another man other than the child’s father spending
the night with her. Blackwomen become so engrossed in
their social experiences with whomever her man is at the
moment that she does not place enough priority on privacy.
Privacy to ensure that the child does not ever hear her having
intimacies with her man. Single Blackwomen may have
many men over the course of their children’s lives during 18
years. Since the Blackwoman is not sensible enough to make
and settle down to a good choice, she is periodically
speculating and becoming involved with new men. Her
affairs have a definite pattern of beginning, middle and end.
She becomes familiar with the schedule and is able to predict
the longevity of a relationship by the age of 30. She learns to
function and enjoy each stage and will actually look forward
to them - the opening and the closing. Her routine does not
change. She believes that her program is right and that if she
holds on to it eventually she will find the right man. Her
problem, as she sees it, is that she just keeps getting with the .
wrong men. Her hunt for the right man can encompass 20,*
30 or 40 years. She does not realize that at the end of every
failed relationship that she is possibly guilty of the same
behavior that destroyed the previous one. Her blindness
makes her see things that are not really there. She is so
desperate and so headstrong she persists in her same game
plan seeking one man after another to satisfy ea ee
demands. :
104
If she finally gets to the one she claims she really wants
but abuses him so much that he doesn’t want her, she will
institute several processes to prevent this from happening. At
least to prolong the inevitable and give her some secure
leverage against the man. As a last resort she will get
pregnant. Every Blackwoman knows that no matter what the
future brings, if she has a baby by a man she will be
included in his life some kind of a way for at least about 20
years. In this position she feels her benefits of connection to
the man outweigh the fact that the man doesn’t want her and
that she tricked him into being forced to deal with her. She
believes the baby gives her a right to contact him at anytime,
have mutually concerned discussions, force him to deliver
money to her, consult him in family emergencies concerning
the child (which she sometimes makes up), and will require
him to have contact with her on a routine basis if she can
arrange it. On one side she dotes on the child to impress the
father and on the other hand if the child does not provide her
with any of the aforementioned amenities with the father, she
may lose interest in it. This is a very dangerous rectangle for
the child. It can come to represent its low down dog of a
father, or be blamed for broken career dreams. In either
case, the innocent baby suffers since to the Blackwoman it
can come to represent a failure. The failure of a relationship
and the failure of a plan - one she is stuck with.
Sometimes Blackwomen decide they have finally birthed
the golden child they have prayed for all their lives.
Hallelujah. They trade wifedom for motherhood. The baby
becomes the center of her life. She neglects the father, the
house and herself in order to worship the baby. This is not
the way it should be. The baby is a physical manifested
result of the union between the man and the woman, and
therefore the baby is third - not first. The Blackwoman will
treat the Blackman as if he had no part in creating the baby,
and will direct her every waking moment to caring for the
baby and ignoring the man. This is wrong. The Blackman
should not be bumped out of his rightful place as the most
important entity in the home just because he reproduces
himself via his woman. This does not mean that the Black
baby should be devalued or mistreated but the Blackman is
first. His needs must be attended to in such as way as not to
make him feel that he must come in second to his own
105
offspring. A newborn baby is not God and should not be
worshipped. It has its place and priority but it does not have
superiority over the man who made it. The Blackman must
recognize this practice and correct it as soon as possible. The Blackwoman should also not be allowed to bring the
baby into the bedroom and keep it there for month after
month. The Blackwoman must be introduced to a new
household organizational schedule after she births a child. If
this is not done she becomes confused and will consider the
Blackman’s presence an interruption between her and her
new toy. The one that he implanted in her womb while
making her feel good.
If the Blackman has children by another woman from a
previous relationship the Blackwoman does not like it and
may not accept the child as the sister or brother of the one
she has. She may do everything she can to keep her child
from even knowing that other children exist who have the
same father. She bases this on her warped ideas of what she
believes her child’s family structure should be like. She may
insist that “her” child have expensive toys and clothes and
gadgets galore, and if the Blackman pays childsupport to
what is wrongly labeled as his “outside child”, she increases
her demands to make sure that “hers” is well taken care of -
first.
She discounts the desire of the Blackman to have all of
his seed know and love each other. He is often forced to live
a double life because if he brings up his “outside child” at
home his live-in Blackwoman will raise hell. She may
selfishly think only of herself and will try to prevent any of
her friends from knowing that her man has other children.
She and her family may not include his “outside child” in
family gatherings or holiday activities. If she must confront
or accept the child she may slyly ask questions to learn about
the mother, or to find out how much time her man actually.
spends with it. She refers to the child she birthed as “mine’
and to the other child as “his” - this is wrong, they are all
shisk:
Blackwomen are also famous for not trusting each other
with each other’s children if they had them by the same man.
They think, because of what is in their own hearts, that the
other woman may mistreat her child. All of this is ignorance because children are always elated to find out about or meet
106
their other sisters and brothers. Some Black children are
deprived of this right for many years, sometimes until
adulthood. Whether or not the children should know each
other should be discussed in terms of the development of the
children - not the whim of the adults. Sometimes separation
is the only way it can be, but the Blackman should have the
final say-so on his children. And the Blackwoman should do
her part to form the kind of nation that he chooses for his
offspring.
Until the Blackwoman accepts her appointed duty as
mother and wife Blacks will continue to see the destruction
of the Black family. There is no magic about how a nation
survives to leave a legacy of a glorious past. There are
principles that govern the outcome of any given set of
circumstances. By abandoning the principles of a civilized
Black society the Blackwoman has instead absorbed a set of
mores that help destroy Black people. She is waiting for
something external to happen in order to change herself
internally. To change the way she thinks. The way she
thinks about her man and her children and any other children
he sires. Few children are planned, they are only a byproduct of sexual intercourse.
It is impossible for a Blackwoman to raise a Black male
child who is confident and secure if during his lifetime all he
hears from his mother is derogatory remarks about
Blackmen. He is usually attached to his mother and she often
treats him as if he is deaf. She talks to her friends and family
and does not realize the male child may be paying rapt
attention to her every word and action. She does not have a
special set of guidelines she uses to raise her boy child. The
most she knows about the development of a Black boy is to
make sure that he develops physically, usually sportswise,
so he can gain the muscle strength and masculinity he will
need as a man. She is used to changing with the times and
therefore has no sense of steady direction by which to steer
the Black boy. Often she makes the boy child hang out with
she and her women friends. She knows little about how to
make a man so the boy is overly exposed to the feminine
side of life. The Blackwoman has a very special love for her
male baby. Her boy remains her prize. She may also change
clothes in front of the boy, bathe or walk around halfdressed. She will also allow him to sleep in the same bed
107
with her for an inordinate length of time up to several years
old. She says she doesn’t see anything wrong with this type
of behavior. After all, she says, “I’m his mother.” When he
is born she lays him on her stomach or chest and lets him
sleep there. It is a bonding process. After he is weaned
sometimes she continues to let him sleep on top of her or
across her lap. While this is not a questionable practice of a
mother, it is not always a good idea for a male baby because
he becomes too accustomed to the scent of his mother’s
body, including her vagina. During this stage she may also
be kissing him in the mouth or sucking his lips instead of
kissing him on the cheeks or forehead. She also thinks that
this practice is okay. She’s his mother. The baby is not
mentally developed enough to understand that his mother is
prohibited to him sexually. He may not even be able to
understand or identify it as a sexual attraction since the
sensation of being close to his mother’s body has always
been pleasurable to him. It is also pleasurable to the mother,
just as nursing is. The Blackmother is not intentionally
participating in unhealthy behavior with her baby son, she
just doesn’t know any better. The mother has a special
relationship with her son. This is not to say that the daughter
is estranged from her or that the baby girl is less adored. But
the Black baby/boy represents the only Black male that the
Blackwoman can execute any control over and she may try
to wean him of all ideas, notions and attitudes she resents in
the adult Black male. In effect she tries to brainwash him
against the natural traits of his nature. She may preach to him
from a very young age that she does not want him to turn out
like his father. The confused values and ideas the
Blackwoman stores are not limited to the Black girl. She
cannot successfully raise a Black male child without a
Blackman. She does not have it in her. She barely knows
how to teach or train the Black female child, and she knows,
absolutely nothing about how to be a man to a woman, or a woman to a man.
Unfortunately, she will also use her children as a way to
get back at the Blackman or punish him. She will refuse to
allow the Black father to have access to the child based on
the adult problems she and the father are having. The
children should not suffer because of the disagreements
between the parents. She would rather the child not have a
108
father figure, or be shifted from one man friend to the next
rather than allow the Black father to raise his own child.
Unless the Black father voluntarily gives up his rights as a
father for the peace and benefit of the child, the mother
should promote the relationship.
And no, it is not enough for the Blackwoman to just say
she “wants” the Blackman. She must also be in agreement
with him about his goals, his lifestyle, his home life and
how he wants to raise his children. She must believe in him
and have confidence that he can provide and protect her. She
claims that she starts out believing and giving the man the
benefit of the doubt but that he always messes up. She does
not understand that her beneficence in giving him the benefit
of the doubt is not good because there is no benefit in doubt.
If she doubts him the doubt will grow until decay sets in.
Black people in America have demonstrated that it is
impossible for them to unite as a group and agree on a
common goal, however, unity remains the most powerful
tool on earth to change the condition of something or
someone. The practice of unity must begin in the home of
the Blackwoman and it is there where she must set the
example for the new nation. The Blackwoman is the vehicle
of the diseased ideas that permeate the minds of Black youth.
She allowed destructive suggestions to invade her children
and did not replace them with better values. She cannot
properly teach her children until she has been properly taught
herself. Motherhood skills are not automatic. The mother’s
love connection to the cub is automatic but that feeling is just
the basis for inspiration to do the other work necessary to
raise the child. The Blackwoman must have a new set of
instructions and mothering techniques that will produce a
new Black child. It may take up to 50 years just to retrain the
Blackwoman to respect the Blackman. It is the Blackwoman
who must institute this change and it is a change that must be
made in the cradle and one she must learn to practice.
If the Blackwoman chooses fancy clothes and jobs over
saving her man, children and home, the American
Government cannot be charged with inflicting genocide on
Black people, she herself will be guilty of suicide and
murder. She destroys herself and kills off her nation as a
whole. Graveyards and incinerators are filled with the fruit
of her womb and she is not concerned. She believes that
109
there is not enough room on earth for her child, and she
believes she will not be able to afford to raise it, and she
believes that birth control is the key to her well-being, and
future. She assents to abortion. She does not recognize her
power. She practices selective breeding because she alone
decides which Blackchild will be born and which one will
not. The statistics she reads about Black teenage pregnancy
convince her that something must be done about the Black
birth rate. Something has been done and if it were not for the
natural drive of nature in young, Black, unprepared mothers,
the population numbers of the Black nation in America
would be moving towards near extinction. These young
girls, as undesired as they may be, are birthing the Black
nation of tomorrow. Against practically everyone’s wishes.
But Black babies are being born. And they need the guidance
of Black fathers. Older Blackmen must teach and train the
young Blackmen about how to be proper fathers and guides.
The Blackwoman does not know that every Blackman
that exists wants to carry on his seed. He wants to reproduce
himself and continue his blood line. Many Blackwomen
defer having children until they accomplish educational
goals, career status, travel, etc. Oftentimes the last thing they
want is the responsibility of a baby. So it becomes easier for
the Blackman, who knows about this idea, to accept that he
too does not want children. And of course there are strident
financial considerations; doctors, pediatricians, hospital
bills, baby furniture, clothes, diapers, food, milk, medicine
and so forth. The Blackwoman is the ultimate consumer and
whenever possible will purchase the most expensive items as
a way to show her love for the child. She chooses expensive
shows of opulence to impress her friends and to make sure
the Blackman financially does his part for the child. They
can be a tremendous economic strain on the Blackman and
his family. He knows that the strain will be great because hex
is aware of the Blackwoman’s unhealthy desire for material
things. It is less trouble for him to agree that he doesn’t want
any children either. It is impossible for a Blackman not to
want sons and daughters from his own loins. Every creature
desires to reproduce itself.
Consequently the Blackwoman must sacrifice her
dashing well planned American future for the honor of
reviving the Black nation. She must get in order, the order
110
that the Blackwoman was in to produce all the other great
and successful Black nations. She cannot control the
Blackman and be successful. She cannot yet comprehend
that what she is battling in the Blackman is his very nature -
which cannot be grafted out. It is his very nature to accept
certain things and reject others. To do certain things no
matter what the cost.
The Blackman in America is the only male on earth,
including every continent, who is disrespected by the
women in his nation. This situation does not exist anyplace
else among the billions of people inhabiting our planet except
her in America. The other Blackmen, the yellowmen, the
redmen, the brownmen and the whitemen are all honored
and respected in their respective nations. All other women
recognize and accept the man as the authority, the ruler and
the leader. Only here, only in the Black nation, scattered
throughout the United States, is the man neglected. This is
not a natural situation. Women from other countries do not
collectively band together to destroy their men. They are in
accord with the natural order of the universe. Man first, then
woman. This is not to say that the woman does not have
rights of equality within her domain, or any other domain
that her man chooses to award her with. No matter how
much education, money (dowry), national or local prestige
other women have, they do not try to take over and rule their
men.
If the Blackwoman, in all of her infinite wisdom, is so
competent, then why are there two generations of Black drug
addicts, homosexuals, lesbians, paranoid schizophrenics and
murderers? Each of these pitiful Blackmen and
Blackwomen, or Black youth, as the case may be, were born
of a Blackwoman. If the Blackwoman would give as much
attention to raising her children as she gives to her wardrobe,
hair and nails, we would not have the self-destructing youth
seen today. It is the mother who must teach and train the
child. It is a job. And it is a job not without accountability.
The Blackwoman’s greatest dream is to have the
Blackman be a father to her babies. She wants him to love
them and spend time with them. And she wants him to insist
on being a father to his child. She wants him to claim the
seed he implanted in her womb.
ABOUT CHILD SUPPORT
Today’s laws for enforcing child support payments are
very strenuous. The courts are arresting fathers who fall
behind in their contributions. Many Blackmen claim that they
do not like to pay child support because their child’s mother does not use the money to take care of the child, and instead
uses the weekly or monthly payments from the father to
purchase clothing or other frivolous articles that are in no
way directed towards the upkeep of the child. This is not a
difficult problem to rectify. When the Blackman is convinced
that the child is not receiving the benefit of his financial
contributions it is better for him to take an active interest in
and learn how to shop for his child or children so that he can
make purchases himself. This obviously requires the
estranged Black father to be actively involved in a parentchild relationship during which time he is able to observe the
child’s clothing, medical or toy needs. Shopping trips with a
child are a favorite activity and create an outing during which
lunch can be included, perhaps a movie or window
shopping. The Black mother will not like an arrangement
where she does not get her hands on the money but as long
as the father is doing his part to help provide for the child
she will not be able to refuse the assistance or reject this
form of subsidy. Under no circumstances should the child
suffer because the Black father believes that his child is not
benefitting from his child support payments. The Black
mother will often exaggerate the cost of items she claims the
child needs so that the father will have to come up with
unusual sums of money. As already mentioned, the
American judicial system has no business having to force a
Black father to take care of his own children. The main way
he is willing to do this is if he has an active role in the child’s
growth and development.
Chapter 11
HOW SHE DRESSES
The one area of life where the Blackwoman acknowledges her complete unity of idea with other Blackwomen is in the category of clothing. Fashion
designers like Louis Voutton, Liz Claiborne, GUCCI,
Calvin Klein, and Polo, Laurent and Lauren have proven
they can impress Blackwomen to agree that clothes indeed
make the woman - and Blackwomen will pay any price to
own and wear the latest styles. The more expensive the
garment or accessory, the more Blackwomen will purchase
it. Clothing becomes a status symbol and states she can
afford the latest trendy fashion. The fact that someone else is
setting her style of dress does not matter to the Blackwoman.
She eagerly awaits the latest styles to be unveiled so she can
commence to plan how she will acquire it. She wants
everyone to know she is up to date fashion-wise and can
afford to keep up.
The Blackwoman will borrow clothes from her friends to
go out on a special date with a Blackman to demonstrate her
multi-faceted wardrobe and prove she can dress richly. She
will run up charge accounts, borrow from the rent and make
any sacrifice she deems necessary to obtain a certain outfit
she believes she absolutely must own. When the style
changes she changes too. Her self-esteem is bolstered when
strangers compliment her on her outfit and tell her how fine
she looks. She may take literally hours to dress to perfect her
special “look.” She will stand poised in doorways, on street
corners, in the line at the bank, at the bus stop, on the
elevator, or in the mall hoping that a man or anyone else will
notice how finely dressed she is. Maintaining her wardrobe
is at the top of her list of priorities. She must have clothing,
a few drop-dead pieces, then food and shelter. She may even
brag to her friends about how much she paid for a certain
garment. She knows little about the mark-up on designer
clothing and cares less that it is sometimes 500 to 5000%. It
rarely occurs to her to design and make her own clothes. She
considers making her own clothes as tacky, and any other
woman who shows she is attempting to make her own
clothes is laughed at and made to feel out of step with the
times. However, since the clothes are so important to her she
should make an effort to make some of her garments herself.
Purchasing fine garments made by white designers is
another major way that huge amounts of money leaves the
Black communities. Since poor Blacks are more concerned
with stylish clothes than poor whites, it would be wise for
Blacks to establish their own clothing factories and buy from
each other. Some Blackwomen adorn the tightest clothing they can
find. Black women think that skintight clothes will get them
the most attention from men. Tight clothes are restricting,
uncomfortable and bind, but it does not matter to the
Blackwoman how much she has to endure. Any amount of
pain is worth suffering if it succeeds in attracting the
attention of the right man, or many men. Some wear low cut
dresses to show their breasts, or wear no bra at all to show
their breast and the imprint of their nipples. All of this is
designed to appear sexy. She may wear an extra short micro
mini skirt and sit in a wide legged way to entice any men
who are looking on. She wears see-through clothing, thin
dresses without a slip or any other kind of alluring outfit
because she is trying to show her body form in a sexy way
to show men what she has. Sadly, the Blackwoman is
convinced that the only quality she has to offer is her body
and feminine wiles. She places her sexual value above all
others. she believes that physical attraction is the only thing
she has going for her as a female. If a man whistles or
makes lewd remarks at her she acts like she is appalled yet
she dresses in such a way as to demand attention and some
kind of reaction from men. While she claims she does not
want to be desired just for her body, she does everything she
can to keep it in the forefront. She considers the Blackman
as an animal that reacts the most strongly to sexual
suggestion. She thinks that he is base, raunchy and easily
managed with sex. She does not think that the Blackman has
enough sense to seek out self-respect, self-discipline,
cheerfulness, courteousness, cleanliness, and intelligence in
her. But when she presents herself as a sex object she can
only be seen in that light and treated accordingly. Sex
represents affection to her. It is practically all she knows,
about loving. When she attracts the wrong kind of fish she
doesn’t realize it’s because she is using the wrong kind of
bait. It is extremely difficult to convince a Blackwoman to
alter or adjust her revealing style of dress. She thinks that the
Blackman tells her to dress more civilized because he does
not want anyone else to look at her or want her. She
rationalizes that if she wants to keep her man on his toes she
must constantly prove to him that she is in demand by other
men. This is so he will know that he has a real prize in her.
By the Blackwoman reducing her standards to a
concentration of ways to attract the Blackman through sexual
innuendo in her style of dressing, he has succumbed to the
promises of that idea and does indeed appear to be impressed
with half-dressed Blackwomen. He has given up the idea of
meeting an attractive competent woman who knows how to
be a woman to a man. The Blackwoman’s style of dress can
set the tone of the initial approach of the Blackman. Often
she will sit or stand in a provocative way so as to entice the
Blackman to sneak of peek, or try to look under her dress,
or through her dress, or down her bosom or up her behind.
She may bend over of stoop in such a way as to provide a
clear shot of her buttocks or frontal pelvic area. The man
may think that he is indeed sneaking a peek at her and that
she is unaware. But the Blackwoman in her plotting to entice
the Blackman through sexual explicitly knows full well what
parts of her body can be seen from every angle. She checks
this out in her full length mirror before she leaves home. She
knows how she sits and how she stands. Blackwomen try
out every pose imaginable to find out which one shows the
greatest portion of the area they are trying to tease with. She
is never unaware of the affect her style of dress has on the
Blackman. She will also wear clothing that shows the
imprint of her underwear. She may wear brightly colored
print panties so they will show vividly through her slacks or
dress. This, of course, is done to draw attention to her
figure. While doing all this she pretends that she is unaware
of what is happening. So as she oozes around a room,
tossing her head and batting her eyes at the men in closest
proximity she enjoys the thrill of playing a high-tech game of
“ain’t I a lot of woman?” She may float about swishing her
hips from one end of the room to the other challenging all the
men present to vie for her attentions to see who can qualify
to take her home.
She will buy hot clothes or shoplift in order to have a
particular item she likes. Sometimes she goes out on a date
dressed to kill to impress a man with her prosperity. She
may drop hints about how much her outfit costs and she may
seduce a man to get him to buy her clothes or jewelry. After
she gets what she wants she may drop the man, or she may
115
spend a lot of time discussing clothes. The so-called
corporate image does not leave a lot of room for sexy
dressing but other Blackwomen who do not work in that type of environment have a lot of freedom about their kind of
dress. Whatever part of the Blackwoman’s body she
considers her best asset is the part she highlights. If she has
big legs she wears short dresses, if she has a full breast she
dons low cut tight tops, if she has a small waist she cinches
it even more, and if she has a well rounded behind she
accentuates it the best she can.
The Blackman needs to know that the way she dresses is
no accident, and all of her nakedness is a statement about her
self-confidence and self-esteem. The more naked she is in
public the less confidence and self-esteem she has. It is
possible to look at a Blackwoman and detect the kind of
desperation she is experiencing by the way she dresses. A
qualified Blackwoman does not have to show her body to
attract a man. She does not have to go naked to be
discovered and noticed. She has other visible traits and
attributes that make her appealing. She relies on her
uniqueness of personality and presence, her intelligence and
courteousness, her softness and friendliness. She does not
wear see-thru clothing to demonstrate her worth. This is not to say that Blackwomen should not have feminine sexy
clothing, but she should wear them only in private in the
presence of her own man to please him, and not expose her
body daily to the unbridled glances of the general public.
The Blackman has a trying time trying to get the
Blackwoman to cover her body in public because she thinks
that covering her body makes her look and feel like an old
lady, and reduces her chances of attracting a man. She
equates youth with tight and revealing clothing. She may set
a bad example for her own daughters by dressing them in
mature too-grown outfits because she thinks it’s cute. She.
raises her daughters to think that it is okay to wear halter
tops, short shorts, tops with the back out, skirts with the
thighs showing, etc. She doesn’t realize that this gets the
young girls into the habit of showing their bodies in public,
basking in the special attention they get and providing them
with an opportunity to study the affect of their nakedness on
the opposite sex. This also sometimes gets them the unwanted attention of pedophiles or other perverts waiting to
116
prey on young girls. The Blackwoman should dress her
small daughters in a more civil fashion and they will grow
up to be more modest.
If the Blackman wants to have daughters who reach
teenagehood under control, with high standards of
intelligence and modesty he must take an active part in the
kind of clothes that she wears as a small child. He should
give the Blackwoman directions regarding the types of
clothing she allows the Black girl child to wear. If she gets
used to being naked as a little girl she will grow up with that
idea and pursue it into adulthood. The man must monitor the
wardrobe of all the females in his house. He can use his own
instincts to determine what is proper and what is not. The
Black mother who upholds her daughters in going nude in
the public in the name of being in style is not a good mother
and is not setting a good example. There was a time when
only prostitutes dressed in certain kinds of clothes and their
style of dress bespoke their profession, but today so many
Blackwomen dress like prostitutes it is practically impossible
to detect who is who. The Blackwoman’s boldness in
strolling naked among the public bespeaks of her low
morals, indecent ideas and hatred and low value for herself.
The Blackwoman’s facial cosmetic make-up is another
area she needs correction. She spends a lot of money on face
powder, foundation, lipstick, blush, eye shadow, eyebrow
pencil and eye liner so she can “make-up” her face. She is
not satisfied with the one she has naturally. Some
Blackwomen will not stick their head out of the door unless
their faces are “made-up.” The fact that the Blackman does
not like her in all this war paint does not matter to her. She
thinks it makes her look better. If the man advises her to take
off a little of it, or to wash her face completely she laments:
“he just wants me to look bad so nobody else will want me,”
because she is so insecure about her position in his life. She
believes to her heart that he is only interested in her because
she is so fine, has a fine shape and dresses sharp. It is
difficult for the Blackman to convince her that all those
greasy layers of artificial color make her look like Ronald
McDonald or some other clown. She fixes her face as if she
is going on stage everyday. If the weather is extremely hot
she still tries to wear make-up that melts from the heat and
gets smeared on her collar, clothes and sometimes on the
117
sleeve or shoulder of her man. She also may “make-up” the
rest of her body too. She may wear a padded bra, artificial
eyelashes, fake nails, a long flowing hairweave, spike heels
to appear taller and a girdle or waist cincher. If and when she
takes off all these extra parts she looks like a completely
different person. She adds all of these attachments because
she thinks they make her look good and special. These
various appliances are expensive to maintain and often
uncomfortable and tedious to apply, but she wears them all
because she thinks it will make her more appealing to catch a
man. Few Blackwomen look good with big blood-red
lipstick on, or big round patches of rouge on their cheeks, or
a double coat of liquid make-up that’s a totally different color
from her neck and ears. All of her rainbow colored
eyeshadow makes her look like a technicolor monster, but
through some stretch of the imagination she thinks it looks
good. More amazing is that she thinks that make-up makes
her look natural. She is unwilling to accept herself as God
designed her. The fancier the outfit or the occasion the more
make-up she adorns. She is seeking a flawless complexion,
perfectly formed body, a crowning glory of hair and the
stylishness of a fashion model. She is once again seeking the
wrong things in the wrong places. Her make-up is like a
shield, a barrier that she hides behind and one that keeps a
wall between her real self and the Blackman.
Blackwomen who wear pants or slacks a lot have a
tendency to take on masculine mannerisms. They may stand
differently, cross their legs and walk more like a man. The
same observations are noted when Blackwomen wear men
type coats, hats, shoes and jackets. While slacks are
admittedly comfortable in summer, and perhaps warmer in
winter, they do pose a problem for selected Blackwomen
who cannot handle wearing men fashioned clothing. Certain
garments are identifiable with certain ideas and genders.
Masculine type hairstyles have the same effect. :
The workplace can also pose clothing problems for the
Blackwoman. Positions like police, electricians, plumbers,
contractors, security guards, taxi drivers, carpenters, mechanics, truck drivers and so forth all require that the worker function in a more masculine stance. These jobs are traditionally held by men and in order to conform to the duties and qualify to-do the work a certain attitude, uniform,
118
weapon, weight, or appearance is required. A change in
femininity can be noticed just as when a man takes a job
more prevalent to women than men. It is nearly impossible
for a Blackwoman to work daily in the above cited positions
and wear those uniforms and not take on a more masculine
type behavior. A change in language, including cursing, is
included.
The Blackman must monitor the vocational and
occupational interests of the Blackwoman so she does not
get herself into a work situation that she cannot handle, and
one that will cause her personality conflict at home when she
starts to imagine she can compete with her man.
Personalities are changed by adopting new ideas that grow
and take precedence over the previous ideas. The Blackman
should visit the Blackwoman’s job periodically to see what
the atmosphere is like, and to see how she behaves and how
her co-workers relate to her. If he determines that the job is
the problem he is dealing with at home, he should take her
out of there. She must have appropriate work to suit her
home life which is more important.
Some Blackwomen have it in their mind that their
buttocks (hips - butt - behind) is the focal point of her
attractiveness. She dresses to accentuate the cheeks of her
hindparts, and they are exposed to what she believes to be
their best advantage to afford the best view. Thus the
Blackman can walk down any street in America and see all
shapes of Blackwomen stuffed into tight jeans, tight skirts
and dresses, splits up the back, splits up the front and the
side. She wears all of this to show her rear end. At an early
age she learns to shake her behind, make it wiggle or roll
very unobtrusively. Barely noticeable to everyone other than
the man she has it aimed at. She learns to walk in such a way
as to make her behind shake or to twist it in such a way as to
get attention. She is flattered when a man whistles at her or
yells out remarks referring to her hips, their size or shape.
If the Blackwoman is immodestly dressed when the
Blackman meets her but he sees some potential in her to be
his woman, he should make it plain up front that he is not
impressed with her lewd style of dress and would prefer her
to tone it down a bit and put on some regular clothes. He
should tell her as soon as possible, not five or ten dates later
when she has already decided that she is impressing him
119
with her scantily clad body. He can tell her to go home and
put some clothes on. This will blow her mind because she is
not used to the Blackman informing her that he is conscious
of her other values other than the reaction she causes below
his belt. If she wants him she will conform.
Married Blackwomen and those with children should not
appear in public in shorts, mini-skirts or revealing clothes. It
is a disrespect to herself, to her man and to Black
motherhood. These types of garments should be reserved for
the home - in the house, if they must be worn at all. She
should also refrain from dressing this way in front of her
man’s male company/friends. The Blackman must insist on
this. It is another way to clean up the Blackwoman and
prevent her from joining in Western civilization styles. The
Blackwoman who dresses in revealing clothes puts the
Blackman’s life on the line every time she goes out with
him, because if another Blackman or whiteman makes
improper advances or makes disrespectful comments to her,
the Blackman is bound by the code of manhood to defend
her honor - even if she dishonors herself. If he is out with
her he is responsible for her. A properly dressed
Blackwoman is a protection to her man and family. She must
be inspected. The man should be firm but gentle in enforcing
these rules of dress. Firm by not wavering on his
requirements and gentle in his insistence she comply with his
wishes if she wants to be his woman. She will come at him
in different ways to test his sincerity and seriousness. He
must maintain consistency so she can depend on him. He
may make a few mistakes in moving into his new role as
controller. So will she. She must know that the Blackman
has certain requirements and standards.she must live up to if
she wants him to be her man and wants to be accepted by
him. Rarely is there a civilized refined Blackman who
disagrees with a Blackwoman who covers her body. The
Blackwoman currently has thrown her intelligence in the
garbage can and their loose classless behavior and style of
dress contributes to the low ideals of the Blackman - he has nothing to strive for and no visible rules of protocol he must adhere to in her presence.
If every time the Blackman looks at the Blackwoman the only reaction he has is one of lustful desire he grows to agree that sex is her total worth. Her alluring style of-dress
120
leaves little space for other considerations of her value. She
is to blame for this and has certain outfits she refers to as her
“catch” clothes. These are outfits specifically matched to
cause a desirous reaction from men. Blackwomen who use
their clothes as tools to attract attention from Blackmen often
wind up actually attracting a man they are interested in. They
report to their friends the next day that they “caught” which
means they landed a man’s interest in them. Fishermen say
that the kind of fish you catch depends on the kind of bait
you use. If the bait is tainted the fish attracted are unpalatable
or poisonous. None of this is to say the the Blackwoman
should not enjoy her wardrobe or respectable stylish clothes.
But the clothes should not be worn to seduce or to prove the
value and worth of the wearer. A well dressed and
accessorized Blackwoman is a very beautiful admirable
sight.
The garments should be attractive, feminine, durable and
above all useful. Wearing high heeled shoes that cause
excruciating pain, corns on her toes or swollen ankles are
not considered useful shoes - especially since they are just
worn to “match” a certain outfit. Low cut blouses and
sweaters designed to show cleavage - especially in winter are
not useful. Tops that keep coming apart or skirts that keep
riding up or splits that won’t stay closed are not useful
clothes. When the Blackman sees the Blackwoman wearing
an outfit she is visibly uncomfortable in he should request
that she change into something more comfortable and more
suitable for a respectful woman. If she is dealing in a circle
where fine clothes are the prerequisite for acceptance she
should be encouraged to get out of it.
Chapter 12
HER RELIGION
This is a sticky topic and one that must be approached
with great care. No matter what the affiliation, the
Blackwoman is dedicated to her religion (if she has one).
She will honor and respect her church as if God himself
resides there. She donates or tithes a lot of her salary and
personal funds to her church. She joins church clubs,
choirs, boards and groups and incorporates them into her
life. She works tirelessly for causes related to her house of
worship. If she attends church regularly the Blackman may
notice that some of the outfits she wears to church are
inappropriate, too tight, too short or too low cut. Her church
is another place she goes to see who can dress the best.
While the Blackman does not approve of the outfits she
wears to church he is usually not in a position to protest
effectively. It is also common knowledge that the church is
not immune to scandal and many of the membership have
clandestine illicit relationships going on among the so-called
holy. There is always a lot of gossip going around about
who did what to whom, or who caught who with whom or
who’s sneaking around behind another spouses back. The
Blackman quickly loses interest in going to church because
his street experience allows him to cut through the religious
rap and recognize the money game that’s often going on.
He sometimes recognizes the preacher as a bible-toting
holy rolling pimp of sorts who milks the female members
out of big dough. The hypocrisy and fakery repels him. The
Blackwoman respects her pastor as her perceived link to
God Almighty and she serves him, raises money for him,
cooks for him and follows his instructions some times to the
letter. She often treats her minister like she ought to treat her
man. It is trying for the Blackman to watch his woman work
so diligently for another Blackman when he can’t get any
cooperation from her at home.
If the Blackman does not attend church as regularly as
the Blackwoman or refuses to go at all, the Blackwoman
tends to feel sorry for him and believes that his salvation is at
stake. She thinks that if he went to church more his luck
might improve. There are always more Blackwomen in
church than Blackmen. This is not because Blackwomen are
trying harder to get to glory, but because the Blackman is nat
prone to sit up and listen for hours to another Blackman tell
him how to run his life. He does not like it when his woman confesses their private affairs to the minister and holds his decisions and recommendations more dear than his. Blackwomen obey their pastors because his instructions do not require her to have to deal with him in follow-up. She has options and the pastor appreciates any efforts she makes to aid him in his program. She doesn’t have to live with him
122
daily so her reverence is reserved for Sunday, or choir
rehearsal or usher board meeting. The Blackwoman views
church as a permissible place to let her hair down and
confess her sins publicly. She believes that her private
relationship with God is separate from everything else she
does and she claims to turn to God to help her problems with
the Blackman. She sincerely says: “I put it in the hands of
the Lord.” Often she belongs to a quiet dignified religion that
does not require an outcry.
Another shocker is when the Blackwoman gets in church
and works herself into a frenzy commonly called “shouting.”
This is a process during which she voluntarily loses control
of her bodily limbs, screams, cries loudly and becomes
nearly hysterical due to being overcome with religious
worship. She calls it “feeling the spirit.” She flings her
arms, throws up her dress and kicks her legs wildly while
tossing her head from side to side. She is not embarrassed
about this kind of public performance and the other
Blackwomen there feel good about the fact that she got
“happy.” Many time male ushers rush to her side and
physically carry her from the pew because she is disruptive
and possibly dangerous to other members sitting near who
may get hit or kicked while she is out of her head. She has
this fit to let off her frustration in a place where this kind of
tantrum is permitted based on religion. It has been said that
the “shouting” phenomena is a frenzy during which the
person actually ends up with a feeling similar to an orgasm.
The Blackman is embarrassed about the whole ordeal and
does not believe that God requires the Blackwoman to have
an epileptic type seizure to profess her belief. And he is
right. It’s all a game.
The Blackwoman will cling to her Bible for comfort and
read it in the Blackman’s presence. She may sit around the
house humming spirituals, singing aloud appealing to God
for mercy in her affairs. It gives her a feeling of calm. Of
course she dismisses the parts in the Bible that refer to what
her role should be as a woman. She picks and chooses
which parts of the Bible she will believe and reduces the rest
to old time information that doesn’t apply today. She ignores
these parts and decides for herself what God wants her to be
and do. She believes that God or Jesus said such-in-such
during the olden days which do not apply to modern times.
123
She believes herself to be very righteous due to attending
and being involved in the church. She feels that if she can be
busy with other activities during the week that she can at
least give one day to God - and attend church services. She
should give all of her days to God, not just Sunday, and she
should discuss her concepts of God and her practice of
religion with her man. She has a continuing need for
approval by her church members and often counts on them
for her self-esteem. Her self-esteem is closely related to the
perception of esteem by her peers and nameless others which
she perpetually tries to attain. On the other hand the
Blackman is considered a misfit because he rejects the role
demands placed on him by others. He is his own man. If he
does things in a way that is contrary to the way suggested by
common opinion he is called wrong. If he persists in his
own ideas and refuses to change them he is called stubborn.
He is known to execute his will in the face of countless
odds.
The Blackwoman, not understanding the purpose of
religion, goes to church to worship a God of some sort who
is a member of the masculine entity. He is a man. He is built
like a man. He is made like a man, and is referred to as “He”
or “Him” or “His.” God, the supreme being, has always
been a man. His masculine gender has never been doubted
or tampered with. He has always been and always will be a
man. The Blackwoman accepts the actual fact that God is
indeed a male. She reads and hears about the thoughts and
wishes of God and is respectful to his words, professes to
love him, fears him and memorizes his instructions. She
periodically even tries to obey God and do what he says to
reach heaven (happiness) here and in the other life she
believes is waiting for her in glory after she dies.
She can honor the God/man in this way because she
knows that it is highly unlikely she will ever meet the
supreme God/man face to face, or have to answer his
questions, or be held personally accountable for her actions
under direct examination. The supreme being, the creator,
can be a man to her as long as the God/man does not live with her. It is simple for her to claim she wants to obey God because it is not her man she is talking about. If the
Blackwoman had to live with God, since he is a man also, she could not get along with him either. She does not
124
understand that her behavior towards a man will and does
not change, no matter which man it is. Since the Blackman is
in the image of the God/man she should also respect, honor
and obey him too. Her man may be the closest symbol she
ever meets who resembles the God. But she likes to think
that all of this is just a fluke of nature. The point that her
Blackmate is a man, and God is a man, does not phase her.
The similarity shoots right over her holy head.
It should be explained to her that the two major
differences between the Black/man and the God/man are
power and knowledge. She should be told that:
POWER is the ability to cause others to adjust their
behavior in conformance with the instructions given.
Power can be wielded multifarious ways to get the
desired result. Reduced to its lowest common
denominator power is simply strength. Proven real
or perceived by demonstration.
KNOWLEDGE is the acquaintance with facts, truths
and principles. Comprehension, judgement and
wisdom go with the territory. It is an absolute
knowing of information.
The object that prevents the Black/man from acquiring
the power and knowledge to be in line behind the God/man
is the Blackwoman. She is a wall between the Blackman and
his developing a certain measure of the kind of power and
knowledge it takes to rule, to rule the world and to rule her.
She does not obey him or tell him the truths that would allow
him to change her behavior - so he does not have power or
knowledge. She keeps him from attaining full knowledge
because she will not tell. She blocks him from attaining full
knowledge because she will not tell. She blocks him from
being acquainted with her true-self and doesn’t let him know
very much about what she knows or believes. She does not
assist him in his creations and is short on patience. If he tries
something and fails once, that’s it. And she never lets him
forget it.
Her lack of support of him in his multifaceted quests and
her denial of the moral approbation to execute his own ideas
keeps him from succeeding. He is like a man in a sinking
boat full of people with buckets and the only one bailing
water is him. If the boat sinks he will be charged with the
failure to preserve the occupant’s lives. If he succeeds in
125
saving them, he is told it was what he was supposed to do
anyway. He seemingly has white America holding him
down on one end and the Blackwoman putting him down on
the other. If he were not so strong and self-motivated he
would have been destroyed centuries ago.
While keeping the Blackman from getting to power and
knowledge, she does something else completely juxtaposed
to that position. She expects him to have the answer to all of
her problems. Often the Blackman will report to each other
about the Blackwoman and say: “she got too many
problems.” As soon as the Blackwoman is sure she has the
ear of the Blackman she starts to complain and drags out all
of her psychological hang-ups for him to sift through, solve
and make better. This is not a bad idea for her to do this
except that she usually has no intention of taking his advice.
She asks him anyway to tear apart his theories. Yet she
looks to him as a mystic who will decipher her problems of
adjustment and make it all better. She may be attracted to
Buddhism or witchcraft or even atheism trying to find her
own personal God. Sometimes the Blackwoman turns to her
Zodiac sign as religiously as she turns to her church. Zodiac
books, a familiar kind of numerology, based on the sun,
moon, stars, planets, and months, are sold every where and
purchased by those desiring to know the future. The
Blackwoman will pattern and temper her behavior sometimes
according to her daily zodiac reading. She chooses
numerology, mythology and tricknology before she will take
her daily instructions from her man. She likes to obey a
“thing” as opposed to obeying a live man. She wants to obey
and follow an entity that cannot monitor her or communicate
normally with words. She insists upon having some kind of
magic governing her life. She believes in a ridiculous
assortment of misinformation she receives or buys from
people whom she does not know. She moves to yoga,
crystals or meditation, seeking a God she can design ‘an
control. To know avail. In the rare cases when she does
listen to the Blackman, after he drags her to the answers to her problems, she looks up one day and decides that she did it all be herself. All alone. She develops amnesia about his input and guidance, claims that God showed her the way, and may decide she no longer needs the man. She may want to shake him off because she doesn’t want anyone present to
126
remind her of her lame past of failure and frustration. She
wants to impress the other people around her with her selfdirected, self-achieved success. The history of her botching
up every thing she tried before she got to her Blackman is
conveniently dismissed from memory. She does not want to
be beholden.
This is particularly true of a Blackwoman with mediocre
intelligence whose man helps her to get through school or
training and to get on their feet professionally or personally.
It may involved showing her how to establish credit, drive
or buy a car, dress appropriately or speak right. These are
special categories that the Blackwoman wants to believe she
accomplished alone from her own inspiration and
knowledge. Once on her feet and making a little money she
immediately computes how she can exist on her own without
having to put up with her man. He becomes instantly
dispensable. She is willing to dispense with the vessel that
rendered to her all her blessings. Earning a little money
makes the Blackwoman feel independent and free. She may
have no idea what kind of life she will live without the
Blackman, but her fantasies tell her that it can always be
better - if she is available. Almost the very second she
achieves her goals she decides she is superior to her man.
After that point, she may just tolerate him until she can
actually figure out the logistics of getting away. She prays to
God. Sadly, she believes that the God/man will support her
in fighting against the Black/man, who is God’s own kind -
another man. Because she equates the God/man with mind
boggling wondrous miracles she cannot see him in her own
Black/man. But he is there. He is only repressed. It is this
kind of reality that the Blackwoman finds hard to handle.
She finds this troublesome to accept because she does not
see herself as being worthy of associating with a being who
is in the image of God. A man. The Blackwoman’s gross
national product regarding religion is confusion. She has not
yet been able to conceptualize God. Some of them do not
instill a religion in their children and say they will let the
child, who is unqualified to make this decision, decide for
itself what kind of religion it wants to have. Children should
be taught the religion of their parents, and their parents
should have the same religion.
Chapter 13 EDUCATION AND CAREER
The so-called professional Blackwoman is a wonder to
behold. She loves her job and the public acclaim it affords
her. She is a workaholic when challenged by her boss to
complete certain tasks. She tries to make comrades of her coworkers and often confides in them about her home life and
will try to build her entire life around her job - if allowed to.
Her main focus is to achieve the highest possible title
available in her field and to make the most money doing so.
She also hopes to be considered the best dressed employee
ever. She will spend humongous sums of money on clothes
so she can look more prosperous than she is. Somewhere
along the line the Blackwoman adopted the foolish idea that
she should wear a different outfit to work everyday - of the
year if possible. She is so selfish and self centered she
believes that her co-workers count her outfits and by doing
so can tell what she has, so she puts forth a great effort to
make sure they think she has a ton of clothes.
While on her tip-top job she stays late for meetings,
volunteers for special assignments, hauls home a briefcase
full of papers every night, and will treat her boss (white or
Black) with extra charm if she thinks it will help her get
ahead in both title and salary. She is exceptionally proud of
her alma mater and prides herself on getting a full college
education that qualifies her for special jobs. She thinks it
makes her superior, and if her man happens not to have
attended college she will throw it up in his face whenever
she has a sophisticated talk with him about something he’s
not familiar with. She learned a lot of her nonsense about the
Blackwoman’s place from her formal education or should it.
be called mis-education? She is seen to adjust her values an
demeanor to fit it and get along on her job. All of the on-thejob principles that white Americans adhere to are accepted by
her and she tries to live up to them also. If her man tells her she is spending too much time on her job she may rebel and say he is just jealous of her career and doesn’t want her to get ahead and make more money than he does. She has the
same kind of irrational explanation for everything’ the
128
Blackman asks of her while she is working on her big-time
gig. She will come home bragging about her
accomplishments on the job or about her great boss and what
a fantastic man he is, or that she just spent such-n-such on a
present for her boss, or “my boss in taking me out to
dinner.” It matters not to her that her own family or man
needs her at home to fix dinner for them. She convinces the
Blackman that she can’t be stopped because she is on a roll
moving up in the world. A world that is not hers because her
world is one that should be rotating around the Black nation.
Unlike any other species the Black female rejects her natural
mate and offspring to cling to the culture of others in the
name of holding down a job. She reminds the Blackman of
his perceived financial shortcomings by saying “you know
we need the money.” If she gets a hard earned promotion
she boasts to everyone in earshot about how she pleased her
employer enough with her dedicated service to get promoted.
She doesn’t know that the Blackman doesn’t mind her
earning a high salary, it doesn’t really make him feel less of
a man and he doesn’t really feel a need to compete with her,
it’s just that she can’t handle it herself. Her feelings of guilt
are self-nurtured. She is the one who becomes
uncomfortable about how much money she earns especially
if it’s more than her man. If she shared her money with her
man and put it all in one pot she would not be so apt to feel
superior or to make him feel inferior. Nevertheless she
parades around claiming that she wishes she could find a
man who is not intimidated by her high salary and corporate
image. Her equation that money equals power in her
relationship with the Blackman is unfounded yet she thinks
money is the measure of who is in charge of making
decisions in the home. Of course this idea creates a lot of
problems for the Blackman in the home. The Blackman is
supposed to be the boss in his home and it has nothing to do
with who makes the most money. The Blackwoman belongs
to the Blackman and every thing she owns also belongs to
him. All ancient Black civilizations were set up in this way
because it is a system that allows the man to be in a more
powerful position with the added clout of the wealth of his
wives. If a Blackwoman nags the Blackman about not
making enough money or expounds daily about how he
should have more ambition, he will surely seek out another
129
mate who accepts him without consulting his wallet. The
Blackwoman mistakenly thinks that if she nags the
Blackman long enough or stays mad at him long enough, or
refuses his affections long enough, that it will make him give
in and submit to her ideas. Instead, it runs him away and he
is outside looking for peace of mind. This peace of mind
may come in the form of another woman, drugs, alcohol or
other than normal perversions - of which there are plenty.
When the Blackwoman is cross with the Blackman and
breaks his peace he is unable to function in his normal way.
If he is able to function it is because he has been forced to
develop an “I don't care” or “F-it” attitude that restores him
to calm. He develops this attitude because of the futility of
trying to get his points over to the Blackwoman who rejects
them. She wants him to suffer if she is displeased with him
in any way. She will withhold the peace until she is satisfied
he has been punished enough and has learned his lesson.
Well, not exactly his lesson, but her lesson. She fights in the
same way to defend her right to work, control “her own”
money and to be excused from womanly duties.
If she attends a party at work she often uses another
voice, laughs at jokes or incidents which are not funny to
Blacks, and is chummy with her co-workers. Although she
is not on the job to socialize or fraternize she becomes adept
at appearing to be interested in office jokes, sometimes off
color stories, and other kinds of conversations not fit for the
ears of a Blackwoman when told by strangers. On some jobs
the Blackwoman is still subject to be pinched, patted on the
behind, touched in a familiar way and fondled at will by her
“boss” or “bosses.”
The Blackwoman sometimes accepts this kind of
disrespectful action because she wants to keep her job and
thinks that if she does not go along with the touching and
patting that she will be fired. And she will in most cases»
Most of this goes on on several levels of employment. On
the more classy jobs many of them file law suits claiming
sexual harassment, but on more menial jobs Blackwomen do not know how to defend themselves. If the Blackman should get wind of a report the Blackwoman is being offended physically by her boss he should demand that she quit the job. No job is so important that the Blackwoman exchanges her dignity for a few dollars more.
130
Older Blackwomen are also subject to this kind of
behavior from their male bosses and feel they are defenseless
because they need the job. Blackmen should question their
women, their sisters and their mothers to make sure they are
not being disrespected on the job.
Unfortunately, interracial dating has become common
place in the workplace and many Blackwomen feel honored
if their white boss or white co-worker shows special
personal interest in them. Office romances of all kinds are
apt to surface if she is spending several hours a day with
another man other than her own. If a man and woman spend
extensive time together and develop intimate communications
from the close proximity they are working in daily, or
nightly, the Blackman should be aware that nature will take
its course. Unless the two workers are totally repulsed by
each other the potential for an affair is present. The
Blackwoman will work closely and dedicated with the men
on her job and cooperate fully to complete a project. Of
course her motivation is financial - it’s her job she thinks she
is performing just for the money. If she must work outside
the home, and many Blackwomen have talents that others
can benefit from, the Blackman should make sure that the
environment is safe. Safe from sexual harassment and safe
from overly close involvement with other men. The
Blackwoman romanticizes a lot and she is not above
comparing her boss or co-worker to her man at home and
deciding that the former has more to offer her or that they
have more in common. Today’s ideas of work are specific
and competitive and those who have chosen to work must
adopt the same ideas of the job hosting them. The
Blackwoman is not exempt from these perspectives. She has
leapt into the fray head first. Things are seemingly moving
so fast she no longer has time to examine her motivations or
actions. She looks about her and sees what’s going on with
others and believes she must match the tempo of their pace if
she wants to achieve. She is constantly concerned about
what “they” will think about how she dresses, how she
looks, what she has, and who her man is. She notes that the
Blackman is more often than not absent, missing from the
job scene because of lack of skills, prison, old age, drugs,
craziness, illness and dissatisfaction. She feels more alone
today than she has ever been before. The media have set up
131
such a bad and unwholesome picture of the Blackman that
she is often embarrassed to even be associated with a
Blackman who is not wearing a Suit or carrying a briefcase.
She considers it beneath her dignity to develop a relationship
with what is referred to as a “blue collar worker”. She has
adopted the standards of white America and believes her
education makes her superior to the Blackman who may not
have the same interests or options. In fact, if a so-called
intelligent, attractive, successfully employed Blackwoman
dates or becomes genuinely interested in a Blackman who
her friends consider to be below her social status, her friends
will criticize her and remind her that she should be with a
doctor or lawyer, etc.
Blackwoman think that they are too good for some
Blackmen when in effect it is the direct opposite, some
Blackmen are too good to have to put up with some of the
funky dispositions of today’s Blackwomen. The Blackman
should be himself and exercise his power and will over the
Blackwoman. Her Harvard degree or office door name plate
has no place in her personal affairs with her man. It has no
value there. The only place her training or education has any
value is on her job. And she should be reminded to leave her
hoity-toity behavior on the job where it belongs. This is not
to say that the Blackwoman should be kept down on the
farm rooting potatoes, certainly she should be educated - in
intelligence, courteousness, cleanliness, cheerfulness and
dependability.
The Blackwoman is equally baffled about why the
unemployed Blackman cannot find a job and settle into it for
a zillion years until retirement. It appears so simple to her
and she has no problem finding work of some kind if she
really sets her mind to it. She has several survival cushions
at her disposal not readily available to the Blackman. If she
is single she can some times easily move in with a girlfriend;
move back home or with another relative. If she has children
and falls on hard times she can get welfare, food stamps,
medical care and a place to live. She can get these benefits sick or well. No matter what her age. And she can get them literally for as long as she likes. The Blackman is in no such position. If he falls upon hard times it is difficult, if not impossible, for him to find a place where he is welcome to live with no money. Males do not readily take each other in
132
as women do. Blackwomen also do not take in a Blackman
who cannot pull his own weight financially. If he has had relationships with several women who he remains in contact
with, sometimes he can live with them for a short while
before they becomes impatient with his displacement and
starts making snide remarks about his being out of work.
His other option is to try to move back home, if he has
relatives, or to become homeless and live in a shelter or on
the streets as many Blackmen do. He certainly cannot move
back home as readily as a Blackwoman. His mother, a
Blackwoman, eventually feels the same way as other
Blackwomen, he should get out and get a job, any job, as
long as he makes some money, and he should get out and
get him a woman, or he should get out period. Blackwomen
give no consideration to the jobless rate of Blackmen and
boys in general. She is not the least bit concerned with, what
she considers false pride, about what kind of job he will
take, how much money he desires to earn, or how he must
be treated on a job in order to stay on it. He is expected to
suffer any kind of insults or vile treatment as long as he
makes some money. Any complaints he makes about why he
quit a job or refused to take one are considered to be lame
excuses for laziness. She has never been a Blackman in a
white society. She has no concept of what it is like. If she
lets him move in with her, or continue to live with her when
he loses his job, or quits his job, it’s not long before she
makes him feel like he is the lowest creature in a swamp, as
if the sum total of his self-worth is based on the dollar. This
is another contradiction because she claims she wants the
Blackman home with her, but only when she’s there and
only if he gives up some money. She takes the lessons of the
whore - if a man sleeps with her he owes her money for the
privilege. No romance without finance, or you have to pay
to play, are her slogans. If the man she is interested in does
not have the education that equals hers he must be at least a
self-made man and have a business or inherited money, or
drug money, or other - but he must have some money to
make up for his scholastic ignorance - or - the potential to be
taught a little class according to her idea. She expects the
uneducated Blackman to be extra special in bed. He must be
able to do something that she can use as an explanation to
her friends about why she is with him. She does not think of
133
telling them that she loves him for being himself, or for his
values, or because he loves her and treats her well.
When not working at all everything he says is examined
with suspicion because she thinks if he isn’t working his
opinion and authority is invalidated and void until he gets
another job. No job. No respect. She may even lose interest
in him sexually because she claims she can’t get her mind off
bills. When he is not working or paying her in some way
she thinks that she is providing sex for free.
Broadening the spectrum, if the Blackman quits or gets
fired from his “good” job the Blackwoman panics more than
he does. She calls her parents and everyone else she knows
to inform them of the bad news. All of these people advise
her about how to handle it as if she were the wounded party.
She immediately becomes worried that she and/or the
children will starve to death. She launches a panic rocket
landing on the thought of her living in a barrel or some
where in the subway, instead of trying to comfort her man
and assure him that they can work something out. She may
mention the fact that she can get a part-time job (in addition
to her full-time one). Her financial security is easily shaken
because she can’t bear the thought that she might have to
change her style of living or give up a few of her material
things, and God forbid the neighbors from finding out. She
becomes convinced that if he got fired he must have done
something wrong, and whatever happened he should have
preserved his job. Most of them believe that their security is
working in the system for large white owned entities. Many
Blackmen never stop looking for the opening by which they
can escape a job owned by someone else and own one of his
own. His plight at that time is another whole tub of worms
and worry. His woman may or may not help him in his
quest to go for self. And if he should fail, and some ideas do
fail, she lets him know that he should have known that af
wouldn’t work in the first place. If she really does not like
his new business venture idea she will withhold her help.
The problems the Blackwoman presents the Blackman
with regarding her behavior in the workforce, or how she acts when she works on the same job as he does, or how she demonstrates her fierce competitive aura makes for bad vibes between them. He is sick and tired of all that women’s lib boldness and fed up with her aggressive actions.
134
The Blackman has responded to the Blackwoman’s aggression in the workforce by retaliating in the following ways:
1) He stays away from her
2) Hekeeps his contact superficial and platonic
3) He does not voluntarily help her financially
4) He has turned to the white woman and the
oriental woman for love
5) He declines and ducks marriage
6)e°He does not make a full emotional
commitment
7) He does not share his ideas with her
8) He becomes bitter towards all women in
general
9) And in many cases he withdraws from her bed
10) He does not plan on a future that includes her
The Blackwoman has the misplaced notion that she can
treat the Blackman any way that she pleases and that he has
to take it if he wants the sex. This has proven, once again, to
be another failed plan because the Blackman while mostly
silent, is using the non-violent skills listed above to get back
at her. She in turn becomes more adamant in her charges
against him and the stand off continues. The Black woman is
convinced that she must go for self and achieve her own
personal goals: She will fully compete with the Blackman to
prove her superiority and flaunts among the society
bellowing her achievements. Professional gain has taken
precedence over her male relationship. The Blackman does
not have any special worth to her. He is just another
opponent who persists in getting in her way as she mounts
the glistening rungs of the corporate ladder. Any
advancement outside of the home is considered high
achievement, no matter how many casualties she causes.
When she is criticized for competing with the Blackman for
the best jobs under the whiteman’s employment system she
dismisses her evil intent and claims that the Blackman is just
a sore loser and not as qualified as she is. She gives less
than a damn about his need to have adequate funds to
support his family. She wants accolades from her coworkers and other strangers and she wants material things
that cost cash money. She believes she can outdo the
135
Blackman in every category and she takes pride in being
labeled as a tough bitch on the job. And she takes special
pleasure in her never ending plight to prove her equality with
the Blackman, the white woman and the white man. She
feels inadequate to all three groups and is often compelled to
achieve higher pay and higher recognition as a defense
mechanism. All of this is not to say that the Blackwoman
should not work outside the home, but a job does promote
the idea of independence and separation - especially in the
brass laden carpeted corridors of the corporate world. If she
does not know what to expect, and plan how she will defer
negative stumbling blocks, she is doomed to become a
victim of peer pressure and change for the worse. Any
change she makes contrary to what her man wants and
expects of her will be detrimental,
If working outside the home interferes with child
rearing, taking care of her husband and attending the house,
the Blackwoman should only work part-time or quit the job
altogether. Yes, it is a sacrifice. But it is a major way to put
the Blackman back in the spot of head of the house and
breadwinner. The Blackman should access the situation,
decide how he wants to live and whether or not her financial
contribution is worth he and the children giving up what they
need from the wife and mother in his home. If he approves
of her working then he should cooperate with her in
maintaining the home and taking care of the children. It
doesn’t have to be 50-50, but he should help.
OVERTIME
On the issue of the Blackwoman working overtime,
please know that Blackwomen want to please their bosses.
Many of them will work late into the evening and into the
night, Saturdays or Sundays, or full weekends. Obviously
to do this she must neglect other areas of her life that requixé
care and maintenance. Cooking dinner and cleaning the house - spending time with her man often go lacking due to her hectic overtime schedule. No Blackwoman should become dedicated to her job or so-called career if it requires her to neglect her family. As priority stressed, mealtime is a very important event in the Black household. All schedules should be adjusted whenever possible to allow for mealtime congregating of the family members. This is similar to an
136
every evening reunion of the group. If the Blackwoman
finds it unavoidable to get out of working overtime she
should prepare all her meals on the weekend and freeze them
so they can be reheated each weekend evening for dinner, or
get up earlier each morning to fix the dinner meal. Under no
circumstances should the Blackman and his children have to
eat junk food or scuffle around the kitchen on their own just
so the Blackwoman can work overtime on someone else’s
job. Her first job and her first responsibility is to her man
and family. Small children especially need their mother home
with them in the evening and weekends should somehow be
devoted to some relaxed family time or outside activities
together. Of course it is impossible to maintain this schedule
every weekend, but at least once a month the family should
participate in a group activity for communal enjoyment. And
yes, she will rebel against the Blackman informing her that
she needs to cut her overtime down. It is also wise at this
time that he ask her what she intends to do with the extra
money she is earning.
Chapter 14
ATTITUDES
Blackwomen very easily do what is referred to as “get an
attitude” or “catching an attitude,” and this means routinely,
daily, moment to moment, she may decide for whatever
reason that it is necessary to float between good feelings and
bad feelings which equals an: attitude. The attitude
represents a change in mood. She may become dark and
gloomy, or uptight for days on end, about something that
she has not even presented to the Blackman. There are
several interactions she predetermines will give her some
kind of emotional problem that results in her exhibiting and
attitude. The attitude is unpleasant, makes her extra hard to
get along with and pervades the atmosphere with
dissatisfaction. The Blackwoman’s attitude affects how she
looks, how she responds and what she does. Her attitude
can be described simply as her state of mind - negative.
While her presence is important - and her cooperation
essential - the most important issue the Blackman has to deal
137
with is the Blackwoman’s state of mind. If she has an
attitude she will be careless, cynical, silent and disagreeable
to live with in peace. The first hint that she has an attitude is
that she becomes quiet, distracted and irritable. The
Blackwoman has a very short memory of the good times she
has with a Blackman, and as soon as something goes wrong
she immediately figures out what it would take for her to bail
out of the relationship. She can make her exit plans in the twinkling of an eye
and instantly is ready to do whatever it takes to flee. She
keeps these plans ready in the forefront of her mind anyway
because of her insecurity, distrust and lack of faith in the
Blackman. Once she’s figured out her game plan, i.e., what
she’ll do if he does this or that, she becomes settled. It is at
that moment her confidence returns and she is ready to deal
with the problem at hand. She deals with personal interaction
problems as if they are happening during the last day of her
life. There is no tomorrow for she and the man she is at odds
with.
The unfair thing about the Blackwoman’s attitude is that
she chooses to act out her dissatisfaction instead of
confronting the Blackman head-on honestly and explaining
what she is unhappy about. Sometimes once the actual
words are spoken out of her mouth she realizes how
ridiculous her position is, and hopes with all her might the
man will offer a simple solution or explanation that will get
her off the hook. When she is carrying an attitude about
something she thinks the entire conversation out in her head.
She may even rehearse her lines or make up responses to
what she thinks the Blackman will say. She may become so
involved with her inner-talk scripts she is unable to hear
other people talk to her and appears to be daydreaming. The
Blackman, who is unaware of her self-talks and verbal
preparation, may be surprised at the almost instant intensity
and organization she presents her problem in. While she is
waiting to see if the man will figure out for himself what is
wrong with her, she talks to her friends. She downgrades
the Blackman and tells her cohorts every negative thing she
knows about him and possibly his whole family. Her
friends, other Blackwomen, are, of course, sympathetic with her predicament. The Blackman is literally tried, and convicted before he even goes on trial. Later on after the
138
conflict has passed and she and the man are back on good
terms, all the bad things she said about him are expected to
be forgotten and her friends play by the same rule so they
never mention it again. This is a kind of grace or
courteousness they extend to each other because they know
that when angry with a man they might say anything and
exaggerate. Her friends may tell her to continue to watch him
because he is probably lying. Sometimes if the Blackwoman
in question has told too much about her private affairs she
becomes so embarrassed that she breaks off the relationship
with the people she told. She thinks that after that incident
she can never really be completely believed about how happy
she and her man are. The reputation of a Blackman hangs in
a delicate balance between his woman and her girlfriends.
Once ruined by rumor he has a hard time regaining their
confidence or respect. He never knows this because usually
they all continue to act friendly never letting on that they
have changed their opinion about him because of something
he allegedly did to his woman. They are compassionate with
each other about having an attitude.
If the Blackman examines the Blackwoman when she
has an attitude, one she denies she is having, he can see the
physical symptoms of her stress such as:
1) General irritability and gloom, she sulks,
may manage a strained smile and gets
impatient easily.
2) Her heart pounds - she shows symptoms of
being excited or out of breath, her blood
pressure may rise.
3) Her mouth and throat becomes dry - she may
have difficulty speaking, or responding in a
normal tone.
4) She may throw things around, she becomes
careless, developing an “I don‘t care” or “Fit” manner.
5) Dizziness - she may appear slightly drunk
when she walks.
6) She develops an inability to concentrate on
normal activities, she may have to be spoken
to several times before she responds.
139
7) Floating anxiety - she appears to be afraid
and nervous while restraining her outburst.
8) Trembling or nervous ticks - her jaw or eye
may twitch, her hands may shake from trying
to control her outrage.
9) Stuttering - she may jumble her words or
display other speech difficulties.
10) Grinding her teeth - she may do this while
awake or asleep at night. She might start to
eat more.
11) Diarrhea, indigestion or vomiting - caused by
her internal systems adjusting to deal with her
suppressed Stress.
12) Popping pills or increased smoking - she may
do this to delay her reactions or just to have
something to do other than face her problem.
13) Severe headaches - sick migraines that may
put her out of commission or send her to bed
with pain and nausea.
14) Drinking - increased alcohol consumption,
she may drink more and say things she later
says she doesn’t remember.
15) Nightmares - she may wake up with cold
sweats or toss and turn.
16) Accident prone - because of her distraction
she may start bumping into things or drive
carelessly and becomes dizzy. She cannot see
because her vision is clouded with her
problems.
The Blackwoman does not know that stress is a reaction
caused by the value she places on something. If she changes
her value or reaction to an issue or subject she will have
milder responses. If she tells herself that certain things make
her upset undoubtable they will.
Sometimes the Blackman will stay away from the
Blackwoman until she gets over her attitude. Left to her own
devices eventually she will work the problem out in her
head, settle on a decision she can live with and continue on
in the relationship. Every problem with the Blackman
however, requires her to make a decision about whether or
not she will stay with him or go. She does not consider
140
problems as temporary stumbling blocks. Every issue is a
a or death problem that the entire relationship dangles rom.
During the course of her attitude she may also devise all
kinds of devious schemes she plans how to execute if she
thinks her man has done her wrong or tried to make a fool of
her. The Blackman does not have to “make” a fool out of the
Blackwoman, if he stays with her long enough he will
witness her making a fool out of herself. Most of her
emotional pain is self-inflicted but she refuses to
acknowledge this. She sees the Blackman as the root of all
her problems. And if he would just act right she would be
fine. One of the main reasons she develops an attitude with
the Blackman is when she thinks that he has made a decision
about his life that thrusts her out of the limelight. She insists
that the Blackman’s entire world revolve around her just
because her whole world revolves around him. She does not
want to be a part of his world - she wants to be his entire
world. She desires to remain in a state of constantly being
romanticized by him. When he develops other interests she
quakes inside from fear wondering if his new interest means
he is bored with her and no longer wants her. She vies to be
the sum total of his focus and will send him through a lot of
fabricated changes just to keep his undivided attention.
The Blackwoman is not familiar with non-possessive
loving so she believes that to hold on to the love of the
Blackman she must cling to an invisible umbilical cord
attached to his brain. Because she is like the earth she desires
to be steady with her whole being circulating around the
Blackman. The Blackman is worldly, he may choose to visit
any of the other planets while still keeping his homestead
intact with the Blackwoman. He may choose to have satellite
bases in numerous areas encompassing his universe. His
limitations are not equally set with the Blackwoman’s so
while she becomes content with her home routine, he may
charge on searching and discovering - everything.
The Blackwoman thinks that his experimentations and
investigations outside of her means that he does not love her
or want her. She wants the Blackman to be like she is,
satisfied and accepting of their life together. If he does not
do this she thinks he is wrong and will get mad at him. She
prefers to have him hanging on to her dress tail, but when he
141
does this she disrespects him, considers him weak and treats
him badly. The Blackman is called upon to love the
Blackwoman but he must set limitations about what she can
and cannot do. She wants him to enforce his rule over her
even though she claims she doesn’t. The main process that creates security for the
Blackwoman is for the Blackman to tell her what to do, have
a plan for her life and see to it that she does it. She desires to
be convinced of his love and be forced to do right by him.
She is similar to a child who does something to see if the
parent will allow it, or does something wrong to see if the
parent loves it enough to chastise it. Children do this all the
time to reaffirm for themselves that the parent loves them
enough to reprimand them. The Blackwoman practices a
contradiction when she claims she wants to have her own
way. All the while she wants to be monitored and restricted
so she will not harm herself or others.
It’s deep.
She gets an attitude when she can’t have her way about
one of the Blackman’s ideas, she will be in disagreement
with a plan and admit she doesn’t have anything to replace it
with. She should be reminded that it is better to go along
with him in unity - and be wrong, than to fight against him
to win - and be right. If she chooses him she should go
along with the program he offers her, If she does not want to
support his ideas and go along with him then she should get
herself another man whom she will go along with. The only
right between the Blackman and Blackwoman is for them to
be together in unity, peace and love. Obviously, for the
Blackwoman these goals are far down the list of what she
says will make her happy. She thinks she knows about
everything in a more sane fashion than he. Her fight against
him is based solely on fear. Fear of abandonment, fear of
losing her home, fear of looking like a fool to her friends,
and fear of being used. She has been programmed to think
the worse of him by books, news reports, movies, television and newspapers - all her life. She is still not qualified to rule herself, let alone the Blackman, but she tries to force him by one method or another to accept her ideas about everything from work to lifestyle. She continues to fail. And she constantly has an attitude about anything related to her failure. Her daily state of being teed off about numerous
142
things increase the frown lines in her face and make her look haggard.
Sometime rather than submit to the Blackman and be
what he wants her to be some Blackwomen choose to be
alone. They justify their right to live in celibacy and
nowadays claim it as a welcome hiatus or satisfaction to be
looked forward to between one of her failed tries.
She claims being alone gives her time to get to know
herself and get in touch with her real feelings. It is
impossible for her to get to know herself without guidance.
When she is alone it only gives her time to congratulate
herself on being right about how she is. She wants to keep
her fragile ego in check so she only admits to light criticism
of herself. She is under siege by her erroneous ideas. The
advisors in women magazines and newspaper columns have
commenced providing women with creative alternatives to
having a man. They give long detailed lists of activities that
do not require a man and that afford special pleasures to the
unattached female. Of course all of these suggestions fall
short and are inadequate to compete with the company of a
man. Almost any activity is better when accompanied by a
Blackman. The options offered to lone women are
distractions presented to help the Blackwomen conclude she
doesn’t really need a man to be happy. Certainly a woman
will not keel over and die if she doesn’t have a man, but then
again, the moment of death is over in a second, while
loneliness seems to linger for infinity.
Any Blackwoman who wants to have a Blackman can
have one. Obviously it requires her to adjust her ideas and
stipulations. She must adjust her behavior to attract a man
and keep him. Being fine, having a grand education and
money are not sufficient credentials to attract, keep and
satisfy a Blackman. There are countless multitudes of
Blackwomen who possess these accoutrements who are
lonely and untouched by a man. They are the ones so rigid in
their requirements and refuse to budge of accept any offer
other than what she dreams a man should be. The man of her
dreams does not exist anywhere on earth except in her
cartoon-like imagination. There is no real shortage of
Blackmen if the Blackwoman would decide to deal with
what she has as opposed to living alone and dreaming of
what is not available to her.
Still, Blackwomen persist in pursuing a tragic wasted life
of trying to re-make the Blackman. She wants a gender-free
society where the women are free to act like men and the
men are free to take care of their own needs domestically like
a woman. She tantalizes him with her act of smiles and
sensitivity and then drops the bomb on him as soon as
anything happens that doesn’t please her. The bomb is her
funky disposition that interferes with her happiness.
Not only does the Blackwoman believe that trying to
please the Blackman is a blatant form of masochism, she has
sufficiently fooled many Blackmen into believing that there
is no longer any such thing as a “good woman.” She has
also inspired him to believe that he may as well stop
searching for what does not exist and to accept her lowdown decorum as the norm. She wants him to give up on
being happy the way he perceives it and accept the terms she
offers and be satisfied. Her greatest threat is that one day the
Blackman will learn the truth of her and bust her in her
deception. She becomes weary carrying the burden of
keeping the Blackman deaf and dumb. Day after day
juggling the details of falsehood and truth mixed together
and trying to maintain a natural looking facial expression. It
is time consuming and tiring but she thinks it is the only way
to relate to the Blackman in order to get any benefit for
herself. She does not view her actions as trickery but as a
necessary game plan to survive. She too, has given up on
the possibility of finding a good Blackman - not the kind she
is looking high and low for. She has three main tools she
uses to control him: 1) denial 2) aggression and 3)
jealousy. She can be counted on to use these three traits to
combat the Blackman when he does something that she feels
she absolutely cannot accept. It could be anything. She does
not apply the same tactics to every issue that arises. She
changes her position craftily according to whatever she feels
emotionally at the time of the infraction. Sometimes just ore
misplaced word in one of her man’s explanations can send her off. She is a real grouch when she is suffering from one of her attitudes.
It is a good idea for the Blackwoman to be taught to smile. Smile. Smile when she greets her man in the morning and smile when she meets him at night. A smile is a very helpful and comforting form of the communication of
144
confidence and satisfaction. She must be reminded to keep
up the happy spirit in the home and make it a happy place.
REGARDING HAPPINESS
It has been said by many Blackmen that it is impossible
to make a Blackwoman happy. They say “that woman ain’t
never satisfied” or “no matter what I do it still ain’t enough.”
It is reported that Blackmen make this complaint because
they have tried to do many things to make the Blackwoman
happy, satisfied and content. Unfortunately they seemingly
are destined to fail miserably each time they give it a try. For
some odd reason whenever the Blackwoman gets what she
wants and is happy, at least for the moment, she starts to
think that something must be wrong. She thinks that if it
looks like things are working out then something must be
going on that she doesn’t know about. At this stage she
starts to examine her life, check stuff out more closely and
nit-pick at her surroundings and the people in it. She will
watch and check until she comes up with something that she
can express her negative attitude about. She just can’t seem
to stand too much happiness, it makes her uncomfortable.
When the Blackman sees her in this kind of depression
he exclaims: “what is it now?” because he is accustomed to
her interrupting her own happiness with a new problem she
just thought of. The Blackman should realize that being
unhappy is a bad habit to her. She finds it extremely tedious
to break out of her old habits that make her life miserable.
She has tried many ways to be happy and invariably ends up
just as unhappy as she started out. The problem is that she
does not know what happiness is or how to express it freely.
Happiness is a state of mind that she is afraid to linger in too
long for fear that she will be overcome by something or
somebody. Since she is not used to being happy she does
not know how to act when she is.
Chapter 15
HER SEX
Let’s dive right in. The Blackwoman spends a great deal
of her days and nights being aware of her sexuality. She
145
throbs nearly involuntarily. As a result of all she has learned
from other Blackwomen and girlfriends her age, she is
impressed that her sex is a bonafide point of leverage she can
wield against the Blackman to get her way. She will use her
sexuality to snare a Blackman and will misrepresent the
intensity of her sexual desire to get his attention. She lays
sexual traps for him and behaves blatantly like a trollop
when she is alone with a Blackman she is trying to lure. She
is cunning and plots to get him in bed because she believes
that once she has sex with a Blackman it will give her certain
rights in his life. Since she connects sex with love, when she
deceptively persuades the Blackman to sleep with her, she
thinks that she has convinced him to love her - or at least
show a measure of love that she thinks is bonding.
Since she is such a pseudo romantic creature she cannot
be trusted in the presence of strange men for a long length of
time because she is always open for a line, especially if it’s
one telling her how beautiful or desirable she is. She
believes anything a Blackman tells her if he looks good to
her physically. She is easily flattered but will pretend that
compliments are not really important to her and have no
bearing on whether or not she is attracted to a Blackman.
Without exception, if a Blackman pursues her long enough
with compliments, flowers, phone calls and the like, she will
ultimately go to bed with him. She enjoys the special
attention and wants to believe that he will compliment and
admire her forever. Many Blackmen she meets or sees
walking down the street are envisioned as her lover, for a
split second she imagines having sex with him, considers
how he might act in bed and either lines him up for followup or rejects him as anything other than a friend. She gives
off body language that sends unspoken messages translated
to mean that the possibility, however remote, of sex is being
considered, and potential exists.
The Blackwoman claims that the Blackman is such a dog*”
because in her view he will always go for the promise of sex froma Wiomani-eve7 Teeicaeeao MOR ANE ere
believes he is famous for one-night stands and will sneak off
and have an illicit encounter and then return to her as if
nothing ever happened. She hates this potential in the
Blackman and calls him a low-down hound for this kind of
behavior. She sees herself as above this kind of animalistic
146
practice. Sex means more to her than that, or so she says.
The truth of the matter is that the Blackwoman practices the
exact same type of behavior if given the right opportunity.
She will sneak around more cleverly than the Blackman
which is why she doesn’t get busted as often. She may have
no problem trying to have two men at the same time if she
thinks her main man is fooling around with another woman
behind her back. She will try to pay him back by having
another man even if she doesn’t really want to. She just can’t
allow him to be one-up on her, plus she enjoys the feeling it
gives her to see him carrying on his normal life without
knowing what she has done or is doing. She tries to compete
in this fashion although it may turn her life into chaos trying
to live double because she does not have the capability to
love two or more men at the same time. She certainly cannot
be a woman to two men at the same time, so one of the men
she is dealing with is purely for fornication purposes. She
will go to bed with one man on Friday, another on Saturday
and the following Monday or maybe even the same night -
and still pretend to be outraged and shocked about the
Blackman’s deviation with another woman. Her double
standard is built on falsehood and an image she thinks she
has to preserve about the honorability of womanhood. Part
of her falsehood is her belief that Blackmen desire sex more
often than she does, so she can never admit to him or herself
that her own sex drive is a powerful motivating factor in her
life and decisions as well.
She brags on her sexual conquests in the same way the
Blackman is rumored to brag about his. She will explain to
her friends in great detail about her activities in bed with a
Blackman. She especially likes to tell about the size of his
penis, what he says while copulating, his stroke and whether
or not he performed oral sex well. They go into a minute by
minute, blow by blow description about the encounter. If he
does any oddities she calls him nasty and other horrible
names and she and her friends laugh at him. It is a rare
Blackwoman who does not tell about her private sexual life
with a Blackman. So if a Blackman has a woman with a best
friend or several close friends he can be sure that they know
all about his bedroom action. Down to the most intimate
detail.
However, she only vaguely confesses her own part, or
tells what she did. Blackwomen do not ask each other what
they do in bed, they only discuss what he does. ’
Another highly deceptive activity she takes part in is to
have sex with a man and pretend by her sounds or words
that it feels better than it does. If she really wants the man
she will continue to mislead him about his wonderful libido
and then talk about how he turns her off when he does this
or that. She won’t explain to the Blackman what makes her
feel good and may not even tell him when it’s painful. She
thinks it is something she has to endure - she doesn’t want to
hurt his feelings. She tolerates the pain without flinching,
pretend to have an orgasm (reach a climax) for fear if she
tells him the truth she might lose him. However, if he does
not satisfy her sexual cravings she will seek out and receive
sexual gratification with another man - or woman. Some of
them are in marriages or relationships which last several
years and never reveal her dissatisfaction about their sex life.
She claims that her lacking sex life is unimportant as long as
he takes care of the bills, is a father to the children and
remains married or with her. She secretly hopes that one day
he will figure it out on his own and do what she wants him
to do. This hardly ever happens, and if it does, she becomes
suspicious that he learned from another woman - which in
most cases he has. Nevertheless, he is charged with
ineptitude for not satisfying her sexually.
She will also use sex as a weapon against the Blackman.
It is her most useful tool - she thinks. If he angers or
displeases her she will automatically go into sexual shutdown. It is a way to communicate her unhappiness with
him. She will try to punish him by denying him sex until he
submits to her idea, or does what she wants him to do. She
will continue this game for days or weeks when she feels it
is necessary to make a point or whip him into submission,
She is satisfied if the Blackman literally comes limping bac
to her crawling on his hands and knees begging her to go to
bed with him. The Blackman should beat her at her own
game and when she displeases him he should deny her sex
and see what happens. He will see fireworks like he never
imagined. She is much more vicious when under the pressure of lack of sexual expression and is known to act like a plumb fool if her bottom is not happy.
148
Another truism is that if she continues to deny her man
sex for an inordinate length of time but continues to live with
him, sleep in the bed with him every night, dress in the same
room and slyly tease him - and still say NO!, she may want
him to overpower her physically and take it. She wants to be
ravished sometimes, even if she claims it is against her
wishes. The Blackman should remember that if he is familiar
with her schedule and she’s not seeing anyone on the side,
she is also punishing herself when she denies him sex. This
is not to say that she wants to be viciously raped - but she
does want her man to let her know that the pleasures of her
vagina are a prize possession to him. She wants him to be
willing to fight for it if necessary. Sometimes she says no
for so long that she doesn’t know how to get out of it and
say yes, so if he takes it, it makes it easier on her and solves
her problem of how to get back in good with him. This is a
very warped perception, but that’s how it is. She does not
mind being treated like she is the Blackman’s property at that
time, in fact, sex is about the only time she succumbs to the
wishes of the Blackman and is in submission to him.
However, this kind of cooperation does not extend beyond
the bedroom and her misty eyed surrender is soon forgotten
about 10-15 minutes after the act is over. By the time she is
dressed she is back to her old self again. He still ain’t right.
It also is not always necessary for the Blackwoman to
reach a climax when she has sex with a man. What she longs
for and enjoys the most is the closeness and direct attention
she receives from the Blackman during the sex act itself. She
has him all to herself and he is connected to her body for the
purpose of sheer pleasure. A pleasure she is sure he has
never known. She actually believes that her vagina and body
is the only aspect of her being that gives her existence any
real value. She is at a loss as to why the Blackman would
desire another woman after she lets him enter her body. She
has been brought up to believe and has been impressed by
American culture that her vagina is the only real thing she
has to offer and negotiate with throughout her entire life.
When all else fails she can offer a man her body and one of
them is bound to accept it. Either for free or for pay. If she
does it right she can use it for barter and exchange.
Marriage for her is an acknowledgement that she will be
with one man and he will be with one woman - her. She is
149
more apt to accept the rules of a marriage contract
manufactured and compiled by American government
officials than to just accept the Blackman’s word that he is
making a marital commitment to her, to respect, protect and
provide for her. She wants some kind of legal appearing
document that will give her recourse with the courts or
police, because she suspects that one day she will possibly
need their help in dealing with him. Everything she’s ever
heard about him points to that conclusion.
While the Blackwoman enjoys sex she does not want to
have sex with the Blackman 25 days a month leaving six
days for her menstrual cycle. There is not enough time, she
does not have the energy and it would possibly break her
body down. She can keep up with this pace if the sex is a
quickie but if it consists of the indepth type of lengthy
throw-down Blacks are known to share in bed, although she
wants to, she can’t. However, if the Blackman should do
something or say something she does not like she will deny
sex to him for that particular night at least. Depending on his
reaction the grudge could grow and last as long as she sees
fit. She will run from him, sleep with the children, stay up
until he goes to sleep, pretend she is on her period or sick,
or Say it is too painful. She uses these as ways to manipulate
the Blackman into not wanting to have sex with her. She
also may start an argument to ensure that he will be so angry
or disgusted with her that he has no desire for her. She
refuses to acknowledge sex as an individual appetite akin to
hunger and thirst. She wants to make it some kind of special
ritual that she has power over. Power to give and power to
take away.
She will put on a sensational award winning
performance in bed if she is trying to impress a new man that
she really wants him - or - to get him to really want her. She
purchases the most scintillating lingerie, lights candles, dims
the lights, adorns sweet smelling perfumes, cooks special
dinners, goes nude, flutters her eyelashes, uses her body
provocatively, looks seductive or markets her idea and
promotes her sex any way she decides. Sometimes all of this
is done before she gets married to the man. After marriage
the meals, sexy bed clothes, rub downs and instant sexual
response may cease. She tries to make the Blackman think that she will always and forever cater to him and make him
150
comfortable - in and out of bed, but once she “gets” him she
slows down at first and then stops completely.
After this point she attempts to use her affections as a
means to negotiate whatever she wants. If she gets what she
wants she will occasionally give him the attention he wants.
As time goes by if takes more and more to get her to
cooperate sexually. It’s almost like blackmail. Most of them
want it as much as he does. Others claim it’s something they
tolerate just to please him. Obviously that was not the way
she started out or the man would have never gotten with her.
Ever so often, especially these days when gay liberation
is prevalent, the Blackwoman will decide due to her failed
encounters with Blackmen that she no longer wants to be a
woman, and instead wants to be a man. She is then
classified as a lesbian and if she goes all the way masculine,
a dyke or butch. She may cut her hair short, start dressing in
a masculine way, talk hard, take hormones and grow a beard
or mustache and vie with real men for the attention and
affection of women.
Her idea is based on her belief that she knows how to
treat a Blackwoman better than the Blackman. She thinks she
knows where to touch a Blackwoman to make her feel good
and how to satisfy her more proficiently than a man. She
seeks to intimidate the Blackman by her presence,
representing an unfamiliar foe, and will become violent if provoked. She thinks that her choice is normal and that her
desire to be a man and love other women is a genetic fluke of
nature and one that she has no control over. She thinks its
physical instead of mental. In no way will she admit that her
choice is the result of her absolute frustration with the
Blackman. While claiming to hate men she tries her best to
emulate them in every way available to her. The lesbian
Blackwoman has arrived at her final limit and literally blows
a fuse in her brain which blocks out her real gender and
replaces it with a masculine role. Of course just as male
homosexuals, she overdoes it and makes herself a spectacle
that is not welcome among civilized people. She is rough
and tough and ready to battle. Again, this demonstrates her
prayer for a protector. She is very protective of her female
“lover” and is very territorial. Since she is mutually aware of
the deceptions in the Blackwoman’s behavior she has less
patience than the Blackman when her woman starts a
151
problem. She is quick to nip it in the bud sometimes by
physically attacking her to quench the transgression or
insurrection. She is tougher on her woman because she
knows, since she is really just a woman herself, the ‘secret
agendas of the Blackwoman, and knows exactly what’s
going on and doesn’t go for it. The lesbian Blackwoman is
in a double bind because she can wear men clothes, talk like
one, take steroids or hormones to resemble one and develop
other masculine traits; she can never really get very far from
her own memories of her life as a woman. She can only
block out so much without losing her mind.
The lesbian Blackwoman is repelled by the secret normal
looking Blackwoman who practices lesbianism. They prefer
to keep their deviant sexual preferences to themselves and
continue to act feminine. The full blown lesbian
Blackwoman is to be pitied. She represents a huge problem
that ultimately the Blackman must confront. She is the most
unhappy and frustrated of them all. She is far away from
reality and transforms herself to represent what she doesn’t
understand - which is how to be a Blackman. She is trying
to deal with a human being that she understands, another
woman. Like herself. She knows that try as she may, she
does not have a penis, and will never have a real one, so her
insecurity about her mate does not change, she must be ever
watchful that a brave penis-toting Blackman does not get
close to her woman. Lesbianism has nothing to do with them
obtaining a higher or better level of sexual satisfaction. And
a lesbian Blackwoman can be mastered just like the rest of
them. She needs a special exorcism.
Blackwomen with normal sex drives who desire and
pursue men are glad that their sexual organ anatomy is
designed differently than the Blackman’s because if she too
had a visible penis the Blackman would be quite surprised to
see how often during the day she had an erection.
Consequently, the Blackwoman’s clitoris, which is referred
to by some scientists as a miniature penis, is not visible on
the outside in that way. She has the same reaction to an
attractive male or list of other sexual stimulants, as the
Blackman does. And yes, she masturbates as often, if not more often, than he does. Blackwomen do not discuss how or how often they masturbate. Masturbation is something
that none of them want to readily admit to. It’s too base to discuss. Too uncool. Some things can be omitted.
When in pursuit of an actual one-on-one sexual
encounter with a man the Blackwoman is very driven. She
will wait for countless hours, stand out in the cold or rain,
buy anything she thinks will help her achieve what she
wants and gets real raw in her offering. She goes to great
extremes, boldly and outspokenly when it comes to hooking
up with the man she wants to get in bed. She will flirt, use
innuendo, raunchy language, expose her body, sit with her
legs open, stick out her tongue or do anything else she
thinks will get the message across. She is very adept at
offering herself up for sex. Woe to the Blackman who
refuses or deflects her sexual invitation. She then has the
Capacity to become a raging maniac. Her sexual program is
very fragile. She will attack the man verbally, possibly
publicly, tell other men and women and charge him with
being a sissy. While she reserves the right to pick and
choose which man she wants to sleep with, she does not
agreeably permit the Blackman to exercise the same right.
Especially if she has chosen him to be her next victim. She
considers a refusal for sex as the ultimate insult that is not
without penalty. Not all Blackmen go for sex thrown his
way by women he is not responsible for. The Blackwoman
should be encouraged in the idea that her body will not get
her everything and everyone she wants. She must be taught
that she has other values and that if she does not submit to
being the right kind of woman that she cannot have the sex
she wants with a Blackman. This requires self-control on the
part of the man and selection based on qualifications not
looks. She will respect him more if he behaves in such a
way as to not function like all of his brains are behind his
fly. He is under no obligation to prove his manhood by
bedding down with every female who throws herself his
way. He is much to precious for that. His choices must be
based on much more than a brief thrill.
He must communicate security to the Blackwoman
through touch - not always sex. Touch. Caressing, stroking
and lots of hugging. To be safely encircled in the arms of a
Blackman is a more effective way to show caring and
affection than sex is. The Blackwoman is sore, and her
wounds are tender and exposed. She longs for the healing
153
touch of a Blackman to absorb his strength as a healing
balm. A salve. The Blackman’s brain, activated by electrical
current, is able to transmit the power of his electricity to the
Blackwoman to increase her energy and power to function.
When the Blackman and Blackwoman are in love and
grooving, they are able, through touch, to transfer this
powerful current back and forth between them on a mental,
physical and emotional level. Ideas - sex - feelings. The
Blackwoman’s emotional state if the most difficult to
penetrate with electricity or pain. The Blackman conceivably
needs a crow bar type tactic to pry up the veneer of
falsehood and insecurity the Blackwoman uses as a shield. A
wall to protect her from all the things that terrify her. And all
the things that cause her intense pain. On the inside. But she
is not immune to the unyielding determination of a Blackman
who has accepted the task of putting the Blackwoman back
on course as his responsibility. The Blackman is a powerful
unit of life by nature. He is forgiving and is only seeking
peace. He wants to design his world to eliminate discord and
disunity. He wants to design his world with his
Blackwoman and Black children where there is no decay. He
should consider his sexual organs as precious as the
Blackwoman considers hers. She will respect that and she
will make whatever changes are necessary if she understands
that her cooperation will determine whether or not she
continues to receive sexual gratification from her man.
Chapter 16
THE OTHER WOMAN
The Blackman’s handling of more than one woman is in
a baaaaaaaaad state of condition. The tenderest part of a
Blackwoman’s life is the part that involves her relationship
with her man. Even though she is not doing what he wants
her to do, the fact that she is with him and claims to love him
makes her territorial. She may go literally berserk if her man wanders for a one night stand, or develops a full blown relationship with another woman. The Blackwoman does not understand her role in life with the Blackman. She can be the woman, or the other woman, to a Blackman. Both positions
154
have their own idiosyncrasies of pro and con. It depends upon the Blackwoman’s perspective as to which position she
will occupy. She does not know that whichever position she
takes does not eliminate the other position from the
Blackman’s life. She cannot bear even the thought of this.
While she does not obey the rules governing her duties
as a wife, she expects her man to obey all of the rules of the
marriage vows or of the monogamous commitment. She
refuses to accept the truth about what apparently is his
nature. There is no history of the Blackman settling down
with one woman and never desiring to have another one.
Before slavery, during slavery or after slavery. The
Blackman has never been recorded to have just one woman.
The Blackwoman does not know that just because her man
does not have another woman, does not mean that he does
not want one, he just has not figured out how to do it and
keep the peace. He knows for an actual fact that if his
woman finds out, or even suspects, that he is interested in
adding another woman to his life she will not give him
another moment of peace until he has convinced her beyond
all doubt that he has either changed his mind or wasn’t
serious about it in the first place. She will keep him up all
night if need be until he gets it straight. Since the
Blackwoman has reduced her own worth to her genitals, she
also equates the Blackman’s value with his. She has an idea
that sexual intercourse has some kind of divine worth to the
Blackman as it has to her, and that he should only reserve it
for one woman - herself. The Blackman seemingly is under
no such interpretation and is amazed that she reacts so
violently to him having another woman. He knows she is
jealous. She becomes furious beyond belief and may have to
be restrained physically from harming him or herself. Her
first charge is that “you lied to me” which is followed by
“why didn’t you tell me?” as if his telling her would make
any difference in her reaction. Number one, he knows he
has to lie because he knows she can’t handle much truth
about the reality of his life, much less the fact that he desires
another woman but still wants her. She calls it two-timing.
She will demand all sorts of explanations, none of which
appease her distraught emotional state. Sometimes she
demands the Blackman to tell her every sordid detail of the
relationship, describe the woman, how he met her, whose
155
idea it was, where it happened, how many times it
happened, did he use protection, and she will compare dates
to see if he had her on the same day or night he had her.
Usually the man will give her a portion of the answers to the
questions. If he tells her the whole truth he knows that she possibly
would never recover. She wants him to explain it in such a
way that proves that he was seduced by this horrible other
tramp of a woman, or that it only happened one time, or that
she belongs to another man anyway and it will never happen
again. She wants to believe that the sexual encounter was
brief, uninvolved, superficial and consisted of only straight
sex that was over in a few minutes. The intensity of her
reaction is based on the magnitude of the value she places on
sex. If she and her man are having extremely good sex she
quakes at the idea that he has done those same things to and
with another woman. She is subject to wreck her entire
world, no matter how long the relationship has existed,
based on what her man does with his sex organ. A quagmire
of examples of some of her reactions are as follows:
1) She will withhold the peace -
This means she may catch an attitude and stop
talking to him, or she may just be evil and glare.
She may walk in a hostile gait and be extra fussy
and complain about everything. Nag. Nag. Nag.
2) Cry and seek sympathy -
During this period the Blackwoman will remind
the Blackman of everything she has ever done for
him. She will try to make him feel guilty and
ashamed of his decidedly outrageous behavior.
She will tell her friends the whole horrid story
and they will express their sympathy about her
unfortunate misfortune and agree that her man is
wrong, a low-life dog, and she should leave him.
3) Let the house go to hell -
She may stop cleaning, ironing, washing and
cooking. She may neglect the linen, his clothes,
the dishes or do anything else that resembles a
work stoppage - she goes on strike.
4) Stop taking care of herself -
This means she may stop combing her hair,
eating, dressing, bathing, or just let her entire
156
5)
6)
7)
8)
body droop in a daily and nightly depression.
She may rush to the doctor claiming to be
worried about having a venereal disease, and
warn him that he might have AIDS.
Tell his family, friends or his boss -
She calls all of his relatives and friends to
complain to them about this awful thing he has
done to her and what a dirty whoremonger he is.
She will bellyache to all his kinfolks pleading to
get them on her side and intervene on her behalf.
She will remind them of what a good woman she
has been to him.
She will cut off all affection -
Sexual relations are out. She cringes inside at the
thought of him even touching her. She vows
never to let him touch her again. She cannot even
think of going to bed with him again because she
has a visual picture of him and the other woman
in bed - and she uses her imagination to conjure
up the worse scenario possible. Her worst fears
are picturized in technicolor reeling in her head.
The Silent treatment or “play crazy” -
This means she may just stop talking altogether.
If she is really desperate she will develop some
kind of fatal illness of lose control of her limbs
and refuse to walk or stand. While her doctor
may not be able to find anything physically
wrong with her, she maintains, no matter how
ridiculous she appears, that something dreadful is
indeed wrong with her and she is near death. Her
final pitch is to play absolutely overcome and
have the proverbial human frailty of a nervous
breakdown. This is her expression of pain so
profound that it simply exhausts her brain. She
becomes incapable of handling her rage and
disappointment. She may scream, cry
hysterically, break dishes, thrash about or have a
fit. She gives in to the ultimate aggrandizement
and becomes burned out. This is a periodic
collapse during the worse crisis of her life.
Threaten or try committing suicide -
157
9)
10)
11)
12)
Another last-chance desperate move is that she
will announce she is going to kill herself, and she
may even try. She might take pills, cut on the gas
or slash her wrists. She will not succeed. She is
not trying to, she wouldn’t dare deprive herself
of the thrill of revenge. She just wants to punish
the man and make him feel as guilty as possible.
This poor confused beautiful creature believes
that his offense is indeed worth almost dying for.
Start drinking alcohol more or abuse drugs -
She may start drinking excessively, getting
sloppy drunk, showing up drunk and disruptive
on his job, drinking on her own job or worse.
She may take mind altering drugs that make her
hallucinate or sleep all the time. She will be
lethargic and depressed.
Abuse the children -
She knows that no matter what anyone else says
- the Blackman adores his children. So she may
beat them more, verbally attack them, and rant
and rave to them about their no-good father.
Hit the man, fight, scratch or bite him -
She will become wildly out of control and gets
up the nerve to think she can win a physical fight
against her man. She is secretly counting on his
honor that he will not fight her back because of
his guilt and will just try to restrain her. In the
meantime she will get in a few good punches or
scratches. She might just get so carried away that
she actually tries to shoot or cut him. At this
point the man has no recourse but to defend
himself. Things can get pretty wild and involve
the police.
Retaliate by getting another man - : He may be her man’s best friend, worst enenty,
his brother, his father or next door neighbor.
Any man whom she thinks has a special value to
her man is considered. This isn’t what she really
wants to do but she is so out of control that she
thinks this will vividly make her man understand
a similar hurt. She wants at that time to cause the
most lingering pain imaginable in his life. She
thinks she has to do something, anything.
13) Burn his clothes, wreck his car, trash his office,
make a scene -
This means all of the above and more. When
inspired by jealousy the Blackwoman goes into a
blind rage and will destroy lives and property -
including her own. She is determined to vent her
anger and she wants witnesses. She must be
restrained.
14) Attack and beat up on the other woman -
She will investigate and seek out the other
woman and attack her or call her house and make
threats or hang up on her at all hours of the day
or night. She will tell everyone connected to her
what a low down man stealing whore she is. She
will call the other woman all kinds of vile names
and make up any lies she can to make her appear
to be a totally indecent person.
There may be many other variations of her reactions but
these are the most common ones the Blackman must contend
with in this particular event. Sometimes he has to deal with
all of them concurrently. Hell erupts. All of the above listed
actions are done to get sympathy. She thinks that if she can
arouse pity in the Blackman he will have mercy on her and
stop whatever he is doing with the other woman. She wants
to impress him that she loves him so much that she can’t live
knowing that he loves another woman and is sleeping with
her too. She wants her love to be enough for him since his
love is enough for her, for the most part.
She does not understand that he is capable of being
attracted to or loving more than one woman, and because of
her refusal to try to comprehend this part of his nature, he is
unable to satisfactorily explain to her this undeniable fact.
Amazingly, the Blackwoman complains: “if only he had told
me” or “why, what did I do?” and she thinks that it
happened because of a shortcoming in her. Sometimes it is,
but not necessarily.
It is rare that a Blackwoman is totally surprised to find
out that her Blackman has another woman because while
appearing to ignore him, she studies his every move. She
159
knows what he does, how he does it, how he dresses, what
he smells like, his sleeping habits, his eating habits, his
language, his ideas, his likes and his dislikes. She knows
his routine, his rap, his eyes and his desire level. She will
sometimes not rock the boat of the relationship if he
continues to sneak around behind her back in an acceptable
manner so as not to disturb the orderly life she thinks she
has. She says: “what you don’t know can’t hurt you.” She
also says: “as long as I don’t find out about it,” or “as long
as he don’t let me know.”
What actually happens between the two women is
twofold. The wife at home and the other woman both
experience an immediate zing of terror laced with fear when
it becomes apparent that all parties involved know about the
existence of the others. The wife at home is scared that her
man has found someone outside who he wants more than
her, and that he will leave her stranded and shamed without a
man. The so-called outside/other woman is the one put
exactly on point because she is confronted with the
possibility that the man and his wife might break up and if
they do he will probably land on her doorstep, and if she
doesn’t really want him she’s got a monumental problem -
him. If she does want him she may be relieved that at last it’s
out in the open and he’ll have to choose. She knows he has
been with the other woman longer, may have children and
property involved and has a financial investment in the
union. So she fears that the pressure the wife will put on him
will force him to cut off with her. Both women become
apprehensive about the outcome and both immediately start
making plans on how they will become the winner.
Sometimes if both the women are shrewd they will both
become extra nice to the man, the wife at home determined to
win back his affections which she thinks she has lost, and
the other woman who thinks that she finally is in a position
to compete. The woman at home may become sexier in a
marathon effort to wear him out so much at home that he
won’t have the stamina to bed down with another woman.
The other woman may pep herself up to imitate the best little
wife in the world to try to show him the contrast.
The Blackman may also be glad it’s out in the open and
may have a plan whereby each of them can live in peace by
adjusting his time and money to take care of and see after
160
both women; but he never gets to present the plan that’s
most appealing to him because of the erratic emotional state
of both women. He has a hard enough time just keeping
them apart. He has to deal with shock, fear, apprehension,
increased distrust, hostility and guilt. Both women will have
varied levels and degrees of each of the aforementioned
ailments. During all of this at-home turmoil he still has his
job, other day to day responsibilities, the children and inlaws on both sides. It‘s a heavy burden - but not an
impossible one to carry. Not if the Blackman stays on course
with the truth and doesn’t give in to conventionalism.
The Blackwoman’s reaction to the truth should be relief.
Instead, it is turmoil and purgatory. The truth comes to shed
light not instill the darkness. The darkness of falsehood is a
sensitive cloak that the Blackwoman wears to shield herself
from submitting to the Blackman’s ideas. Another interesting
aspect of this trilogy, is that each Blackwoman involved in a
two women-one man relationship, or a three women-one
man relationship (which does exists), is that they tend to be
embarrassed for each other to know they are sharing the
same man. It sounds confusing - because it is. In other
words, it’s alright for the women to know their man has
another woman until the women are confronted with the
actual existence of each other. They may want to know but
they don’t want to see. Seeing represents too much reality
for them to be able to handle. They think of the other woman
in a blur, no face, no body and no personality. Once she
visualizes her comp she tears away at herself in comparisons
and hallucinations of her man doing things and having fun
with his other woman. Fun.
A competent Blackman who is dealing with a wife and
another woman, who is also a wife of sorts, learns to tackle
the situation through trial and error. He may, if lucky,
eventually get upon how to handle their mental, physical and
emotional needs simultaneously. He does this separately and
rarely gets mixed up. He meters out his time, takes care of
any crisis that arises in either location, and may also father
children in both homes. He may attend functions or go out
with each woman at different times, have a complete set of
friends connected to each woman, be fond of both their
extended family members, and do everything a man must do
when he takes on the responsibility of two women he loves.
161
Sometimes he is able to do this for years. Sometimes he is
able to do this only for a few weeks or months before the
women find out about each other. Blackwomen like to think
that their man was tricked into a relationship with another
woman and does not want to believe that her man wanted
another woman based on her own merit or his own need.
When a Blackman has more than one woman for the
purposes of adding more joy to his life and because he met
another woman who had needs he decided to fulfill, he must
keep the women under control by telling each of them the
truth. Yes, he’ll have a fight, but it will be temporary if he is
first sure that both women love him. She says she wants the
truth so give it to her, but he must walk her through it so she
does not become savage and unruly. She will adjust and go
for more than he thinks if she knows it’s her only option to
continue to be with the man she loves. She is quite resilient.
She has never allowed the Blackman to explain his need
to have another woman. She chooses to believe that his need
is based solely on sex. Sex is so temporary it allows her to
justify it quickly. Part of her shock is that she has convinced
herself that her man has to accept what she is shoveling.
Plus, the marriage license is the only legal document in
America that the Blackwoman holds the Blackman
responsible for adhering to. She clamps down tight on the
Blackman responsible for adhering to. She clamps down
tight on the Blackman whether married to him or not because
she has heard of the shortage of Blackmen and views every
single Blackwoman as a threat to her world. There is no
shortage of Blackmen. There is only a shortage of Blackmen
who meet the white folks standards of availability and
qualification. She readily accepts the idea of a shortage and
makes her selection from the choices proscribed for her by
others. She has never heard of or met a Blackman who
Stayed with one woman for the duration of his life, yet she
expects her own Blackman to be the first one to do so. She
thinks she can change the nature of a Blackman through
prodding, trickery and nagging. The Blackman’s nature is
not governed or controlled by American political or social
laws. Including monogamy. He practices serial monogamy.
He may have anywhere from 10 to upwards to 500 women
in his lifetime between the ages of 14 and 75. It is rare to
find an adult Blackman who does not have a lengthy history
162
of being with other women, several children and the
emotional scars of those involvements. Good relationships
are the result of longevity and familiarity. No man chooses
to voluntarily keep changing women.
Part of the Blackwoman’s frustration is that she is
incapable of having two men at one time in the way the
Blackman is capable of having two women. This is true.
They are not equipped to handle two husbands, two sets of
children, two households, two full responsibilities or two
lifestyles. Her capabilities are too different. Her desires are
too focused. She is most content when focusing all her
attention and energy on one singular relationship. It is not
her nature to maintain two equally involved love
relationships. She simply cannot do it.
It is a mystery to her how the Blackman manages to do
this. She does not even understand why he would want that
kind of complication in his life. She certainly cannot
understand how her man can say he loves her and loves
another woman in the same way. She thinks it must be either
or. Not because of the impossibility, but because it is not
what she wants because she has been raised to be insecure
and selfish. She simply cannot grasp the motivation of the
Blackman’s ego. She does not know the origin of love or the
definition of it. And she did not get this way by herself. Her
own strong influence managed to infect the Blackman with
her ideas and forced him to start a infertile history of lying to
her and pretending to play by the rules she designated. Her
idea has not made for success for him or her. She has
pushed the issue that her relationship’s peace with him is
based solely on his fidelity.
She uses other instructions to support her in her
position. She does not know who the author of these
instructions are, but she obeys and memorizes them just the
same. Some of the slogans (instructions) are:
1) What’s good for the goose is good for the
gander
2) | Ican do bad by myself
3) Allis fair in love and war
4) All good things must come to an end
5) | Use what you got to get what you want
6) There ain’t nothing a man can do for me that
I can’t do for myself
163
7) Here today, gone tomorrow
8) No romance without finance
9) It’s easier to forgive than to forget
10) Out of sight, out of mind
11) Fake it ’till you make it
12) | Absence makes the heart grow fonder
13) Never put all your eggs in one basket ~
14) Allis fair in love and war
15) Never let your right hand know what your
left hand is doing
On examination these are some of the most popular
sayings of today. They seem harmless enough. They have
been passed down from one generation to the next. They are
sets of words that need no explanation when applied to a
relationship between a man and a woman. They have
endured and provided people with catch-all responses and
attitudes. These slogans have done more to support the
Blackwoman in her disagreement with the Blackman than
any other memorized text.
She should be told the truth about everything, not the
shuffling half-truth, but any truth that affects her life and will
give the Blackman peace and more freedom in his life. One
thing is for sure, the Blackman does not have to worry that
he is the only one who has been lying, the Blackwoman is
just as guilty of lying as he is. Their subjects are different,
but the effects of the lies are the same: disunity, suspicion
and doubt.
Another area of confusion she participates in is the
difference between what an affair is and what a relationship
is. An affair is exactly what it suggests, a temporary
happening, something attended, a thing to do, an event. In
more precise terms, an affair is strictly an episode or many
episodes of sex without responsibility. Fornication.
Adultery, on the other hand, is sex expressed when one
is not sure of one’s womanhood or manhood. Adultery is
sex used as a proving ground to try to convince self of
capability and usefulness. A relationship is a union of a man
and woman where they are responsible for each other, not
necessarily financially, but emotionally, mentally and
physically. A relationship is grounded in reality. Life
situations are met with discussion and compassion, and:-there
164
is demonstrated caring, involvement and consideration.
Certainly a real relationship presents more challenges than a
fun-filled, frolic in the hay limited affair. Affairs are easier,
less complicated and represent immaturity, cowardices and
lust - raw passion with no real potential for love. It is a
limited engagement that dies when the passion burns out or
becomes impossible to satisfy. A relationship is unlimited,
fruitful, educational and filled with daily excitement. It is
unselfishness in its most desirable form between a man and a
woman.
The Blackwoman and the Blackman must get past the
stage of becoming addicted to sex, the possibility of sex and
the temporary euphoria of genital to genital contact. Yes, sex
is big fun, but it’s bigger fun when there is commitment and
a full knowledge of the other person far greater than face
value and physical compatibility. To be selective of a mate is
not being a prude, it is being mature, intelligent and
considerate. The Blackwoman must choose her man, accept
her lot and work to make him happy and be satisfied with
her choice. There are no perfect choices among
Blackwomen, and there are no perfect choices among
Blackmen. But all of the choices are potentially acceptable,
workable and capable of allowing both parties to have a
measure of happiness and security. Things are only right to a
certain extent and the Blackwoman must work to achieve the
fullest extent of happiness and satisfaction available to her. It
is whatever she makes of it.
Chapter 17
ARGUMENTS
The Blackman knows that arguing with a Blackwoman is
a useless exercise and one that he cannot win. Nobody on
earth can out argue a Blackwoman. She may prepare for an
argument days, weeks or years in advance rehearsing her
strategies of how to get her points across. She will save up
certain incriminating information to use it at the proper
moment to give her leverage. She can speak very quickly
and fire off insults hundreds at a time like a gattling gun. The
Blackwoman, when arguing with the Blackman, tends to
165
sound as if she is fussing at her child. She does not
distinguish between the two when she is angry. Especially
since she views the Blackman as an incompetent immature
being. Many a Blackman has become outdone and tonguetied from trying to argue back at a Blackwoman. She is a
master at it. She will harbor grudges and hold fast to a
hostile thought forever. She is very adept at negative
thinking therefore when it comes time to argue she uses the
no-holds-barred theory and vents all of her complaints at
once. She will throw in new topics, things that she has been
upset about over the past month, and is glad to have the
chance to get it off. She will make the most cruel and throatcutting remarks. And in every new argument she throws up
the old embers from the previous one. She will pout until
she gets her way. A mere apology from her man is not
enough. Nothing is enough if she is mad and thinks she’s
right. She might demand some material item like clothes,
jewelry, money or more until she is satisfied that her man is
truly sorry and repentant. Sometimes it might be a request
that he do certain housework, take her out, keep the children
or stay at home. This can only happen when the Blackman
admits to some wrongdoing or lies and she knows it a lie but
she lets him get away with it. Sometimes the admission is
not verbal. It may be a look. When arguing she insists on
having the last word. She curses and flings the most vile
words out of her mouth. Sometimes she can keep up the
same argument for days never changing a word. She
manages to stay angry for an extraordinary length of time,
will huff and puff, turn red, sweat, stomp her feet and slam
doors or throw things. After a certain point she ceases to
address the right or wrong of the issue and merely fights to
win. She considers herself the winner if she manages to
drive the man out of the house, make him stop talking back
or get him to concede. If she has done something andws
guilty, busted, she checks her mental files to find something
that the Blackman has done which is equally wrong and use
that point to defend herself. She cannot rest until she forces him to admit his error.
She has learned that the Blackman is peaceful by nature.
She has learned that he will go along with a lot of situations
just to keep the peace and keep from arguing with. her. Sometimes she places outrageous demands on him to try to
166
perk him into an argument. When she finds he will
acquiesce to desensitize the situation, she will press further
just to see how far she can push him before he rebels. It’s a
game to her, and an unfair one, since she could not survive
this kind of mental pressure from the Blackman. But she is
petty and she keeps all sorts of little mental score cards, and
when the right moment presents itself she lets go with both
barrels. Below are a few examples of the trite reasons the
Blackwoman uses to get mad at and argue with the
Blackman:
1) If he stays away from home too long (whether
she knows where he is or not).
2) If he visits with his mother or other family
members too often or too long.
3) If he does not take her to the place of her choice.
4) If he breaks a date with her for a reason she does
not accept.
5) If he says “I'll be right back” and doesn’t.
6) For doing more for his side of the family than
hers.
7) For speaking to an old acquaintance with too
much enthusiasm.
8) For dancing too close with another woman.
9) For looking at another woman when she is out
with him
10) For not telling her that he loves her enough
11) For spending too much money on his “other”
children.
12) For not complimenting her on her new outfit or
hairstyle.
13) For not remembering her birthday or other
special occasions
14) For being too tired or busy to have sex with her.
15) For admiring another Blackwoman on T.V. or in
the movies.
16) For not being on time for a dinner or date.
17) For working too much, not cutting the grass, or
emptying the trash.
18) For not attending a special affair with her.
19) For not going to church or on a church bus trip.
20) For being too busy to listen to her chatter,
preoccupation.
167
For not opening the door or pulling out her chair.
For wearing a suit she doesn’t like, or any other
outfit.
For doing too many favors for his friends.
For loaning money to his friends or relatives.
For watching too much television or VCR.
For not continuing his education.
For not asking for a raise.
For buying a car she doesn’t like.
For wanting to have some time with the boys or
the fellas.
For ignoring her accidentally when he is with
another woman.
For not showing his affection for her in public.
For growing a beard, getting a special haircut.
For taking the children’s side against her.
For showing out or dancing funny at a party.
For telling her to shut up or that she talks too
much.
For telling her that her clothes look funny or too
tight.
For telling her she has on too much make-up.
For asking her to clean up the house.
For expecting her to give him some attention.
For not going shopping with her.
For going to sleep in a movie or while she is
talking to him.
For not letting her drive or give him traffic
instructions.
For staying out too late, not reporting in or
answering questions.
For telling her that she nags too much.
For forbidding her to do a certain thing or goa
certain place. .
For asking her where she’s been. iy Da
For asking her to fix him something to eat.
For refusing to baby-sit the children when he has
other plans.
For asking her what she did with her (or his) money.
For telling and proving to her she is wrong about something.
These 50 categories are just a few of the often trite
examples that the Blackwoman blames as reasons to get mad
at the Blackman. This list is actually almost infinite and just
as ridiculous. This is not to say that couples do not become
displeased with each other for doing this - or - that, but the
displeasure must be expressed in civilized terms. A civilized
person is one who does and says things in an intelligent,
mannerable, considerate way. Civilized more importantly
means: One possessing knowledge, wisdom and
understanding, culture, refinement and is not savage. The
pursuit of happiness.
There is another kind of Blackwoman who does not
consider a fight a fight unless some licks are passed. She is
the kind who believes that she is just as tough and bad as a
man, and thinks she can say whatever she wants to, no
matter how repugnant, insulting and disrespectful it is - and
thinks there are no ramifications or accountability. She tries
to be a bully. She braces up to her man toe to toe and eye to
eye. She presents a problem when she does this. This brings
up a very unpopular and unpleasant category - the
Blackman’s self-defense mechanisms. There is never an
excuse for ever hitting a Blackwoman anywhere but in the
mouth. Because it is from that hole, in the lower part of her
face, that all her rebellion culminates into words. Her
unbridled tongue is a main reason she cannot get along with
the Blackman. She often needs a reminder. This does not
mean that she needs, or wants, to be battered or beaten to a
bloody pulp. However, if she ignores the authority and
superiority of the Blackman, there is a penalty. When she
crosses this line and becomes viciously insulting it is time
for the Blackman to soundly slap her in the mouth.
She is often like a rambunctious child. She wants to
know what her parameters are. If she is allowed to curse at
and yell at the Blackman she will get worse. This is not an
instruction to be used as a license to daily beat the hell out of
the Blackwoman. Frustration and mental illness has already
been identified as reasons the Blackwoman is physically
battered and abused by the Blackman. This directive is for
sensible Blackmen who adopt the tactics and advice of this
entire text. The author is not advising: “when in doubt,
knock her out.” To beat the Blackwoman and injure her, or
169
to strike her with a closed masculine fist is forbidden. For
the Blackman to become impatient and just beat the
Blackwoman is savage and uncivilized behavior that‘is not
recommended. If she is brutalized repeatedly the relationship will fail
and the Blackman will possibly be arrested and charged with
cowardly abusing a woman. This is not the goal. Make no
mistake about it. No black-eyes, no punching in the breast or
stomach, no stomping and no upper-cuts . Analyzing the
options available to the Blackman when the Blackwoman’s
mouth becomes uncontrollably disrespectful, they total only
a few:
1) He can walk away from her, leave the house, get
drunk.
2) Hecan go to his other woman and complain.
3) Hecan quit the relationship, leave the woman
4) Hecan try to argue back - and lose.
5) Hecan seek counseling or sympathy from friends.
6) Or he can offer her a sound open-handed slap in
the mouth.
She may also have to be physically restrained until her
anger and shock passes. It’s okay to restrain her, she won’t
burst and no Blackwoman can win a physical fight against a
right Blackman. The Blackman should not be so refined or
cool to accept harsh language from his woman. Soon she
will become trained and curb her vicious tongue when
talking to him. She will gain a new respect for him and
finally realize when she is exceeding the limits.
She can cause a great commotion when she calls herself
“getting mad,” and has been known to turn the house topsyturvy, report the Blackman’s illegal practices to the police,
tell his parents some deep dark secret about him, call his
boss and defame his occupational reputation, slash his tirés,
burn his clothes, or do anything else she thinks will first
embarrass him, then inconvenience him, and then make him
madder than he has ever been in his life. She becomes
enveloped in her dissension for one main purpose: to pay him back! She will even destroy items she herself has
bought for him. She’ll cry and scream and scratch - like a
wild animal - and she must be dealt with as such.
170
After she has done all she can humanly do she sits back
and waits on the Blackman’s reaction, she still wants his
attention, any kind of attention she can get, even if it is the
kind of attention that gets her butt whipped. She wants a
rumpus, a blow out, an emotional release. If it is possible to
restrain her long enough to get her to listen, it is possible that
she can be reasoned with. At this time the Blackman should
not lie. Repeat: the Blackman should not lie, he should tell
the truth, untampered with, and in such a way as to make her
understand that it is not the end of the world just because she
doesn’t like something that happened. Whenever she fusses
or battles with her man and wins she is still unhappy inside.
It is a very confusing dilemma she perpetrates because she
doesn’t really want to win, and whenever she loses she
gains more confidence in her man’s abilities. She is so
mixed up. Whenever she wins it muddles her more. It is not
that important to her - whatever he does, as long as he can
give her the following:
1) Companionship - she wants to be sure that he
will not abandon her. She wants belongingness,
to be possessed by him.
2) She wants to be connected, included and
considered.
3) Opportunity to give service - She wants the
Blackman to give her something to do that will
help him, she wants to feel part of him by doing
things for him especially designed for her that no
one else can do as well. She wants to be expected
to do certain things.
4) She wants a home - She wants a place to live that
is secure for her children. She wants her home to
be her sanctuary.
5) She wants sexual fulfillment - She wants the
Blackman to desire her and enjoy her sexual
expressions and tell her so. She wants to be
touched and stroked.
6) She wants to be protected - She wants to be
confident that her life and her children’s lives are
safe with the Blackman, she wants him to
demonstrate this publicly if possible.
7) She wants her man to make decisions - She
wants him to decide what she needs and give it to
171
her, she does not want to have to figure out
everything for herself. She wants him to TAKE
charge.
8) | She wants him to be firm - She wants hin to set
the limits and enforce his instructions and rules.
Not by breaking the peace.
9) She wants security - Again, she wants to know
that her man will not leave her for another
woman as long as she performs properly, and
that he will always come back to her.
10) She wants him to be spiritual - She wants her
man to identify with and recognize a higher
authority (God) and guide his life by his religious
principles.
If the Blackman gives her all or some of the above
requests, after a time, she will become secure and give him
peace. It is extremely tenuous to try to give her the things
that make for peace because she has been taught to live in a
mental hell daily. There are those who are idea producers
and planners who give directions, and those who agree to
follow the instructions to make the goals a reality. This
system is the only one that works to make progress in
anything. The Blackman’s problem is that the Blackwoman
thinks she is the one who has the ideas and is qualified to
give the directions. Well, she has been able to lead other
Blackwomen and some other white people, but she has not
been able to lead the Blackman. He won’t go. He cannot by
nature follow the Blackwoman. It does not matter what she
has, who she is or what she gives him. He will not follow
the Blackwoman as his guide. He would rather mark his
place, stand still, or step backwards. But he will not go
forward with her in the front.
The Blackwoman has been tutored by the liberation
seeking white woman to execute her own individuality and
throw off the shackles of husbandly bondage, and practice
self-freedom. While some of this may be true of the white
woman’s plight, it has no bearing on the Blackwoman’s
situation since she has not been under the Blackman’s rule
since prior to slavery. Slavery was such a desperate time for
Blacks due to the race destructing tactics employed by the
slavemaster. Not only was there unbearable physical pain
172
and excruciating demanding labor; but separation was
promoted by offering singular and individual rewards gained
by pleasing the slavemaster and being a good slave. A good
slave was one who consented to do anything, and did
everything possible to stay alive. The individual-reward
system ripped apart the ties of couples, sibling, relatives and
friends. Independent self-preservation was the rule - if one
wanted to stay alive unhurt. This training was a fallacy
because the real truth is that the greatest advancements are
made through unity and agreement not individuality. She is
beautiful butterfly encased in a cocoon of fear, doubt and
suspicion. She has been frightened and allowed her fears to
govern her life and behavior. It will take a long time to get
her back on the nght path to successful Blackwomanhood
and it is a journey she cannot make without the guidance of
the Blackman.
Blackwomen seemingly have a bloodline connection
when it comes to taking and following instructions. She is
hardheaded and stubborn to have her own way. She thinks
that if she obeys her man that he will try to make a fool of
her and take away her identity. She also fears what her
family and friends will say if they find out she lets him tell
her what to do. Therefore she is disobedient.
Obedient means one who is willing to follow instruction
as a means of respect.
Slave means a human being who is owned by another
and dominated to the point of drudgery, mistreatment and
pain.
Fool means a silly person, capable of being tricked or
deceived.
Blackwomen are not readily able to explain why they
associate obedience with that of being a fool. Nor are they
able to elaborate on why they compare being told what to do
with slavery. Here again, is the psychological result of
slavery on the Blackwoman. The slavemaster systematically
and graphically devised steps to prove in front of the
Blackwoman that the Blackman had no control of his will.
And he destroyed anything he tried to build or protect. The
Blackman’s stamina, faith and perseverance in the face of
multiple, impossible looking obstacles, impressed her that he
was a soft-headed man who repeatedly deceives himself by
believing that he can do great things. It’s a paradox to her.
173
She doesn’t know that every civilization has rules.
Mathematically, to add means to multiply and increase; to
subtract means to divide and separate. One unites, the other
disbands. To unite means to come together. It is impossible
to have unity ahd separation at the same time. Yet, the
Blackwoman will practice separation while living in the same
house with the Blackman. She maintains her own separate
ideas, separate money, separate personal goals and separate
authority. She does not want anyone telling her what to do.
She thinks she is the most qualified to chart the course. If the
Blackman lets her rule him she does so with an iron fist.
Daily insults, threats, ignoring his presence, telling him what
to do every step of the way, abusive language, denial of sex
and respect. He has to be home after work at exactly the
same time everyday, he has to clean the house, take care of
his own clothes, wash dishes, fix his own food, maybe
sleep in another room, stay in every night, not spend any
money without her permission - and throughout all of this
she requires that he act like he likes it. She calls this keeping
him under control. His life becomes pure hell and totally
against his nature and she thinks this is the way to have a
successful relationship with a Blackman. These are her peace
requirements.
On the other side juxtaposing her position, she has some
inner feelings that represent disdain for herself. She hates the
Blackman for letting her treat him this way. She wants him
to stand up and defend himself even if it means he has to
knock her out of the way to do so. This is necessary
whenever the Blackwoman steps out of the protection of
womanly behavior and enters the dangerous domain of
masculine challenge. Regretfully, some Blackwomenwantto
be physically controlled. They may call each other up on the
phone and proudly brag to each other about how my man:
“beat my a--” or “beat the s--- out of me” or “kicked my a--,”
These confessions do not usually mean she was brutally
attacked or injured bodily, they just mean that they got
busted in something that other Blackwomen understand -
and realize the risk they take everyday keeping up the game.
A bust can be devastating too. But masochism is not new to her. Sometimes her sexual desires become perverted to the point that she derives a weird pleasure out of being hit because she likes the special attention she gets during make174
up. Some of them report that sex is extra good right after a good fight.
The Blackman should not give in to her abnormal
distortion of sexual stimulation connected to pain. Not
unless they both agree that this is how they like it. And both
parties go through these motions on a voluntary basis. The
Blackwoman does not know why certain kinds of pain and
discord appeal to her. She doesn’t know why she chooses
misery over happiness. She gives no consideration to the
roots of her ideas. She thinks that everything she thinks
comes directly from deep inside her nature, and that
whatever she feels is a permanent part of her. She learned
everything she knows from other people in the form of
instruction or suggestion. The majority of her instructors did
not have her well-being in mind.
She must be encouraged to talk and study her own
behavior. To trace her ideas to the place or point she took
them on. She must learn to recognize the signs of
backsliding. It takes a great deal of objectivity to study self,
but she can be taught to do so. Everyone must be taught to
do so if change is desired. The principles of how to think
and use the brain must be studied so the brain of the
Blackwoman can be reactivated with new ideas of peace and
love for the Blackman.
Arguments and disagreements between the Blackman
and the Blackwoman must be settled in such a way as to deal
with not just the catalyst issues that sparked the anger, but
why the particular incident invited such a frantic and hostile
reaction from the woman. Sometimes seemingly harmless or
lightweight events cause great eruption in the Blackwoman’s
mood and cause her to go out of control. The inside, true
issues and reasons must be delved into to get to the root of
her insecurity. Actually, to the Blackwoman, certain
behaviors in the Blackman are symbolic of things that caused
her unbearable pain and disappointment in her childhood or
teenage years. So when anything similar or reminiscent of
these occurrences appear in her personal relationship, which
she is already unsure of, she goes berserk. She feels
vulnerable, threatened, powerless and scared. These are
strong emotions when the Blackwoman experiences them
simultaneously.
In examining the Blackwoman’s childhood the Blackman
will have ample opportunity to scrutinize his own. All must
focus on the forces, the individual personalities and
environments from which they emerged. From these
memories they will be able to examine together the long term
effects of slavery and hard times. It will invariably be found
that the disparity between the Blackman and the
Blackwoman was already present when they were born. It
has existed a very long time, with each generation
contributing their own part to the decline of Black male and
Black female interpersonal relationships. It is not really
something that the present day Blacks invented. It is an
inherited habit of neglect, dissatisfaction and perversion. The
aforementioned three habits are not rules, nor are they
prerequisites to living in today’s world. They are patterns of
behavior brought on by suggestions and conclusions drawn
by Western societal morals and mores.
In the meantime, remember that the Blackwoman’s real
self is a wonderful loving helpmate, and if she forgets this
and behaves other than her real self, the Blackman should
collar her on the spot and insist she get it back together. He
must treat her right and make her treat him right. If after the
Blackman tries every way he can to make the Blackwoman
happy, does everything he feels necessary to make her
satisfied; and she still insists on being out of order and
rebellious, he should get rid of her. No matter what it costs.
He should not waste his precious life trying to live with a
Blackwoman who refuses to make him happy. Freedom and
peace are priceless.
There will arise a great resistance against the
recommendations in this chapter. Black and white women
will flail against the mere idea of suggesting that the
Blackman defend himself physically against the verbal
attacks of the Blackwoman. They will cite cases of
Blackwomen who have been battered by mentally unstable
Blackmen. But this directive is not for mentally unstable
Blackmen. It is for serious minded adult Blackmen who are in control of all their faculties and whose mission is to re- claim his place as the man over his woman, and who recognizes the absolute need for moderation and self-control. Until the argument issue is settled and until the Blackman is proclaimed the national winner, the Blackwoman’ will
176
continue to talk rough to her man. He must make her respect him. And she must live and behave in such a way as to make him respect her. This is called mutual respect. The Blackman must not rule his wife and family with an unrelenting iron
fist. He must be loving, understanding, flexibie (on minor
issues) and willing to confront and work on the visible and
invisible problems lurking in his household. When he
functions in this way he is in the best position to reprimand or punish wrongdoing.
Chapter 18
CONCLUSION
Every chapter in this book is filled with examples of the
kinds of problems the Blackwoman has both emotionally
and mentally. Until the Blackman is able to collectively
access the amount of psychological damage done to the
character of the Blackwoman he cannot know where or how
to begin correcting it. It’s deep. It’s an infection that for
many years has robbed the Blackman from reaching his full
potential as the king of kings. He is held back by his queen
who is deeply entrenched in fear. Fear that she will be
recognized and required to change. She is trying to run away
from the problem. She is trying to flee from the individual
work that must be done to save out nation. Although not lazy
by nature, she has become loose and careless, about herself,
and about her man and family. Her brain is smaller than the
Blackman’s so while she is acclaimed for her high scholastic
achievement, her thought processes do not compare to the
conscious Blackman’s. Her complaints and whining about
the lack of qualified Blackmen has led her to whitemen,
celibacy and lesbianism. She would rather live in the
artificial stages of these types of random, poorly thought out
choices than accept the options offered to her by the
Blackman. As the first, the original, and the leader, the
Blackman is responsible for remaking the Blackwoman into
what she must become.
It is not the easiest job, and payment will be slow and the
initial benefits few. The recipient challenges the work that
must be done. She is hard to train and it will take time,
177
patience, endurance and attention. Great sacrifices reap great
results.
Occasionally there surfaces a Blackwoman who strives
to be civilized. She is refined, intelligent, clean, courteous
and cheerful. It is a lucky Blackman who finds or makes this
kind of Blackwoman. She represents good material to-work
with . She requires guidance but because of her being in line
with the true nature of the Blackwoman she is easier to train
and submit herself for correction. This type of woman
accepts her responsibilities as wife and as mother. She is
satisfied and content with what her Blackman provides for
her and her family. Money is not her God, she lives a
simpler existence, teaches her children good values and
spends time with them to influence their futures. She is
obedient and respectful to her man, pursues wholesome
goals, is respected in her community and dresses in a stylish
non-seductive way. She does not curse or be loud in public,
she supports her man and enjoys the splendor of a happy sex
life. This kind of Blackwoman is a rarity. But she does
exist.
The Blackman’s work on the Blackwoman must be
carefully done so as not to permanently maim her ego. He
must approach and challenge her behavior head on, and he
must do it in such a way that will not drive her insane. He
must do it in a way, possibly different, in each situation
according to the degree of her problem. His words must not
be based on the rationale and reasoning of the American way
of life. Instead, his way must be one of his very own design
based on his individual needs and desires - whatever he
wants his woman, children and home to be like.
His standards for making these decisions must not be
calculated necessarily by the current American lifestyles. He
must figure out how to maintain a family and household in
peace. A household where there is love and sincere caring
for each of the members. He must control his group (his
family) by being civilized in his asking and telling. The
initial introduction of a new way of living will be a little rocky but this will subside in about three weeks. It takes approximately three weeks to make a change. If the Blackman can maintain his seriousness of purpose for just three weeks he will start to reap the benefits of change. .
178
The Blackwoman should be the proudest female on
earth, and she should feel she is the most blessed of all humankind because she is the mate of the greatest form of life on the planet - the Blackman. Instead of opting for this
prestigious position she has chosen the role of rebellion and
hostility. But she is not herself. Herself is the most valuable
and the most beautiful vessel the Blackman owns. She has
no match.
Also remember that much covered in this text concerning
the problems of the Blackwoman discusses variable levels of
indoctrination. Certainly not all Blackwomen suffer from all
of these traits to the fullest extent. But rest assured that all of
them are tainted on some level with every ailment mentioned.
Covertly, overtly, or both.
These are very serious times. Black lives are at risk from
the deadly extreme of drugs to the misleading comforts of
nestling in the warm armpits of the system. Every stage of
livelihood is contaminated.
The plan to create a dead brain in the slave was set in
motion in 1555 and the effect was designed to be selfperpetuating throughout each commencing generation. It is a
mold, a frame of mind, an idea of mental death and
deterioration that permeates the Black nation. Currently the
disconnection of Black people and their failure to come to an
agreement on the time and what must be done continues to
mushroom and snowball at the same time. The problems
loom larger and are more widespread than ever in the 90’s.
Distrust, disunity and disagreement is rampant in every
Black community, and worse, in nearly every Black
household. The condition of the Blackwoman is the
strongest manifestation of this defect. Clear warnings have come from the problem-solvers of
our era, and some of the solutions have even been presented
by the problem-makers, but to date they have all been
rejected. Groups are splintered and competitive with each
other (this is also witnessed in the Black family). The
warners who came with clear messages have died, been
killed or systematically ignored, and truth has been reduced
to an interpretation of mere opinion.
It does not matter now how much financial help is given
to the Black nation, or how much is taken away. If the basic
foundation of the Blackman and Blackwoman’s attachment
179
is not repaired the Black nation in America will continue to
self-destruct without additional help or hindrance from
anyone. It is already on a roll. Superior education, business
advancement, sport achievement and marvelous
entertainment is not enough. We must breed a new people
and teach them new ideas.
Blackmen and Blackwomen have a clear choice to make,
a choice to live resulting from change, or a choice to die
from rejecting this truth. This book poses a question of
survival and the individual choices made by the Blackman
and the Blackwoman about this situation will determine
whether or not the Black nation will slowly heal, or continue
to die a shameful, disrespectful, and unnatural death.
There is no point in being embarassed about the facts
presented in this text because they simply outline the current
effect of four centuries of slavery on the minds and actions
of Black people - all of the Black people, including the
Colored, the Negro, the Blacks, the Afro-American and the
new title: African-American. It is still not settled about who
we are. And superficial unity based on racial identification is
not adequate for progress anyway. The sheer ignorance and
mimicry that Blacks practice is recognized and known
throughout the civilized world. The pitiful state of condition
of the Blackman, the Blackwoman and the Black child is not
hidden, certainly not from the people who caused it to be this
way. Remember: the Black nation is not responsible for
being enslaved, however, we are responsible for our
freedom. And until Black couples make a conscious decision
to practice the behavioral modification required to change the
slavery thought patterns, and combat the practices that
perpetuate failure and dependency, the Black family will
continue on the downhill rollercoaster to hell and extinction it
is currently riding. We can no longer look to the people who
put us in this condition to provide us a way out of it. We
must do this ourselves. We must plan sanely for our futures.
So make no mistake about it, this writing is a call for the
blood. The special blood of the seed of the original
Blackmen who have within their genes the knowledge of
great legacies of progress and eternal peace. Every Blackman
will not heed this call. For some of them it is already too late
- they have been emotionally destroyed. Their problems are
only symptoms of the causes - which are detailed in this
180
book. This writing is also a call to the Blackman to confront
and conquer the terror filled veins flowing throughout the
Blackwoman’s body, and it is a platform for the Blackman
to learn what he must do to survive. No Blackman is exempt
from these instructions. Repeat: No Blackman is exempt
from this information. He must elevate himself to the
occasion. Rise Blackman, and take your rightful place as
ruler of the universe and everything in it. Including the
Blackwoman.
Something About The Author
y Maurice Brian Henderson
I first met Shahrazad Ali back in 1985 at one of her
infamous “Get Off That Hog” lectures in Atlanta. She was
promoting her other book “How Not To Eat Pork (or life
without the pig)” - a wildly controversial but splendid title.
Her intro mentioned that she was a freelance writer
specializing in independent study about social and ethnic
issues. My initial reaction to her was almost one of
overwhelment when I saw this flashy little bolt of thunder
exuding such powerful energy. She approached her audience
with a fervor, gesturing, pointing, reeling like a flaming ball
of light. She gave a descriptive and fascinating presentation
on her case against pork. I got convinced. Her talk rang with
such authority and clarity that the entire audience was
mesmerized with her topic and the only sound heard in that
room for the next hour or so was Shahrazad’s voice. We met
shortly after when she autographed my copy of her book and
we became no less than instant friends. I later learned she
had managed to single handedly reach over 20 million people
informing them about the dangers of eating pork and
possibly saved many lives. I’m a writer too so I was
impressed.
Today we’re both in Philadelphia, both still writing and
still communicating with each other. She calls periodically to
bring me up to date on her writing career, informs me about
her family, her businesses and her volunteer community
work. She’s a dedicated woman and mother. She also keeps
182
me abreast of her new ideas, and when Shahrazad tells you
about a new idea she presents it with such enthusiasm and
excitement that she leaves you literally dying to do whatever
she’s talking about. This is precisely what happened when
she called to tell me about her latest project “The Blackman’s
Guide...” I knew immediately she had another hit.
At that time my own love life reeked of pretension and
artificiality - in other words she was lying and I was
pretending she wasn’t. So I begged Shahrazad to let me take
a peek at her manuscript. She said no! The suspense was
killing me, I couldn’t forget the title. When she finally let me
read it I was captivated. Each page stretched me out, rolled
me over and slapped my face. Brothers, this book contains
the most body slamming information we’ve ever received
from a woman. And Shahrazad is a woman we can trust to
tell us the real deal. She’s not just a fantastic writer, she’s an
educator, a speaker and a self-appointed social scientist. One
thing is for sure, she loves Black people and works hard to
help the Black man out of his dilemmas - especially the one
we’re in with the Black woman, and more importantly she
wants her Black sisters to be happy.
Throughout 1990 Shahrazad plans to tour the U.S.
promoting the “Blackman’s Guide To Understanding The
Blackwoman.” She’s an excellent media personality,
attractive, articulate and entertaining. We can look forward to
an exciting informative year. Part of her tour will feature
what she calls “Black Relationship Seminars” and during
these sessions she’s going to answer our questions and help
point us in the right direction. Shahrazad offers a completely
new view that supports the rights of the Black man to put the
Black woman in her place.
This is a boss idea that’s never been tried before. But
that’s just like Shahrazad, she’s a trailblazer, always forging
ahead, a brave little stick of dynamite that can always be
counted on to bring us the hottest and most explosive
subjects. She craftily tosses them into the ring for
discussion. I hope the brothers who read this book will
thank her for bringing us this life-saving message wrought
with truth and love about our women. Help is no longer on
the way. It has arrived.
183
Publisher’ s Note:
Maurice Brian Henderson is a creative writing instructor
at Temple University in Philadelphia. He recently became a
fellow of the World Literary Academy in Cambridge
England which permits him to do research on Afro-American
art and literature. He also was awarded the Van Pelt College
House Fellow from the University of Pennsylvania. He
graduated from Penn’s Publishing Institute in 1987. He is
currently authoring a book titled “Black Greek-Letteréd
Organizations: A Lesson In African-American Egyptology”
scheduled to be released soon. Maurice is a widely traveled
poet and playwright and has appeared off-Broadway starring
in his own work.
184
ainyeuBbis
ayeqg ‘dxy # peg
pied saysew
FT] Pou on sresoroum (‘O'W 40 49) ‘}ouy Junowy
*(jou, Buyjpuey »g aBeysog) Adoo yoke 10} Z1$ asojoUa aSBd|d
SS3YHdaV
JINVN
SVL6L Wd “WiiHd
‘S "LS HZ 6102
SNOILVOITENd GAZNIAID
/ {/ at : >
si
Pad
: . 7
Vy —. gm cid! geo | ts Ly es = > :
—— ytisvatl
f = .
iy “) ?
r . ° pila r a
j 7 i} =
|
| |
al
a t eel
¢ _ ie = =
This book is for every Blackman in America...
pe ® Playtime is over!
Blackmen across America say:
“A riveting mind shattering account of what’s happening
inside the brain of the Blackwoman in America.’
Walter Matlock, Compton
“Spellbinding confessions of a member of the secret ‘Blackwomen’s Club’ where the fate of the brothers is decided by a
unanimous vote.”
Derrick Wayne, Chicago
“Shahrazad Ali splatters the unabashed soul-searched truth
about the sisters. Information so profound it sent shivers up
my spine. And then she leaves us with a splendid hope and
faith for the future. A master plan.” |
J.William Smith, Philadelphia
“Writing so gripping and so graphic that my hands actually
trembled as I turned each explosive page. At
last...acknowledgement and explanation...we’ve waited so
long...”
S.Abu Bakr, Shreveport
Help is on the way!
$10 CIVILIZED PUBLICATIONS
‘ ISBN #0-933405-01-4 
