HarperCollins e-books
Human
Accomplishment
THE PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCЕ
IN THE ARTS AND SCIENCES,
800 в.с. то 1950
Charles Murray
Human
Accomplishment
The Pursuit of Excellence
in the Arts and Sciences,
800 B.C. to 1950
CHARLES MURRAY
To
Irwin Stelzer, Charles Krauthammer, and Harlan Crow
It turns out I had brothers after all
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments v
A Note on Presentation ix
Introduction xi
PART ONE
A Sense of Accomplishment 1
1. A Sense of Time 3
2. A Sense of Mystery 13
3. A Sense of Place 25
4. A Sense of Wonder 53
PART TWO
Identifying the People and Events That Matter 57
5. Excellence and Its Identification 59
6. The Lotka Curve 87
7. The People Who Matter I: Significant Figures 107
8. The People Who Matter II:The Giants 119
9. The Events That Matter I: Significant Events 155
10. The Events That Matter II: Meta-Inventions 209
PART THREE
Patterns and Trajectories 245
11. Coming to Terms with the Role of Modern Europe 247
12. . . . and of Dead White Males 265
13. Concentrations of European and American Accomplishment 295
14. Taking Population into Account:The Accomplishment Rate 309
15. Explanations I: Peace and Prosperity 331
16. Explanations II: Models, Elite Cities, and Freedom of Action 353
17. What’s Left to Explain? 379
iv • CONTENTS
PART FOUR
On the Origins and Decline of Accomplishment 383
18. The Aristotelian Principle 385
19. Sources of Energy: Purpose and Autonomy 391
20. Sources of Content:The Organizing Structure
and Transcendental Goods 409
21. Is Accomplishment Declining? 427
22. Summation 449
APPENDICES 459
1. Statistics for People Who Are Sure They Can’t Learn Statistics 461
2. Construction of the Inventories and the Eminence Index 475
3. Inventory Sources 491
4. Geographic and Population Data 505
5. The Roster of the Significant Figures 513
Notes 589
Bibliography 625
Index 639
About the Author
Praise
Other Books by Charles Murray
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Human Accomplishment consumed my professional life from the fall of
1997 to the end of 2002, almost to the exclusion of the research on
social policy that is my stock in trade. Christopher DeMuth, president of the
American Enterprise Institute (AEI), where I am a fellow, gave me his unreserved support throughout this long project, as did my colleagues and the
Institute’s trustees. AEI is a wonderful home for intellectual inquiry.
In the literature on historiometric analysis of greatness and achievement, one name dominates: Dean Keith Simonton, whose works fill a shelf in
my library. He generously shared his expertise with an outsider coming into
his domain and provided invaluable guidance. If you want to know more
about almost any topic in this book, go to the list of Simonton references in
the bibliography.
At the outset of the project, Michael Novak predicted in his gentle way
that I would find Christianity’s role in Western human accomplishment to be
pivotal. I privately doubted him (it seemed to me that the Greeks had set the
stage without Christianity), but he opened my mind to possibilities that came
to fruition in material you will find in Part 4—the most important, but only
one, of Michael’s many contributions to the book.
As I worked my way through the quantitative analyses in Part 3, I
turned first to Douglas Hibbs, a friend since he was on my dissertation
committee 30 years ago. Others who responded to my many requests for
consultation on technical matters were AEI colleagues Kevin Hassett,
Nicholas Eberstadt, John Lott, and Brent Mast, plus anonymous others who
provided help at second-hand as my queries were circulated.
vi • ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Christopher DeMuth, Richard Posner, and Joan Kennedy Taylor
undertook the daunting task of reading the entire draft, providing strategic
comments along with line-by-line editorial advice.
My topic required that I deal with disparate technical subjects. Kevin
Grau, Miles Hoffman, and Roger Kimball were especially unstinting in their
response to queries about issues involving the histories of science, music,
and aesthetics respectively. I also gratefully acknowledge the review of many
others who had expertises I lack: Munawar Anees, Eileen Blumenthal, Harlan
Crow, John Derbyshire, Henry Harpending, Masaaki Harada, Gertrude
Himmelfarb, Ralph Holloway, Irving Kristol, Charles Krauthammer, Marvin
Kruger, James Lilley, Elizabeth Lurie, Richard McNally, Steven Reiss, Samuel
Schulman, Irwin Stelzer, Scott Tanona, Steven and Kazuko Tripp, Arthur
Waldron, Benjamin Wong, José Zalaquett, Kate Zhou, and others who prefer
to remain anonymous.
The responsibility for mistakes that remain are mine, with this emphasis: Almost all of the people I just named did not see the full manuscript, but
isolated pages of draft. None saw the final manuscript that went to press.That
a name appears in the paragraphs above does not imply that person’s seal of
approval on anything.
I enjoy everything about the kind of research that Human Accomplishment entailed, so I did as much as I could myself. But there was too much
to do alone, so I enlisted help along the way.Thanks go to AEI research assistants and interns who took on tasks at one time or another over the years:
Hans Allhoff, Bion Bliss, Masaaki Harada, Daniel Mindus, Todd Ostroske,
Sara Russo, Julian Sanchez, and Sharon Utz.
The publishing business with which I have interacted for almost 20
years has been filled all along with nothing but engaging, able people who
had the best interest of each book at heart. Not every writer has this experience, I am told. That it has been mine is because my agent, Amanda Urban,
has made it so. It is high time that I acknowledge how important she has been
to my professional life. For this book, Amanda arranged matters so that I
should have the pleasure of being edited by Hugh van Dusen, whom I didn’t
meet face-to-face for the first four years, after we had long since developed
an epistolary friendship in the best Victorian tradition. In John Yohalem, I had
a copy editor of formidable erudition who spotted obscure historical errors
as fast as syntactical ones. Bob Bull coped with the book’s many design challenges and its meddlesome author with equal measures of skill and patience.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS • vii
Catherine Bly Cox is the other editor of Human Accomplishment, as she
has been of everything I have published since 1982. I doubt whether there is
a page of text in the book that has not been improved by her red pen. But
she was also my wife throughout this most difficult project. Her role in
getting me through it was of a kind for which thanks are both inadequate and
superfluous.
Charles Murray
Burkittsville
3 August 2003
A NOTE ON
PRESENTATION
Human Accomplishment uses several devices to organize an unwieldy
body of material. Boxed text is scattered throughout the book for
excursions that I think are worth including but can be skipped. Brackets
around an endnote number indicate that the note contains additional detail.
The appendices are reserved for full-scale discussion of methods and for the
presentation of data too bulky to fit in the text.
I have adopted two conventions for labeling centuries and years to
minimize the clutter in a text filled with dates. One is to refer to a century by
its number followed by a capital C, so that, for example, the eighteenth century
becomes 18C. The second is to dispense with BC and AD or their more
recent replacements BCE and CE. The putative year of Christ’s birth has
become the world’s cross-cultural base year for a dating system, even in countries that still use another base year in their own calendars, so I will treat it as
such and be done with it. Thus 300 AD becomes simply 300 and 300 BC
becomes –300. One other convention involving dates should be kept in
mind: A span of time designated (for example) “1400–1600” should be read
as “1400 to the outset of 1600,”not “1400 through 1600.” Thus the two periods 1400–1600 and 1600–1800 do not overlap.
On matters involving alternative spellings of names, their order (e.g.,
“Leonardo da Vinci” or “da Vinci, Leonardo”), birth dates, death dates, or
fluorit dates, I used the consensus version whenever one existed and otherwise
followed the source I judged to be most authoritative.
Chinese names, places, and phrases are usually transliterated using the
Pinyin system. For Chinese historical figures and places that are well known
in the West by labels the Chinese themselves do not use, I have used the
x • A NOTE ON PRESENTATION
version least likely to cause confusion to Western readers—e.g., Confucius
instead of Kongfuzi and Yangtze River instead of Chang Jiang River.
Regarding the thorny problem of singular third-person pronouns, I
continue a quixotic campaign that is now 20 years old. My position is that
constructions such as “his or her” are cumbersome and that restricting
sentences to plural pronouns is silly. The reasonable solution is for the author,
or the principal author, to use his or her sex as the basis for all third-person
singular pronouns unless there is an obvious reason not to, and I hereafter hew
to that principle in Human Accomplishment.
INTRODUCTION
t irregular times and in scattered settings, human beings have achieved Agreat things. They have discovered truths about the workings of the
physical world, invented wondrous devices, combined sounds and colors in
ways that touch our deepest emotions, and arranged words in ways that illuminate the mysteries of the human condition. Human Accomplishment is about
those great things, falling in the domains known as the arts and sciences, and
the people who did them.
In choosing to focus on these categories of great things, I have in
mind the metaphor of the résumé. What, I ask, can Homo sapiens brag
about—not as individuals, but as a species? In keeping with the metaphor, I
ignore the kinds of achievements that personal résumés ignore. Our job
applications do not include much about whether we are caring individuals; so
also, this book has nothing about whether we are a caring species. Military
accomplishment is out—putting “Defeated Hitler” on the human résumé is
too much like putting “Beat my drug habit” on a personal one. I also omit
governance and commerce—mostly for technical reasons, but also remaining
true to the metaphor. In their effect on the individual’s freedom to pursue
happiness, the creation of prosperous and free societies is the greatest of all
achievements by humans on behalf of other humans. But as an accomplishment of the species, those achievements are akin to paying the rent and
putting food on the table, freeing Homo sapiens to reach the heights within
reach of the human mind and spirit—heights that are most visibly attained in
the arts and sciences.
The first purpose of this book is to assemble and describe inventories of
human accomplishment, a task that implies the book’s first thesis: the dimensions and content of human accomplishment can be apprehended as facts. It is more
xii • INTRODUCTION
than a matter of opinion that Rembrandt was a greater artist than, say, Edward
Hopper, or Dante a greater poet than Carl Sandburg. The same is true at a
higher level of aggregation: Assessing the comparative contributions of the
Greeks and the Aztecs to human progress is not a choice between equally
valid constructions of reality.
Apprehending the facts of human accomplishment does require judgment, which implies a corollary to the thesis. Judgment is separable from opinion
in matters of artistic and scientific excellence. It is possible to distinguish the important from the trivial, the fine from the coarse, the credible from the meretricious, and the elegant from the vulgar. Doing so is not a simple matter, and
no single observer is infallible, but a realm of objective knowledge about
excellence exists. That knowledge can be tapped systematically and arranged
as data that meet scientific standards of reliability and validity.
From this view of excellence in human endeavors flows the following
claim: I have assembled inventories that contain the people and events most
important to the story of human accomplishment in the arts and sciences
from –800 to 1950. In Part 2, I will quickly amend that claim with qualifications and demurrers, but not ones that compromise its core meaning.
The bulk of the material in this book uses those inventories to describe
who, what, when, and where. Who are the people that must be part of the
story when historians set out to describe the history of the arts and sciences?
Among those who must be part of the story, which ones are pivotal and why?
How has human accomplishment been distributed across the centuries?
Around the world? Within Europe and the United States? What distinguishes
great accomplishment from lesser achievements? Such questions are informed
by many kinds of sources. Chronologies of events and biographical dictionaries provide the raw material for reconstructing the pageant of human accomplishment. Histories provide a linear account and analysis of how it has
unfolded over time.The primary contribution of this book, I hope, will be to
help see the pageant whole, making it possible to compare accomplishment
across domains, eras, and geography.
In the latter chapters, I take up the question of why. What distinguishes
the eras and places in which human accomplishment has flourished from
those eras and places where it has languished? In Part 3, I explore the
mechanics of the process. What are the roles of the basic economic, political,
and demographic factors? To what extent are streams of accomplishment,
once started, self-reinforcing? These questions lend themselves to quantitative
analyses using well-established techniques. In Part 4, I ask what starts those
INTRODUCTION • xiii
streams of accomplishment in the first place—a harder question, with answers
that are more exploratory. My short answer is that the human capital for great
accomplishment and the underlying human attraction to excellence are
always with us, but environments for eliciting great accomplishment are not.
Some of the hallmarks of environments that foster and shape great accomplishment can be identified. In the final chapter, I use those hallmarks to assess
the prospects for human accomplishment in our own time.
Human Accomplishment
declined.
Human Accomplishment
and places.
TWO TOPICS THAT ARE NOT PART OF THE BOOK
Let me specify two topics that could easily be part of an account of
human accomplishment but that are not part of this one.
is not about why civilizations rise and
fall. Over the years, distinguished scholars in a line from Oswald
Spengler through Arnold Toynbee to Jared Diamond have set out to
explain why some parts of the world never developed advanced civilizations, why classical China was unable to adapt to modernity while
classical Japan could, or why the West rose to worldwide dominance
in the middle of the second millennium. These are important questions, and some of the material in this book informs them, but they
are not the ones I ask. Sometimes the trajectory of a civilization
tracks with its accomplishments in the arts and sciences; sometimes it
does not. In this book, I want to describe the ways in which the
characteristics of civilizations help us to understand their accomplishments, not why those civilizations came about or why they
is not about the psychological nature of
genius and creativity. This topic too has been the subject of a large
literature adorned by the recent work of scholars such as Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, Howard Gardner, and Dean Simonton, to name
three from whom I have benefited. In this book I focus on how the
realization of genius and creative potential has varied across times
It should be clear by now that I am engaged in an enterprise that begins
with a certain view of the world—a subtext, as it is called these days. Now is
a good time to declare that subtext explicitly.
xiv • INTRODUCTION
To celebrate human accomplishment is to embrace a heroic view of
mankind and its destiny. I am joining with the view expressed once in
these words:
What varieties has man found out in buildings, attires, husbandry, navigation,
sculpture, and painting! . . . What millions of inventions has he [in] arms,
engines, stratagems, and the like! What thousands of medicines for the health,
. . . of eloquent phrases to delight, of verses for pleasure, of musical inventions
and instruments! . . . How large is the capacity of man, if we should dwell
upon particulars!
My ally here is not some Victorian triumphalist talking about the
glories of the Industrial Revolution, but Augustine of Hippo, writing in City
of God in the first decades of 5C as the Roman Empire was collapsing. His
enthusiasm prefigures the Idea of Progress that during the Enlightenment
became the linchpin of intellectual discourse about history: Societies and
technologies are not just changing, but changing for the better.
From the outset of the Enlightenment until 1914, that view accumulated so much evidence that the idea of progress seemed self evident.
Mankind seemed to be progressing not just economically and technologically, but as a civilized and moral species. World War I shattered that
assumption.Then came the Hitlerian, Stalinist, and Maoist atrocities over the
next fifty years, making many wonder whether mankind might actually be
degenerating.
The disillusionment following the World Wars has since given rise to a
broader intellectual rejection of the idea of progress. The idea of the Noble
Savage, another fancy of the Enlightenment, has reemerged in our own time.
It has become fashionable to decry modern technology. Multiculturalism, as
that word is now understood, urges us to accept all cultures as equally praiseworthy.Who is to say that the achievements of Europe, China, India, Japan, or
Arabia are “better” than those of Polynesia, Africa, or the Amazon? Embedded in this mindset is hostility to the idea that discriminating judgments are
appropriate in assessing art and literature, or that hierarchies of value exist—
hostility as well to the idea that objective truth exists.
The contrasting perspective of Human Accomplishment—an empirically
appropriate perspective, I hope to persuade you—is this:
Humility is an appropriate starting point.We human beings are in many
ways a sorry lot, prone to every manner of vanity and error. The human
march forward has been filled with wrong turns, backsliding, and horrible
INTRODUCTION • xv
crimes. But taken in its grand sweep, it has indeed been a march forward. On
every dimension, the last half-dozen centuries in particular have brought
sensational improvement which, with qualifications, continues to this day.
A useful way of thinking about this issue is to ask yourself a question:
Can you think of any earlier moment in history in which you would prefer
to live your life? One’s initial reaction may be to answer yes. The thought of
living in Renaissance Florence or Samuel Johnson’s London or Paris in La
Belle Époque is seductive. But then comes the catch: In whatever era you
choose, your station in life will be determined by lottery, according to the
distribution of well-being at that time—which means that in Renaissance
Florence you are probably going to be poor, work hard at a menial job, and
find an early grave. But I doubt whether I need go to such lengths to make
the point. Let me ask the question another way:Would you be willing to live
your life at any time before the invention of antibiotics?
When it comes to wondering whether the human race has progressed
in matters of daily life, I admit that I have a hard time taking the negative seriously. I am happy to engage in discussion with those who accept that technology and affluence are a net plus, but who worry about their troubling side
effects. Spare me, however, the sensitive souls who deplore technological
advance and economic growth over their cell phones on their way to the
airport. Do technology and economic growth create problems? Certainly.
But as Maurice Chevalier said about the disadvantages of growing old,
consider the alternative.
I will hedge my optimism when it comes to the arts, but only marginally. It is hard to make a case that the literature, art, and music of today come
close to the best work of earlier ages, let alone signify progress. On the other
hand, if you chose to live in Renaissance Florence you would not be able to
enjoy Cézanne and Picasso. In Johnson’s London, you would not be able
to listen to Beethoven and Brahms. In La Belle Époque, you would not be
able to read Joyce or Faulkner. To live in today’s world is not only to have
access to all the best that has come before, but also to have a breadth and ease
of access that is incomparably greater than that enjoyed even by our parents,
let alone earlier generations. And if what passes for high culture in today’s
world seems sterile and self-indulgent, have you noticed the extraordinary
level of talent reflected in the products of today’s popular culture? I believe
that the potential for the creation of great art is out there in abundance.
Driving this optimism about both the arts and the sciences is my faith
in human impulses that I believe are so embedded in the makeup of Homo
xvi • INTRODUCTION
sapiens that no historical circumstances can permanently deflect them. Some
of these aspects of human nature, discussed in Part 4, are more arguable than
others. But as we embark, let me propose two that I think almost everyone
can agree upon, impulses so broad and so deep that one or the other seems to
embrace almost every specific accomplishment.
The first is the abiding impulse of human beings to understand, to seek
out the inner truth of things. We never succeed all at once, and often the
increments are so small and so infrequent that even the appearance of progress
is hard to detect. But, as individuals, we are able to discover many small truths.
As a species, as time goes on, we begin to converge on Truth in some of its
large and final forms.
The other impulse is Homo sapiens’ abiding attraction to beauty. Some
of the earliest artifacts of the species evince the impulse to create something
that has no purpose but to be pleasing to the human eye or ear, to our sense
of taste or touch, to our internal sense of what is beautiful. A lucky few of us
are able to create beauty; all of us have some corner in our souls that yearns
for it. Many of the most enduring human accomplishments have been,
simply, things of beauty.
Truth and beauty. Keats heard the Grecian urn telling him that they are
one and the same—
Beauty is truth, truth beauty—that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.
Keats’s romanticism still seems apt. I am struck by the number of scientists who come to the same equation, seeing in nature and the universe not
only truths about how things work but also the beauty embedded in those
truths. We needn’t push the thought too far—some truths are unlovely, and
some beauty has only the most tenuous relationship to any truth. But in the
realm of human accomplishment, truth and beauty are foci: twin ends toward
which the human spirit inclines. Human Accomplishment describes what we
have achieved, provides some tools for thinking about how it has been done,
and celebrates our continuing common quest.
 ONE
OF
P A R T
A SENSE
ACCOMPLISHMENT
The goal of this book is to view the pageant of human accomplishment whole. Many of the chapters skip across centuries and
countries.The discussion shifts from one science to another, from the
sciences to the arts, from the arts to philosophy.The analysis is long on
numbers and graphs about achievements that should be the stuff of tales
told beside the fire.A sense of that stuff is essential if the numbers and
graphs are to be kept in context, and conveying that sense is the purpose
of Part 1.
Chapter 1 parses the span of time to be covered.
Chapter 2 sets the scene as we pick up the story in –800.
Chapter 3 describes three concrete but very different settings in which
human accomplishment has unfolded.
Chapter 4 tries to evoke the wonder of the accomplishments that serve as
observations and variables in the databases.
ONE
A SENSE OF TIME
Before human accomplishment could begin, we had first of all to
become human. It took a long time. Bipedality came first, somewhere
in the vicinity of five million years ago. After bipedality, about two and a half
million years passed before the animal that walked on two legs learned to
make crude tools. The taming of fire required another one and a half million
years.
Even then, after these unimaginably long spans of time, the creature was
still Homo erectus, of formidable talents compared to every other animal but
not yet recognizably human. With his beetled visage and lumbering gait,
Homo erectus did not look human. More to the point, he did not think like a
human. Homo erectus had a cranial capacity averaging only two-thirds of ours,
and his mind was inhumanly slow.
The animal that the paleo-anthropologists call Homo sapiens and that we
identify as human appeared about 200,000 years ago.[1] It is sometime after
that point that human accomplishment begins. But when? Shall we mark the
beginning at the moment when a human first spoke a word? Drew an image?
Sang a song? Choosing a precise moment is, of course, as subjective as trying
to specify exactly when human beings stopped being Homo erectus and started
being Homo sapiens. But if one were forced to mark the dawn of human
accomplishment, the year –8000 has much to recommend it.
AS IT WAS IN THE BEGINNING
In its topography and climate, the world in –8000 was much the world we
know today. The last major glaciation of the Pleistocene had been receding
4 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
for centuries, and Europe was no snowier than it would be in modern times.
The Rhine, Seine, and Danube already rolled past countryside that we would
recognize today, and the Alps, though 10,000 years newer and a few meters
less eroded, would have looked the same to our eyes. In the Americas,
the southern tip of the remaining great glacier was already north of Lake
Superior, and the geology of what would become the United States had been
determined. Rockies and Appalachians, Mohave Desert and Mississippi valley
and Manhattan Island —all would have looked familiar. A few landmarks were
different then. The Sahara was verdant, and the white cliffs of Dover overlooked a river valley linking England with the European mainland. But a time
traveler from 21C would have had to fly over the surface of the Earth for
many days to discover these occasional surprises.
Nor would a visitor from the future have been surprised by the flora
and fauna.The forest on Manhattan was oak and elm and chestnut, inhabited
by chipmunks and robins and crows. The world still contained a few lonely
mastodons and saber-tooth tigers, but almost all of the animals you would
have found were familiar, even if some were found in unaccustomed places —
bison in Ohio, wolves in Germany, lions in Greece.
The most striking difference to a modern observer visiting –8000
would have been the scarcity of humans. People lived just about everywhere, from the farthest southern reaches of today’s Chile to the Norse
tundra, but they would have been hard to find, living in small and isolated
bands. They had to be scattered, because the human animal is a carnivore
by preference, and large carnivores surviving off the land require a large
range —about 5,000 acres per person, in the case of carnivore Homo sapiens.
Depending on local conditions, a band of just 25 hunter-gatherers could
require more than a thousand square miles.2 The world of –8000 probably
supported fewer than 4 million human beings, roughly the population of
contemporary Kentucky.3
What kind of people were they? In the important ways, just like us.That
doesn’t mean that people of –8000 perceived the world as we do, but
the differences were caused by cultural and educational gulfs, not smaller
brain size. All of us had our counterparts in the world of –8000 —people as
clever, handsome, aesthetically alert, and industrious as any of us, with senses
of humor as witty or ribald.[4] Humans of –8000 were so like us that one of
their infants raised in 21C would be indistinguishable from his playmates.
The humans of –8000 had already accomplished much. Fire had been
not just tamed, but manipulated, adapted for uses ranging from lamps to the
oxidation of pigments.5 Stone tools were sophisticated, including finely
A SENSE OF TIME • 5
crafted hammers and axes, and spears and arrows with razor edges.The technology for acquiring and working the materials for such objects had evolved
remarkably by –8000. There is evidence of underground mining of chert, a
quartz used for spearheads and arrowheads, as early as –35,000.
By –8000, humans already had fully developed languages, the most
advanced of which expressed ideas and emotions with precision. A few of
them apparently had begun to work fibers into textiles. They knew how to
grind seeds to make flour. The first tentative efforts to work copper had
already occurred. And the human spirit was manifesting itself. Burial of the
dead, drawings, sculptures, the conscious use of color, concepts of gods and
cosmic mysteries were all part of human cultures scattered around the earth
in –8000.
These were large accomplishments, and already set Homo sapiens apart
from other living creatures. And yet most of the world’s population in –8000
lived a daily life that in its physical dimensions was only marginally different
from that of the animals they hunted. Humans had learned to find shelter
from the cold and wet, but nothing we would find much more comfortable
than the dens used by other animals. They had tools for hunting and gathering, but food nonetheless had to be obtained continually, by tracking and
killing game or by finding wild vegetables and fruits. It was not always an
exhausting life. When food was plentiful, Paleolithic man actually had a
considerable amount of leisure time. But the tiny surpluses humans accumulated by smoking or salting their meat were stopgaps for emergencies, not
surcease from the endless quest to find enough to eat. Their weapons gave
them only a fighting chance against their predators, not security. Humans
could keep warm in cold weather, up to a point, but otherwise had to take the
environment as they found it.Those lucky enough to survive the first year of
life —about a quarter did not —were likely to be physically decrepit in their
thirties and dead in their forties.
Most of the accomplishments I have listed were not new as of –8000.
The emergence of Homo sapiens in his present form, using fire and shelters
and spoken language and simple tools, is dated to somewhere around
–40,000, which amounts to a distance from –8000 three times as great as our
own distance from –8000. And yet if we were to be whisked from our vantage
point in –8000 back to –40,000 and the only thing we had to go on was the
state of the human beings we observed, anyone but a sophisticated student of
prehistoric life would have a difficult time telling one of those years from
another.
The year –8000 is our point of reference because it is at about that time,
6 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
in one particular part of the world, that these generalizations about primitivism and stasis start to break down.[6] As I write, the first place this break is
known to have occurred lies in today’s Near East, a few hundred miles south
of Ankara.7 In the ensuing Neolithic period, goats and dogs were domesticated, a radical step forward. Shelters became sturdier and more spacious, built
of sun-dried mud brick. Embryonic forms of accounting emerged, in which
things were not only counted but also recorded. Why? Apparently because
some form of commerce had come into being. Religious observances
became more elaborate, requiring temples and paraphernalia.
8
IN TECHNICAL TERMS
The year I have chosen to illustrate the beginning of human accomplishment, –8000, is the accepted beginning of the Neolithic period
in the Middle East. The pre-agricultural world I have been describing is a combination of Upper Paleolithic (40,000 to 10,500 years
ago) and Mesolithic, a period which began 10,500 years ago and
persisted in parts of the Eurasian continent until as late as –3000.
Above all, it is around –8000 when something truly revolutionary
occurred: People began to understand that the seeds of food plants could be
collected and then deliberately put into the ground at a selected place. The
plants could be tended and eventually harvested. Not only could the produce
be eaten, some could be preserved and thereby accumulated. Animals could
be kept in one place, bred, and used as a continually available source of meat
and milk.
Not all of the consequences of this revolution were good. Agriculture
can require more labor than hunting and gathering —leisure time probably
decreased for the average male who was now an agriculturalist rather than a
hunter. Evidence from prehistoric skeletons suggests that life expectancy may
also have decreased after the introduction of agriculture. Domesticated
animals brought with them diseases such as beriberi, rickets, diphtheria, and
perhaps leprosy. Milk alone can transmit some 30 distinct diseases. Nor
did the Neolithic revolution trigger anything resembling a sudden surge
in progress. It took two more millennia before the barest beginnings of
a genuine civilization can be discerned.Vast areas of the world did not participate in even this much progress for still more millennia.
A SENSE OF TIME • 7
But despite the problems and despite the glacial pace of change, a decisive turning point was reached in –8000. Agriculture requires that humans
cease being nomads and put down roots in one place.The tasks of harvesting
and storing food spur technological innovation. Riverine agriculture, the
only option in the arid lands where the Neolithic revolution began, requires
irrigation. Irrigation requires technological innovation and complex forms of
social organization. Most of all: To control the food supply is to free up
human resources for other activities. Specialization of labor expands, and with
it new opportunities for mankind to explore its potential. The beginning of
agriculture in about –8000 opens the way for all the rest of human accomplishment, the topic of this book.
DEMARCATING 10,000 YEARS
The chapters to come will deal primarily with the last 2,800 years of human
history, with successively more detailed attention given to the last 1,000 years
and then to the last 600. The differences in the density of accomplishment
over time warrant this treatment, but it also introduces a distortion. Just as
Saul Steinberg’s famous map of America for The New Yorker equated the
distance from the East River to the Hudson with the distance from the
Hudson to Los Angeles, it is easy when looking back to lump everything
beyond a few centuries into an undifferentiated long ago. It is better if we can
avoid that distortion, for part of understanding the story of human accomplishment is understanding its context, and an important dimension of that
context is time.
The first task then is to try to acquire a sense of time: to grasp the how
long that separates the actors and events in the pageant from one another —
Aristotle from Newton, Newton from Einstein, the first tunnel under the
Euphrates from the first tunnel under the Thames. If we continue to take
–8000 as a rough starting point, we have a span of 10,000 years to hold in our
heads. The measuring rod I will use for this exercise is a four-century packet
of time that I hereby designate a unit, and the device for making a unit
meaningful will be the events that fill it.
By “events that fill it” I mean a counterpart to the landmarks on a map
that enable us to maintain an intuitive grasp of geographic distance, or at least
earth-size distances.You may not know the mileage from Shanghai to New
York or even from London to Paris, may never have traversed those routes,
8 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
but built into the experience of most of us is a sense of how far those distances
are.We have that sense because we have grown up with a visual image of the
globe, and the space on that globe is filled in our mind’s eye with the continents and oceans that give a context to how far.
To understand how long ago something occurred requires us to fill time
with events, just as the globe is filled with oceans and continents. In our own
lives, this is easy. We may say that time has flown, that 20 years seem to have
passed by in an instant, but we are easily able to set straight our internal sense
of how long ago something occurred by thinking about intervening events.
Time in one’s own life is kept from collapsing into an undifferentiated lump
by the events that fill it.
We use the same technique to keep a sense of time about modern
history. It is commonplace for older adults to have an intuitive sense of how
long ago events throughout 20C occurred — our memory fills 20C with
events. How long ago was the Korean War? The year was 1950, but it is not
simple subtraction of 1950 from the current year that tells us how long ago it
was. An American of a certain age is likely to recall Eisenhower’s election,
then perhaps Sputnik, or Nikita Khrushchev banging his shoe on the table
at the UN. Then follow the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the Vietnam
War, the first lunar landing, Watergate, the Iran hostage crisis, the Gulf War,
and 11 September 2001, all filling up the space between 1950 and today and
thereby configuring our sense of how long ago the Korean War occurred.
The First Unit. As we move back even just 100 years from 20C to 19C,
distortions begin to set in. The period from, say, 1812 to the Civil War is an
undifferentiated lump for many Americans who don’t enjoy history. But two
centuries is still manageable, because most people can use a sense of their own
national history to grasp how long it was. If one isn’t able to think of exactly
what happened from 1812 to 1861, most Americans are nonetheless likely to
know in at least a vague sort of way that the nation expanded westward and
engaged in a debate over slavery.
Move back another 200 years from 1800 to 1600. As of 1600, American history hasn’t really begun. The only resident Europeans north of
Mexico are a handful of Spanish in Florida and a handful of French fur traders
on the St. Lawrence River. In Rome, the Renaissance has drawn to a close.
Elizabeth I is on the English throne. Julius Caesar and As You Like It are the
current attractions at the newly opened Globe Theatre.
Already, it is hard to hold a sense of elapsed years in one’s head —the
two centuries from 1600 to 1800 seem blurrier than the two centuries
A SENSE OF TIME • 9
from 1800 to 2000. For many of us, naming even a dozen events that
occurred between 1600 and 1800 requires some thought. But we are still
not completely bereft of anchor points. Louis XIV, Charles II, Cromwell,
the Restoration, Frederick the Great, Isaac Newton, Peter the Great, the
settlement of the American colonies, the Revolutions in America and
France—each of us will recall different specifics, but enough big events loom
through the mist to give some sense of the length of 1600 to 1800. It stretches
most of us to the limit, but the combined four centuries from 1600 to 2000
thus remain a comprehensible period of time —the 400 years during which
the world we know was mostly built. This constitutes the first unit, and with
it we will measure our way back to –8000 and see if we can hold a sense of
10,000 years in our heads.
Two Units. Two units back from 2000, one unit back from Shakespeare,
take us to 1200 and a Europe working its way free from the intellectual desolation of the Dark Ages.Venice is the commercial capital of a Europe that is
being introduced to the mathematical concept of zero recently imported
from the Arabs (who in turn had borrowed zero from the Indians). Siena and
Oxford Universities have been founded in the last few decades. A campanile
recently built in Pisa is tilting alarmingly. Halfway across the world, the
Chinese are near the apogee of more than a thousand years of development,
with a culture that makes Europe look primitive. In England, Richard the
Lion-heart reigns and dies, and stories begin to be told about a man named
Robin Hood.
Consider how our sense of time has already collapsed. Unless you really
know your history, the England of Robin Hood is likely to be part of a
generalized image of castles and kings jumbled into a picture of an old
England that also includes Shakespeare. Yet as many years separate Richard
the Lion-heart from Shakespeare as separate Shakespeare from us.
Three Units. One more unit takes us back to 800. Charlemagne is
crowned head of the western Roman Empire on Christmas Day. Japan’s
seat of government has just been moved to Kyoto, where it will remain
for almost 1,100 years. Within the last decade, the Norse have conducted
their first raids on the British Isles, beginning a century of terror that will
spread from the British Isles to parts of Northern and Eastern Europe. As
many years separate the first Viking raids from Robin Hood as separate
Shakespeare from us.
Four Units. Another unit takes us to the year 400 and a Roman Empire
nearing its death throes. Among the other events attendant to the fall of the
10 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Empire, Roman military forces are preparing to leave Britain. If medieval
England is to many of us an undifferentiated lump of time, our loss of
perspective on Roman Britain is far greater. Most of us remember that
Britain was a sort of frontier outpost for the Romans. And yet, as the Roman
legions evacuate Britain in 407, Britain has been ruled from Rome almost
150 years longer than today’s United States has been in existence. Roman
Britain as of 407 has ancient and prominent families, with lineages going back
for a dozen generations —every generation of which spoke Latin. Some of
them live in magnificent villas that are older in 407 than many of the venerable stately homes of today’s Britain.
Five Units. One more unit brings us to the year one. Jesus of Nazareth
is about seven years old, perhaps learning the rudiments of carpentry. It is less
than half a century since Julius Caesar was assassinated. Virgil is only a few
years dead and Ovid is alive, scandalizing Roman society with Ars Amatoria.
China institutes formal civil service examinations as a requirement for holding public office.
Six Units. One unit back from the birth of Jesus takes us to –400. It
marks a special point for the people of the West, the earliest moment from
which we can yet see unbroken links reaching to our present day. In the year
–400, Socrates still meets with his students in the Athenian agora. In a few
centuries —mostly, in a few decades —immediately before and after –400, the
city-state of Athens lays down the foundations of Western art, literature,
music, philosophy, mathematics, medicine, and science.
Seven Units. If –400 is the frontier of the West’s direct link with its past,
–800 is its last outpost. Only three remnants of that world, albeit glorious
ones, will still be an important part of our culture today: The Iliad and the
Odyssey are already being recited, though they have yet to be written down,
and parts of the Old Testament are already inscribed. With these exceptions,
we are in an alien world as of –800.We are also in a world that is increasingly
barren of remembered events. By –800, it is getting difficult even for a
specialist to fill up the years with events, to talk with confidence about what
happened in –600 versus –700.
Eight Units. Another unit takes us to –1200, where only a handful
of landmarks can be discerned—and no wonder. The world of –1200 is as
remote from the Roman Empire as we are from Charlemagne. The Trojan
War occurs sometime around –1200, but it is fought between small Mediterranean fiefdoms, hardly more than glorified tribes.There are no topless towers
of Ilium, just a small walled town on the Anatolian plain. The great civiliza-
A SENSE OF TIME • 11
tion in –1200 is Egypt, which is in the middle of the sequence of pharaohs
named Ramses —one of whom, Ramses II, is the pharaoh of Exodus.
We are only eight units back, but remembered events have by now all
but ceased to exist. The Egyptologist knows the dates for the markers of a
pharaoh’s reign and can reconstruct some aspects of society, government,
and the economy from the archaeological record, inscriptions, and the occasional papyrus, but when it comes to describing intellectual, artistic, and technological accomplishments, scholars are required to talk about fragments of
evidence from which they try to infer the whole. We now use the word circa
to describe a range sometimes measured in decades, even centuries.
Twelve Units. Recorded events are so sparse that I will forgo moving
back just a single unit. Instead, we leapfrog back four more units —1,600
years, the length of time that separates us from the fall of Rome. This brings
us to –2800. Egypt is the dominant civilization in –2800 as it was in –1200 (a
breathtaking fact when one stops to think about it), but in –2800 it is a civilization in full flower, not in decay. In fact, Egypt in –2800 is on the verge of
becoming technologically more advanced than the Egypt of four units hence.
It goes without saying that the intervening 1,600 years have been filled
with events that we cannot recover. One of the first literary documents in the
world’s library comes from this era, a pharaoh’s instructions to his son. That
we have this papyrus is a freak of preservation, but it is a reminder that fathers
are giving instructions to sons during these intervening 1,600 years, just as
mothers are giving birth, marriages are being celebrated, and deaths are being
mourned. Families rise to fortune, become a local aristocracy for generations,
and then fall into obscurity —a cycle repeated many times over within those
four units. Local heroes perform deeds so heroic that people sing their praises
for centuries —deeds that, by –1200, have been forgotten for centuries. Individual humans experience life as intensely in those 16 centuries as we do. But
if one asks after the events with which we can fill out our conception of those
centuries, there is little to offer except the barest records of wars won and lost
and dynasties rising and falling.
Twenty-five units. Only a few other way stations remain to guide us
along the path back to –8000. Sumer got its start earlier than Egypt, although
trying to assign a date to the time when Sumer stopped being a collection of
villages and started being a civilization is difficult. Some take that point back
as far as –6000, others put it 2,000 years later. Just knowing that the differences can be so great indicates how trackless the plain has become. So I
will bring the exercise to an end. At our last outpost, we were at –2800.
• • •
12 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Contemplate how far we had come from 2000 to –2800. Twelve units altogether—twelve times the distance that separates us from Shakespeare. Get as
firm a grasp as you can on that 4,800-year package. Tack on 200 years. Then
double it. Double that immense span of time —and we have arrived at –8000.
It is not possible to hold 10,000 years in one’s head for long, but to have done
it for even a few minutes will serve two useful purposes as we proceed.
Understanding that 10,000 years is actually a very long time is an antidote to the tendency to think of human civilization as a figurative nanosecond relative to the history of human evolution, the history of the earth, or the
history of the universe. Those perspectives are valid for their purposes, but it
is also true that we are part of a pageant that stretches back a very long time
indeed in human terms, brief as it may be in the time scale of the cosmos.
Understanding how long 10,000 years really is also serves as an antidote
to the all-eras-are-equal mindset. Just one unit out of the 25 —a mere 400
years—got us back to Shakespeare. We of 21C are the beneficiaries of recent
centuries that have been spectacularly unlike any others.
T W O
A SENSE OF MYSTERY
–8000 to –800
The rest of Human Accomplishment is restricted to events after –800, when
the written historical record begins to match the archaeological record
in sufficient detail to make a fine-grained reconstruction of the achievements
possible. The purpose of this chapter is to give you the broad lay of the land
during the preceding seven millennia.
The accumulated record leaves us with two contrasting states of affairs.
If we confine ourselves to the end of the period, from around –1000 to –800,
we are on reasonably secure ground. Archaeologists have reconstructed a
picture of the state of human accomplishment as of –800 that still needs to be
amended now and then (I will give you an example of one such amendment
presently), but is unlikely to require a sweeping restatement. Alongside the
secure story of –800 are some authentic mysteries about technology and
knowledge in the millennia prior to –800 which, were they to be resolved,
could radically change our understanding of human history.
ACCOMPLISHMENT AS OF –800
The table on page 15 condenses the accomplishments we know to have
occurred at least somewhere in the world as of –800 or earlier. They are
grouped under the three basic headings of science, art, and applied knowledge, the last of which embraces technology, medicine, commerce, and
governance. Note that the table shows the highest level of known human
accomplishment as of –800. Few of these accomplishments were known to
more than a fraction of the human population at that time. Even something
14 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
as elemental as the wheel was apparently known only on the Eurasian land
mass and in North Africa. Agriculture had become sophisticated in parts of
the Mediterranean and China, but elsewhere remained primitive or altogether unknown.
Much of the technology listed in the table on the facing page had
been around for a few thousand years by the time of –800. Another area in
which a high degree of sophistication had been achieved long before
–800 was governance. The administrative systems used to rule Egypt and
China had hallmarks of modern hierarchical, geographically extended,
specialized bureaucracies. Legal codes were sophisticated, including distinctions between the civil and criminal realms.
Several of the categories have the word “indeterminate” in the line that
is supposed to contain the leading accomplishments. For some of these, we
have reason to believe that accomplishment was already substantial. This is
especially true for the arts.We know that literature, music, and dance existed
prior to –800, but can only estimate their level of development. The record
is more extensive for visual art, but the surviving works antedating –800 are
a fraction of the whole.
The absence of progress is most striking in the sciences. The ancients
knew the movements of the stars and planets and they could perform
complicated arithmetic, but, as far as we know, they had virtually no knowledge of chemistry, the earth sciences, or physics. What they thought they
knew about the physiology of the human body was mostly wrong.
THE DECLINE OF ACCOMPLISHMENT
We of the West know that the state of human existence can go both ways,
down as well as up, because we witnessed it in our own civilization.The Dark
Ages following the fall of Rome saw Europe sink back to technologies that
were far more primitive than those used during the preceding millennium.
The philosophical and literary foundations of Western civilization were
forgotten for centuries. Many works were lost irretrievably.
The same thing happened in the more distant past. The two greatest
civilizations that predate –800, the Sumerian and Egyptian, passed their technological and artistic peaks long before our story begins, in about –1700 and
–2300 respectively.[1] Among the other civilizations that predate –800, the
Indic civilization reached its peak circa –2200, the Minoan circa –1500, the
A SENSE OF MYSTERY • 15
THE STATE OF HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT AS OF –800
Practical Knowledge
Means of acquiring food Animal husbandry, a variety of grain and fruit crops, apiculture. The
fishing net, plow, sickle, seed drill, hoe. Irrigation, paddy cultivation.
Measurement The scale, sundial, measures of length, calendar.
Information Alphabets, pictographic script, record-keeping, counting boards.
Construction Stone buildings, walled cities, monumental structures, the arch, water storage
and distribution, drainage, city planning.
Tools The bow drill, windlass, composite bow, rope, simple pulley, abrasives, lens, mirror,
knife, ax, saw, scissors, various weapons.
Materials Leather, glass, iron, copper, silver, zinc, lead, boron, tin, mercury, bronze, papyrus,
pottery, linen, silk, cotton. The loom, knitting, smelting, metal casting, quarrying, mining.
Recreation Recreational hunting. Racing. Board games.
Controlled energy Coal, natural gas. Chimney furnace.
Appliances Sanitary facilities, fireplace, furniture, mirror, dishes, cooking utensils.
Transportation Canoes, rafts, framed boats, the sail, the anchor, pack animals. The highway,
bridge, tunnel, canal. The sledge, cart, chariot, skis.
Medicine Opiates, herbal pharmaceuticals, basic surgery, medical training.
Governance Separation of secular from religious leadership, separation of military and civil
powers, complex administrative systems, hierarchical structures, laws, sworn testimony,
proportional punishment, redress for civil charges. Surveying, mapping.
Commerce Long-distance trading, sale of goods and services, money.
Production Specialization of labor, cottage industries.
The Sciences
Earth sciences Indeterminate.
Astronomy Systematic stellar and planetary observations, knowledge of solar and lunar cycles,
obliquity of the ecliptic, first approximation of planetary movements, astronomicallybased calendars.
Mathematics Numerals, positional notation, arithmetic, rudimentary algebra and geometry,
mathematical permutations. Incomplete use of zero. First math textbook.
Biology Indeterminate.
Chemistry Introduction of the concept of elements.
Physics Indeterminate.
Philosophy & religion Monotheism. Codified moral precepts. Complex religious practices.
The Arts
Visual arts Sculpture, painting, mosaics, architecture.
Music Existed, but of indeterminate development.
Literature Epics. Poetry. Probably some form of drama.
Dance Existed, but of indeterminate development.
Decoration Pigments, red and blue dyes, jewelry, cosmetics, decorative clothing.
16 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Hittite circa –1300, and the Syriac (the Levantine civilization encompassing
the Phoenicians, Israelites, and Philistines) circa –1000.[2]
By –800, the Sumerian, Minoan, Hittite, Syriac, and Indic civilizations
had either disappeared or no longer warranted the word civilization. The two
Western civilizations still worthy of the name were in disorder and decay.
Mesopotamia was temporarily ruled by the Assyrians, the latest victor in wars
that had torn the region for centuries. In Egypt, the Libyans ruled over an
empire that had fragmented into several parts, fending off a local Cushite state
pushing into Upper Egypt. Technologically and artistically, Egypt was a shell
of its former self. Of all the great civilizations, only the Chinese remained on
an upward trajectory in –800.
The period from –8000 to –800 cannot be seen as a time in which
human accomplishment slowly accumulated, reaching a critical mass that led
to the subsequent takeoff. It is more accurately seen as a time of slow accumulation for the first 4,000 years, then a period in which great advances in
human accomplishment took place at rates ranging from gradual (Sumer) to
stunningly fast (Egypt), and then a downward slide everywhere but in China,
which was still in an early stage of development. Or to put it another way, the
world’s leading technological, artistic, and economic societies in –800 were
not nearly as advanced as Egypt had been 1,500 years earlier.
PUZZLES
The problem with the standard archaeological account of human accomplishment from –8000 to –800 is not that the picture is incomplete (which is
inevitable), but that the data available to us leave so many puzzles.
The Antikythera Mechanism as a case in point. It postdates –800 by
several centuries, but the lesson generalizes.3The Antikythera Mechanism is a
bronze device about the size of a brick. It was recovered in 1901 from the
wreck of a trading vessel that had sunk near the southern tip of Greece sometime around –65. Upon examination, archaeologists were startled to discover
imprints of gears in the corroded metal. So began a half-century of speculation about what purpose the device might have served.
Finally, in 1959, science historian Derek de Solla Price figured it out:
the Antikythera Mechanism was a mechanical device for calculating the positions of the sun and moon. A few years later, improvements in archaeological
technology led to gamma radiographs of the Mechanism, revealing 22 gears
A SENSE OF MYSTERY • 17
in four layers, capable of simulating several major solar and lunar cycles,
including the 19-year Metonic cycle that brings the phases of the moon back
to the same calendar date. What made this latter feat especially astonishing
was not just that the Mechanism could reproduce the 235 lunations[4] in the
Metonic cycle, but that it used a differential gear to do so. Until then, it was
thought that the differential gear had been invented in 1575.
I begin with the Antikythera Mechanism because it is at once so
comprehensible and so rich in implications.The Mechanism itself is no more
than a sophisticated mechanical device for replicating astronomical findings,
but “no more” is already quite a lot. The existence of this one artifact tells us
that a hitherto unsuspected technology existed as of –1C that may well have
included many such mechanisms. But what might they have been? We have
no idea.The Antikythera Mechanism is one of the rare examples of mechanical devices to survive—understandably, since mechanical devices made of
metal will by their nature hardly ever survive the centuries.
Nor can we make judgments about how extensive the technology
might have been based on the written record, for the written records that
survive comprise the barest fragment of the corpus of work that existed.The
great library at Alexandria burned within about 20 years of the time that the
ship carrying the Antikythera Mechanism sank, destroying some 400,000
manuscripts, and its successor burned a few centuries thereafter.[5] How many
engineering textbooks were among the 400,000 manuscripts destroyed in the
first fire? The 200,000 manuscripts destroyed in the second fire? Again, we
have no idea. We know only that the technology of the era was more extensive than the archaeological record can reconstruct.
This leaves us with two kinds of mystery about the peaks of human
accomplishment prior to –800: the unexplained but explicable, and the
potentially revolutionary.
Known Unknowns
Known unknowns is a phrase used by engineers to refer to aspects of a problem
that remain unsolved but that don’t require any new breakthroughs for their
solution. The science is already understood. I use known unknowns to refer to
accomplishments that unquestionably occurred prior to –800 but that require
additional knowledge before we can explain exactly how they were done. For
example, the lidless coffer believed to be Khufu’s sarcophagus in the Great
Pyramid is carved from one piece of granite. How does one go about hollow-
18 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
ing out a block of granite seven and a half feet long and about three and a half
feet wide and deep? Flinders Petrie, the famous Egyptologist and a founder of
modern archaeology, determined that it was done with tubular blades used to
drill a circular groove deep into the granite.The cores were then broken away
and, core by core, the interior space was created. Because bronze is the only
metal known to have been available to the Egyptians at that time (about
–2500), Petrie reasoned that the blades must have been inset with jeweled
cutting points —probably diamond, if they were to cut the unusually hard
type of granite used in the sarcophagus.6
Petrie recovered some of these cores and was able to examine the spirals
made by the cutting blade. “On the granite core No. 7,” he wrote,“the spiral
of the cut sinks one inch in the circumference of six inches, a rate of ploughing out which is astonishing.”Astonishing indeed. Granite core No. 7 was cut
with a four-inch drill, which means that it had a circumference of about 13
inches. Petrie’s wording implies that the drill was cutting an inch into the
rock in roughly half a turn. Petrie inferred from his findings that somehow
the Egyptians must have placed a load of “at least a ton or two” on the drills.7
Petrie’s explanation is plausible given the artifact he saw before him, but
to say that such a drill was used leaves us without any clear idea of how the
Egyptians managed to do it — especially because, as Petrie himself noted,
Egypt is not known to have possessed diamonds at that time. Nor have any
examples of jeweled saws or drills survived. Egyptologist Mark Lehner argues
that a copper drill could have done the job, with an abrasive slurry of water,
gypsum, and quartz sand doing the actual cutting, but, he acknowledges, the
Egyptians’ ability to cut stone as hard as granite and basalt “remains one of the
truly perplexing questions of pyramid-age masonry.”8We know that the deed
was done, but to do it required not just a single technical feat but an integrated body of technology in mining and the working of extremely hard
minerals; the fabrication of drills that integrated different materials; and
means of applying extremely high pressure to the drills. None of these
accomplishments is specifically mentioned in the table of human accomplishment by –800 because they are all inferred. We have no direct information
about the specific tools and techniques that were invented.
The most famous illustration of the known-unknowns problem is the
Great Pyramid at Giza. It was built; there is no doubting that. But how? In
asking that question, I am not raising any of the wild and wonderful theories
that have been advanced about the Great Pyramid. The Great Pyramid poses
genuine mysteries without them.
Consider first the most readily verifiable of all the Great Pyramid’s
A SENSE OF MYSTERY • 19
aspects, its physical shape and placement. The alignment of the Great
Pyramid with the cardinal points of the compass is nearly perfect, with
an average error for each face of less than .02 percent. The difference
between the longest and shortest sides is an inch and three-quarters, in a
structure the length of two and a half football fields made of large stone
blocks. The base is level to within slightly less than inch.9This betokens
precision surveying of a high order. Such precision is not obtained by
taking a few sightings of the direction of the sun at the spring and fall
equinox or by crude measuring rods.Whatever surveying procedures the
Egyptians had, they were capable of minute calibration.
Once the measurements had been obtained, there remained the
problem of making good on them in the construction phase, just one of
the problems that the pyramid builders overcame. The Great Pyramid is
built of approximately 2.3 million blocks, most of them weighing about
2.6 tons. It was originally covered with an additional 115,000 polished
casing stones, each weighing about ten tons. Maneuvering blocks of that
size without modern equipment can be done with enough manpower,
but assembling them into a structure 480 feet high requires some sort of
lifting mechanism. Herodotus tells us that levers were used, but gives us
no sense of their nature. The only mechanism that we know was available to the Egyptians was ramps.10 But the ramp theories that have been
proposed all involve practical difficulties that leave no one solution with
a clear advantage.11 Some have argued that the difficulties are so great
and would have involved so much material and weight that none of the
ramp solutions is satisfactory.12
The solution to these mysteries need not be exotic. One engineer
has suggested that the most energy-efficient way to raise the blocks to
the upper courses of the pyramid was just to drag them up, perhaps aided
by a simple pulley system.13 Mark Lehner, who built a small pyramid
with the help of a stone mason using tools known to be available to
the Egyptians, concluded that “it was abundantly clear that [the Egyptians’] expertise was not the result of some mysterious technology or
mysterious sophistication, but of generations of practice and experiment.”14 But while we are able to imagine ways in which the Egyptians
might have done it, we still have no way of knowing exactly which of
those ways were used, or whether they might have had some other
approach altogether.
Other known unknowns are associated with Egyptian technology,
but these should make the point. We can be confident that the earlier
20 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
A to point
B
them,
stones.”15
16
17
THE WALLS AT SACSAYHUAMAN
The pyramids at Giza are only the most famous examples of the
ancient human impulse to wrestle huge rocks from point
and then assemble them into structures. Up to a certain weight of
rock, these constructions do not require a high level of engineering
sophistication. Abundant manpower plus some basic knowledge of
ropes and levers suffice. But how does one use manpower to maneuver and assemble much heavier blocks? Egyptian structures pose
some interesting problems in this regard, but at least with Egypt we
are dealing with a society known to possess sophisticated technology.
The walls at Sacsayhuaman, just outside the Inca city of Cuzco in
Peru, are more baffling. They are built of about 1,000 stone blocks,
expertly dressed in polygonal forms and assembled as if they were
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.The Spanish invaders who first saw the wall
marveled at the precision of its assembly. “They are so well fitted
together that you could not slip the point of a knife between two of
” wrote Spanish explorer Garcilaso de la Vega of the blocks,
“. . . which are more like pieces of a mountain than building
Many of the blocks are in the 200-ton range. The weight
of the largest is approximately 355 tons. The Incas, to whom the
walls of Sacsayhuaman are attributed, did not even have the wheel. It
has been a daunting task to find a plausible scheme for moving a
355-ton stone from the quarry to the site of the wall, dressing it as
a polygonal form, and then hoisting and fitting it perfectly with
other polygonal forms, with the technology known to be available to
the Incas, though efforts have been made. It would be a challenge
to move such an object even with today’s technology.
table offers a reasonably good profile of the state of human accomplishment
in –800. It is far off the mark as a profile of all that human beings had ever
accomplished before –800.
A Renegade Paradigm
The parsimonious explanation for the known unknowns is that their existence implies lost technology that could be made to fit within the parameters
of the established model of ancient history. But these and other anomalies are
A SENSE OF MYSTERY • 21
sufficiently strange to have made people wonder whether something more
exotic is involved. The result has been an array of theories ranging from
ancient visitors from other planets to lost civilizations of miraculous powers.
These theories have usually been addressed in books written by authors so
ardently partisan that it is easy to find ways in which they have exaggerated,
made mysteries out of matters that could have simple explanations, seized
upon coincidence, and selectively ignored evidence that does not fit their
favored explanations.
Barely discernible behind the swirling New Age smoke is a glimpse of
something that may be fire. That possibility has attracted a handful of scientists, still a renegade minority, who are trying to investigate systematically the
hypothesis that a lost human civilization predated the Egyptian and Sumerian
civilizations. As to when that civilization existed, where, how advanced it was,
why there are so few traces of it —the answers to all these questions remain so
speculative that I will not even outline them. But the record with which these
renegade scientists are working contains some data so challenging that they
are correct in saying, “If this is true, then the accepted model of ancient
history cannot be true.” I briefly describe two of the puzzles that fit this category, each of which is based on a different type of evidence.
Evidence for historical origins of the monomyth. It is commonly understood that something like the story of Noah and the flood is part of the
mythology of cultures around the globe. It is less widely realized that the
unity of the world’s myths goes far beyond such basic similarities. So elaborate and intertwined are the mythic traditions in places as disparate as Mayan
Central America, Viking Scandinavia, and Pharaonic Egypt, that it has for
some decades been widely accepted among specialists in the field that a single
mythic tradition, what Joseph Campbell named the monomyth, underlies all
the known discrete mythic traditions.[18]
Once we grant the existence of the monomyth, we have a choice
between two broad explanations: Either the human psyche is such that
cultures everywhere produce extraordinarily similar myths (the view
propounded by psychoanalyst Carl Jung and comparative-religion scholar
Mircea Eliade, and accepted as well by Campbell), or the myths had a
common historic origin.The problem with a common historic origin is that
it requires us to posit a means by which the myths were shared across continents, and the standard paradigm of ancient history does not allow for that.
In 1969, science historians Giorgio de Santillana of M.I.T. and Hertha
von Dechend of Frankfurt’s Goethe-Universität came down on the historical
side of the debate with a book entitled Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on Myth
22 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
and the Frame of Time.
19 At its center is the proposition that the world’s
mythologies were drawn from a common historical source with a common
body of astronomical knowledge that included knowledge of precession of
the equinox.
The precession of the equinox is an astronomical phenomenon caused
by the earth’s wobble (the earth spins like a top that has lost a little speed).
One of the results of the wobble is that, seen from the earth’s surface, the
constellation against which the sun rises at the spring and fall equinoxes
changes over time. At the beginning of 21C, the sun at equinox rises in front
of the constellation Pisces —but only for another century or so, because, as the
song says, we are at the dawning of the Age of Aquarius.
A complete cycle through all twelve constellations of the zodiac takes
25,920 years, with each “age” lasting 2,160 years. Thus the first salient fact
about the precession of the equinox is that it cannot be discovered without
accurate star records over a significant period of time. It takes 72 years for the
constellations to move one degree of arc —about as far along the horizon as
the width of your forefinger held out at arm’s length. The standard histories
hold that the Greek astronomer Hipparchus discovered precession of the
equinox in about –134 by comparing his star charts with ones that had been
prepared a century and a half earlier.
De Santillana and von Dechend were not especially concerned with
trying to date the original discovery of precession, mentioning almost in passing that the most likely date is about –5000, nor did they try to assign it to a
lost civilization.20Their concern was to establish their basic contention about
the historical-astronomical nature of the monomyth. But, like it or not, to
demonstrate that precession was known millennia before Hipparchus and that
this knowledge was disseminated throughout the world —both of which are
minimal implications of Hamlet’s Mill—already means that the standard paradigm is in disarray. I will not try to summarize the evidence in Hamlet’s Mill,
but it should be emphasized that the book is not the work of sensationalists,
but of exceptionally erudite scholars of the world’s mythic traditions.
Hamlet’s Mill is only one source of evidence that the advocates of an
early and advanced lost civilization present on behalf of the hypothesis that
precession was known much earlier than Hipparchus. Some of the archaeological evidence, which includes purported astronomical and mathematical
features of the design of the great ancient monuments around the world, is
intriguing. But in trying to evaluate it, we are once again confronted with
advocates who appear to be torturing the data until they confess.The limited
A SENSE OF MYSTERY • 23
point here is that the core scholarly work on the monomyth as it relates to
knowledge of precession of the equinox poses challenges to the standard
paradigm that justify investigation.
Dating the age of the Sphinx. The Great Sphinx of Giza is customarily
dated to circa –2500 and the reign of Khafre, which followed the reign of
Khufu and the construction of the Great Pyramid. In 1991, questions about
the accuracy of that dating led to a geological examination of the weathering
of the limestone from which the Sphinx was carved. Geologist Robert
Schoch of Boston University, a mainstream academic with no prior connection to Egypt or to controversies about ancient history, concluded that the
body of the Sphinx was eroded by water, not by sand. If true, this finding
made the conventional date of –2500 impossible. Egypt in general and the
Giza plateau in particular were arid then and have remained arid since.
But Egypt has not always been dry. At the end of the most recent Ice
Age, Egypt began to enjoy a moist climate called the Nabtian Pluvial. For
thousands of years, the land that we know as a bone-dry desert was a green
savannah. The Nabtian Pluvial lasted until around –3000, when the desiccation of Egypt began.21 So it was indeed possible that the Sphinx was eroded
by water runoff if the construction of the Sphinx had occurred early enough.
Subsequent study in collaboration with seismologist Thomas Dobecki
provided triangulating information.The rump of the Sphinx had been carved
more recently than the rest of the body, it was determined, and collateral
evidence strongly suggested that the more recent work had indeed been done
in –25C. A comparison of the depth of weathering in the newer and older
portions led Schoch and Dobecki to conclude that the minimum date for the
carving of the older portion was in the region of –7000 to –5000, with an
open-ended possibility that it was older still.22
Schoch and Dobecki presented their findings at the 1991 annual meeting of the Geological Society of America.This was followed by a presentation
of competing papers under the aegis of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science in February 1992.23 A variety of objections to the
geological findings were raised, with alternative theories involving fasteroding limestone, failure to take remaining precipitation into account (it still
rained in Egypt after the Nabtian Pluvial, though infrequently), and confusion of differential erosion with changes in rock strata.24 In each case, Schoch
had a technical response and found some independent support.25
Meanwhile, the Egyptologists have remained unconvinced. Their
position is that the archaeological reconstruction of Egypt’s ancient past is
24 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
rich and systematic. A chain of evidence gives them good reason to conclude
that they understand the evolution of Egyptian society in the pre-dynastic
period. A civilization capable of building the Sphinx in –5000 or earlier
would have left an archaeological trace. It did not. The geological evidence
must be wrong.
The continuing debate is taking a new tack as I write, with Schoch
arguing that other monuments in the Giza area exhibit water-weathering
features, suggesting that the archaeological traces of an earlier dynasty exist.26
How the debate will turn out is anybody’s guess; the arguments involve
arcane issues in two fields, geology and Egyptology, that outsiders cannot
assess independently.
A SALUTARY CAUTION
How far had human accomplishment advanced by –800? By this time I hope
you will understand the reasons for being circumspect about the answer. It is
possible that the renegades are right, and that ancient human prehistory may
have to be rewritten from scratch. I have no idea what the odds are, but the
history of science is replete with other renegades who were ridiculed and
eventually triumphed. In living memory, the theory of plate tectonics went
from a far-fetched, widely derided hypothesis to the consensus explanation.
So did the theory that a collision between earth and an asteroid wiped out the
dinosaurs. An open mind is prudent in these matters.
However the story prior to –800 comes to be told, I will now retreat
to our more confident understanding of human accomplishment as we
cross that dividing line. Virtually nothing of the art, literature, music,
tech-nology, mathematics, medicine, and science of –800 is now part of our
everyday world. It was during the centuries beginning with –800 that our
heritage in all of these fields began to accumulate, and it is to that story which
I now turn.
THREE
A SENSE OF PLACE
This chapter tries to convey a sense of what it was like to live in the
midst of three very different configurations of human accomplishment.The sites and times have been chosen to prefigure themes that will surface later in the book. For Western readers, Antonine Rome takes us close to
our cultural roots in ancient Greece. It also serves as an example of a culture
of great power and high technology that is short on artistic and intellectual
creativity. The Chinese city of Hangzhou in the Song Dynasty serves as a
window into an advanced civilization that developed apart from that of the
West. It is also an example of the merits and defects of stability in a culture.
Samuel Johnson’s London is close enough to our time to be recognizable but
startlingly less advanced in some ways than Hangzhou. London in 18C also
serves as a reference point for later questions about what has made the last
600 years so different from all the rest.
Another objective of this chapter is to break loose from the condescension toward the past that has become fashionable in recent years. The
phrase “dead white males” represents one form of that condescension. A
more troubling aspect of it is the presumption of moral superiority that too
often causes us to look down on just about anyone who lived more than a
few decades ago. But we can step outside that impulse at least momentarily.
Obviously —as soon as we stop to think about it —our descendants will find
our own moral sensibility on issues such as class, race, and gender as flawed
as we find the moral sensibility of our ancestors, and our descendants will also
be just as inappropriately confident of their superior perspective as we are of
ours. By the same token, we can look back on the accomplishments of the
past understanding that we are unlikely to have a grasp of right and wrong
26 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
more nuanced than that of Aristotle or Confucius —or, for that matter, to
have a sense of a life well lived superior to that of Aristotle’s sandal-maker or
Confucius’s cook.
ANTONINE ROME, 138–180
“In the second century of the Christian era the empire of Rome comprehended the fairest portion of the earth and the most civilized portion of
mankind.”1 So Gibbon begins his epic, The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire, describing the apogee of Rome under Antoninus Pius and Marcus
Aurelius.
A Roman citizen lucky enough to be free and possessed of a little
money lived a life that in many ways remains competitive with any to follow.
If he wished to study history, he could read Thucydides, Herodotus, or
Plutarch. If he wished to study philosophy, he had before him, in more complete form than we do, the works of Plato and Aristotle. If he wished for literature or drama, he had available to him The Iliad, The Odyssey, The Oresteia,
the Oedipus plays, Antigone, Electra, Medea, Lysistrata, The Aeneid, and more.
Our Roman citizen had easy access to these works. Rome under the
Antonines boasted over 25 public libraries, with books that could be checked
out for reading at home.2 The affluent bought rather than borrowed —easy
enough, since booksellers abounded —and bought in profusion. No house of
any pretensions, Seneca wrote, lacked “its library with shelves of rare cedar
wood and ivory from floor to ceiling.”3
The Roman connoisseur of painting and sculpture lived in a world that
already possessed works that today are among the most prized items in
Europe’s greatest art museums —Nike of Samothrace, the Laocoön group, Venus
de Milo, the Elgin marbles. As in the case of literature, the pieces that survive
are only a fragment of the fine art that the Roman citizen of 2C could enjoy.
Pausanias, a travel writer of that era, wrote a ten-volume tourist guide to
Greece, which among other things contained the equivalent of today’s “must
see” lists of the best art. Of dozens of works he singles out, we have only a
handful. Or consider the most famous Greek sculptor, Phidias. We have
originals in the form of the Elgin marbles, copies of a few of his statues, and
nothing at all of what the ancients considered to be his masterpiece,
the statue of Zeus at Olympia. The Greek statuary that we still find so
compelling today consists largely of what the ancient world considered its
second-tier work.
A SENSE OF PLACE • 27
We know even less about the paintings of antiquity. The mural painter
Polygnotus was widely considered to be Phidias’s equal in genius, but nothing survives to our day. Pliny the Elder, writing in 1C, tells us that the Greek
painter Zeuxis depicted some grapes with such success that the birds flew up
to them, and that Zeuxis’s contemporary Parrhasius depicted a linen curtain
with such truth that Zeuxis asked for it to be drawn aside. We have none of
their work.4 Petronius writes in the Satyricon that “. . . when I came upon the
work of Apelles [Alexander’s court painter] . . . I actually worshipped it. For
the outlines of the figures gave a rendering of natural appearances with such
subtlety that you might believe even their souls had been painted.”5 For Pliny,
Apelles “surpassed all those who were born before him and all those who
came later.”6 Nothing of his work survives.
Everything we know about the painting of antiquity comes from a
comparative handful of works from the Roman era, mostly copies, many
of which survived only because they were preserved under the volcanic
ash that buried Pompeii —and Pompeii was only a provincial town. Trying
to judge the glories of Greek painting from these remnants is impossible.
Furthermore, we know that Roman critics at the time of the Antonines were
unanimous in thinking that the art of their day had deteriorated.7 But at least
the Romans were enthusiastic consumers. The famous Medici Venus that now
resides in the Uffizi gallery in Florence is merely a copy, the best of the 33
Roman copies of the Greek original that still survive.8 We can only guess at
how many copies existed in the time of the Antonines.
Rome had not only access to great literature and art but to advanced
technology. Our Roman citizen traveled beyond Rome on highways built
on raised causeways and packed in layers of stones, gravel, and concrete.They
were self-draining, wide enough for two of the largest wagons to pass without difficulty, with smooth surfaces (sometimes stone, sometimes metalled).
Like today’s interstate highways, they tunneled through hills, spanned marshes on viaducts, maintained an easy grade, and typically stretched for miles
between curves. Posthouses with fresh horses were maintained all along the
roads, enabling military and administrative communications to cover more
than 100 miles per day.9 These highways crisscrossed the empire —a distance,
from the far northwest corner in England to the far southeast corner in
Jerusalem, of more than 3,700 miles. Or, if our Roman citizen traveled by
sea, he could sail from Ostia, conveniently located a mere 16 miles from
downtown Rome—not because there was a natural harbor in Ostia, but
because Roman engineers had built an artificial one.10
The Romans built structures on a colossal scale. The Coliseum, seating
28 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
50,000 people, the largest amphitheatre built anywhere in the world until
20C, is the most famous but not the most spectacular. A candidate for that
title might be the Baths of Caracalla, built a few decades after the death of
Marcus Aurelius, covering 270,000 square feet, about half again as large as the
ground area of the U.S. Capitol building. The main block was about as high
as the nave of St. Paul’s Cathedral in London.11 It was built of marble and
decorated with gold, ivory and rare woods, containing not only baths and a
calidarium, much like our modern sauna, but also gardens, libraries, gymnasia,
and recreation centers. These lavish facilities were open to all free citizens,
including women and children, for a trivial fee.
Amidst these evidences of advanced technology were strange lacunae.
At the baths, for example, one followed a good sweat in the calidarium by having one’s skin scraped with a strigil made of bone or wood.Why scrape? Why
not a thorough soap and rinse? Because the Romans had neglected to invent
soap. What makes this omission so striking is the other ways in which the
ancient Romans’ lives were just like ours. In ancient Rome, people lived in
apartment buildings, followed professional sports, went out for a drink at the
local bars, picked up a quick bite from a fast-food restaurant, whistled popular songs.12 They hunched over board games in public parks, had household
pets, went to the theatre, carried on extensive correspondence, ran complex
business enterprises.13 Men went to barbershops and women went to hairdressers. The wealthy of Rome dressed for dinner, escaped from
the noise of the city to their beach homes, and collected fine wine (the vintage of –121 was so famous that bottles of it were still being hoarded two
centuries later).14
But Rome had no soap. And so it is with dozens of other aspects of
Roman life which were nothing whatsoever like our own.Take medical care,
for example. Some kinds of medical facilities were extensive. Every chartered
city maintained a corps of physicians who worked in complexes that were
typically well-designed and spacious.15 Most slave-owning homes included a
slave physician and an infirmary in which sick slaves could be tended.
Rome’s water supply was abundant and sanitary. An elaborate sewage system
carried off waste water, and Rome maintained public latrines, with marble
seats (some of them heated in winter), flushed by a stream of running water.16
Private physicians abounded, and the fashionable ones made a good living —
600,000 sesterces in one instance that has come down to us, equivalent to a
six-figure-dollar income today. Physicians made house calls, and had a vast
array of medications. An able Roman surgeon had a set of instruments
as good as any that would be available until the French Revolution (200
A SENSE OF PLACE • 29
different kinds of surgical instruments have been found at Pompeii17), and he
was able to conduct a number of sophisticated operations with them —repairs
of hernia and fistula, removal of gall stones and abscesses, and plastic surgery
for removing the brands of slaves who had become freedmen. The Roman
physician could set fractures and amputate limbs as professionally as any
physician until 20C. The obstetrics of the time included podalic version,
turning the fetus in the uterus, a life-saving technique that was forgotten for
a thousand years after the Roman Empire fell.
However: The same Rome had no public hospitals and threw its
garbage in the street. The pristine water from the mountains flowed through
lead pipes, slowly poisoning the population. The surgeon had no anesthesia
and no knowledge of antiseptic practice. The clinical descriptions of disease
were reasonably accurate, but the etiology of those diseases was conjecture,
almost always wrong. The understanding of human anatomy and physiology
was fragmentary. So while Galen, whose work would be considered definitive until the Renaissance, understood that blood ebbed and flowed, he did
not understand that it circulated. Erasistratus correctly noted the difference
between sensory and motor nerves, but thought they were hollow tubes carrying liquid. And so it was with most knowledge of the human physiology:
a few half-truths alongside a mountain of error.
The inventory of medicines consisted of a few useful items —the juice
of mandragora and atropin, drugs for dulling pain, for example. But the rest
of the Roman physician’s vast materia medica consisted of varieties of snake
oil. In the office of that physician I mentioned with an annual income of
600,000 sesterces were chests with titles such as “Eye-salve tried by Florus on
Antonia, wife of Drusus, after other doctors had nearly blinded her”; “Drug
from Berytus for watery eyes. Instantaneous”; and “Remedy for scab. Tested
successfully by Pamphilius during the great scab epidemic.” The ingredients
in these ointments and medicines might be hyena skin, dried centipedes, or
a variety of mammalian excretions. Thus one Roman was led to observe
sourly that “Diaulus has been a surgeon and is now an undertaker. At last he’s
”18 begun to be useful to the sick in the only way that he’s able.
We cannot reconstruct life expectancy with precision, but the available
data are grim.The experience of a few famous families, who presumably had
access to state-of-the-art medical care, shows high infant mortality, and the
fragmentary data about common folk are even worse —of 164 surviving epitaphs of Jews in Rome, for example, 40 percent are of children below the age
of 10.19 Nor was adulthood safe. Appendicitis, strep throat, or an infected
scratch could easily be fatal in Antonine Rome.
30 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Roman ignorance about human physiology and the nature of disease
extended to the rest of the sciences. The Greeks had made some progress.
Five centuries earlier, Parmenides had suggested that matter can be neither
created nor destroyed, and Leucippus and Democritus had enunciated theories of atomism. Archimedes had understood the principles of the lever and
of buoyancy. Strato had suggested that falling bodies accelerate and Strabo
had suggested that volcanos make mountains. Anaximander had proposed
something resembling an evolutionary hypothesis. But these and other
accomplishments in the hard sciences were the merest glimmerings of an
understanding of the way the physical world works. And it is only hindsight
that lets us select these truths, or half-truths, from among the host of things
the Romans believed that were completely wrong.
Even when the results looked right, Roman science was usually wrong.
During the first decade after Antoninus Pius came to power, Claudius
Ptolemy completed the Almagest and thereby brought ancient astronomy to
its summit. His mathematical elaboration of a geocentric system predicted
planetary motion with great accuracy, and it remained in use for more than
a thousand years. But this elegant construction, in spite of its great predictive
power, was wholly wrong about how the solar system actually works.
Perhaps stranger to our sensibility than the Romans’ lack of scientific
knowledge was their lack of curiosity.The Roman code, widely honored from
the Republic through the Antonines, demanded that the Roman gentleman
engage in public service, that he embody vigor and industriousness, that he
shun lexus (self-indulgence) and inertia (idleness). But Romans despised learning for learning’s sake. A Roman gentleman might study philosophy so that
he could learn how to live properly, die with dignity, and be stoically indifferent to the vagaries of fortune. But to study philosophy merely for the sake
of knowledge was unseemly —a kind of inertia.20
Architecture was the one art to which a Roman gentleman might
properly apply himself. It involved science and aesthetics, but to a clear and
present purpose. Otherwise, Romans disdained artists as much as they disdained scholars. As some earlier quotations from Petronius and Pliny indicated, Romans of the upper class often loved the art itself.They shared with our
own time the rites and sensibilities of connoisseurship. Ancient Rome had
art critics, historians, and collectors who spent vast sums on their Great
Masters. But Lucian, writing in the Antonine era, observes matter-of-factly
that a sculptor was without prestige, “no more than a workman, doing
hard physical labor . . . obscure, earning a small wage, a man of low esteem,
classed as worthless by public opinion, neither courted by friends, feared by
A SENSE OF PLACE • 31
enemies, nor envied by fellow citizens.”21 Even more startling are the words
of Plutarch about Phidias, whose artistic works were regarded by the ancients
with the awe that we accord Michelangelo’s: “No gifted young man upon
seeing the Zeus of Phidias at Olympia ever wanted to be Phidias. For it does
not necessarily follow that, if a work is delightful because of its gracefulness,
”22 the man who made it is worthy of our serious regard.
That the Romans could so reverently admire a work of art and so scorn
the person who created it is perhaps part of the reason that the Romans left
us so little of their own creation in the arts and sciences.There are the exceptions of Virgil, Horace, Cicero, and Ovid, plus a sprinkling of other fine
Roman writers, the Stoics in philosophy, and a few major scientific achievements across the Mediterranean in Alexandria. But taken as whole, the
Roman world throughout its history, whether republic or empire, was a near
intellectual void when it came to the arts and sciences—“peopled by a race
of pygmies” in Gibbon’s contemptuous words.23 Scientific, philosophic, and
artistic progress did not come to an end when Rome fell, but, without much
exaggeration, when Rome rose.
In matters of religion, Antonine Rome was boundlessly cynical. The
authorities kept the temples of the Roman gods in immaculate condition,
and each of the many deities’ festival days were attended with the prescribed
rites. But hardly any Romans actually believed that the gods were gods, any
more than they believed that the dead emperors became gods. If one looks
for a Roman true faith, astrology is a better candidate. People of every rank,
including emperors, hung on the readings of the stars, and the top astrologers
had both celebrity and political power. Oracles were taken seriously as well,
along with magic.
Real religious devotion in Antonine Rome was concentrated among
the cults that had been coming and going for centuries —the cults of Isis,
Cybele, and the various mystery sects, for example.Two of the cults had gravitas—the worship of Mithras, imported from Persia, and Christianity —but at
the time of the Antonines, both were still exceptions to the larger religious
environment of Rome which was, not to mince words, spiritually and theologically vacuous.
Roman shortcomings in the arts, sciences, and religion were matched
by a history of governance that can charitably be described as spotty. On the
positive side, the Romans were exceptional administrators. They could dispatch Roman governors to distant territories, create efficient bureaucracies,
and speed directives and resources across the empire.To their credit, Romans
usually ruled with restraint. They could be ruthless in suppressing uprisings,
32 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
as we know from the story of the Jews and Masada, but they had a deserved
reputation for accommodating local customs and institutions while maintaining firm political control. We may also admire Roman law, developed
over the course of centuries into a body of jurisprudence that would be used
to restore the rule of law in Northern Europe after the Dark Ages.
But efficiency in administration and sophistication in law is not the
same as possessing an advanced or just political system. Rome was a functioning republic for some three centuries, about a century longer than the
United States has yet survived as a republic, but it was aristocratic, with voting rights limited to a small portion of the population. The Roman republic
was also a slave state on such a scale that Gibbon estimated that the number
of slaves may have outnumbered the free inhabitants of the Roman world. A
proposal that slaves should wear a distinctive garment was rejected, Gibbon
notes dryly, because “it was justly apprehended that there might be some danger in acquainting [the slaves] with their own numbers.”24 Nor was Roman
slavery kindly. Roman masters might dispose of the lives of their slaves at
will, and were not reluctant to use that power. We know, for example, that
the size of the slave force in the palace of a Roman noble family could number about four hundred souls. The reason we know that number is that the
Roman archives record an instance in which the master in such a palace was
murdered, and the household slaves were executed for failing to prevent his
murder —all four hundred of them.25
Apart from slavery, Roman politics were brutal and primitive even in
the heyday of the Republic. By the time Caesar ended the Republic in –45,
it had become cutthroat. Caesar himself died at a meeting of the Senate,
killed by senators. Pompey and Cicero died violent deaths at the hands of
their political rivals. After the fall of the Republic, the cruelties of Nero and
Caligula were so egregious that they have become legend. These were just
the most obvious examples of a broader streak of violence in polite circles of
Roman life. By the time of the Antonines, the largest single category of medication in the Roman pharmacy was said to be antitoxins.
HANGZHOU DURING THE SONG DYNASTY, 960–1279
To many Westerners, classical China is a collage of images dimly recalled from
films and childhood books: terraced rice paddies, the obedient son bowing
to his father, women with bound feet, barefoot coolies pulling rickshaws,
A SENSE OF PLACE • 33
teeming masses. The image is wonderfully exotic —China has fascinated the
West since the days of Marco Polo —but also evokes a country both quaint
and backward.
Classical China was neither. A sophisticated culture when Rome was
still an obscure city-state on the Italian peninsula, classical China’s accomplishments are impressive not only relative to the barbarity of the Western
Dark Ages, but impressive by any standard.The example of Yongle’s maritime
expeditions will make the point.
Yongle, the second emperor of the Ming Dynasty, wished to incorporate the states of South and Southeast Asia into the Chinese tribute system
that China used to maintain trade and diplomatic relations with the states on
its periphery. Until Yongle came to the throne, China had relied on land
routes. Yongle decided to send China to sea. He directed that maritime
expeditions be carried out — a total of seven over almost three decades
—commanded by a court eunuch named Zheng He.
Zheng He’s fleet set sail at the beginning of the same century that
would end with Columbus’s first trip to the New World. Since Columbus’s
voyage is rightly considered a huge step in the West and technologically on
the cutting edge of what the West was able to do, it is instructive to contemplate what Zheng He’s feat entailed. Columbus successfully negotiated a
round trip from the Western Mediterranean to the Caribbean, conducted
with three vessels that were little more than large boats (the flagship Santa
Maria is thought to have been only about 85 feet long) and a company numbering 90 men and boys.Total elapsed time of the expedition, including time
ashore, was a little more than seven months.
The first of Zheng He’s voyages, begun 90 years before Columbus left
harbor, went to Java and Sumatra, then passed through the Straits of Malacca
and on to Ceylon and India before returning. Zheng He covered about the
same total distance as Columbus, but with 62 ships instead of 3. The last of
the seven expeditions, in 1433–1435, involved 317 ships crewed by 27,750
men.26 The largest of these vessels was 444 feet long, about the length of a
large modern destroyer, with four decks and watertight bulkheads.The smallest of the 317 ships was about twice the length of Columbus’s flagship. The
final Chinese expedition traveled from China down to Java, west to Arabia,
and then down the east coast of Africa before turning for home. Total time
at sea was more than two years.
To put a fleet of 317 ships and 28,000 men to sea for two years would
be a major undertaking for a modern nation. It bespeaks formidable tech-
34 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
nological, industrial, and administrative capacity. Imperial China did it at the
beginning of 15C. To judge China by its standing in 19C and 20C is as misleading as to judge the Roman Empire by its condition in 6C and 7C.
For a portrait of China in all its imperial grandeur, the Ming Dynasty
(1368–1644) that sponsored Zheng He’s voyages would be a good place to
remain. But the apogee of Chinese culture as a whole is more often taken to
be the Song Dynasty (960–1279), “glorious in art as in poetry and philosophy, the period which for Asia stands in history as the Periclean age in
Europe,” as one historian put it.27 Our point of departure is Hangzhou, the
capital of Song China, the city Marco Polo called Kinsay.
Hangzhou became the capital by happenstance. In 1127, it was still a
minor provincial city, midway between the Yangtze and the trading ports of
the southeast China coast, chosen as a refuge by an emperor fleeing nomad
barbarians. He chose a beautiful place. To the west was a large artificial lake
(constructed more than 500 years earlier —a reminder of the staggering span
of Chinese continuity), backed by the graceful curve of low-lying mountains.
To the east, upon a spreading plain,“ . . . there sparkle, like fishes’ scales, the
bright-colored tiles of a thousand roofs,” one visitor wrote. “One would say
” 28 it was landscape composed by a painter.
Sparkle was an apt word. Hangzhou, like other Chinese cities, was
unimaginably clean by Western standards of that time. The crenellated walls
of the old city, also built some 500 years earlier, 30 feet high and 10 feet thick,
were freshly whitewashed every month. The streets were cleaned frequently.
Each year, the canals that crisscrossed the city were dredged and cleaned.The
homes of the rich had cesspools.The poor collected their night soil in buckets that were carried off each day to central collection points. Hangzhou’s
standards for hygiene wouldn’t be approached in Europe until late in 19C,
and then only in the most advanced cities.
This advanced municipal administration was carried out in a metropolis that dwarfed any city in the West. After the fall of Rome, Europe had
become a rural landscape dotted with market towns. Even as late as 12C, the
populations of Paris and London numbered no more than a few tens of thousands each —we cannot know exactly, because the concept of official statistics lay far in the future. The city-states of northern Italy were growing, but
even the largest of them had not reached the 100,000 mark at the end of
12C. Hangzhou in 12C numbered over a million people. How do we know?
Because China had for some centuries been conducting regular censuses, listing the names and ages of every member of every family, their exact location, and, if they were farmers, the size of their cultivated holding.
A SENSE OF PLACE • 35
Hangzhou had extremes of wealth and poverty. Parts of the city were
traversed by wide, well-drained avenues of smoothed stone, and the houses
of the wealthy stood on ample, walled plots. In other parts, the streets were
narrow and crooked, with multi-story houses crowded on each side where
half a dozen people might live in a single small room. Increased urbanization
also led to overcrowding, homelessness, and pauperization of the city’s unemployed who had become disconnected from their families remaining in the
countryside. Hangzhou responded in various ways. Food warehouses supported by special taxes were set aside for the indigent. Private charities specialized in caring for orphans and old people, burying paupers, and providing schooling for indigent children.29 As in the case of Rome before and
London later, commendable responses to need coexisted side by side with
accepted practices that today are felonies. One of the reasons that orphanages
were required was that infants were commonly abandoned on the streets by
parents who could afford no more children —so commonly that the practice
was banned in 1138, though with only partial success.30
Whether the lives of the impoverished were conspicuously better or
worse in Hangzhou than in ancient Rome or Georgian London is hard to
say from our distant vantage point. But for persons outside that extreme
group, at least some of Hangzhou’s public amenities were available to all.
Where Rome had its public baths, so did Hangzhou —three thousand of
them, according to Marco Polo, who observed that the people of Hangzhou
“are very cleanly in their persons.”31 He was even more impressed with the
public facilities on the lake:
In the middle of the Lake there are two Islands, on each of which stands a
palatial edifice with an incredibly large number of rooms and separate pavilions. And when anyone desired to hold a marriage feast, or to give a big banquet, it used to be done at one of these palaces. And everything would be
found there ready to order, such as dishes, napkins and tablecloths and whatever else was needful. These furnishings were acquired and maintained at
common expense by the citizens in these palaces constructed by them for
this purpose. Sometimes there would be at these palaces a hundred different
parties . . . and yet all would find good accommodation in the different apartments and pavilions, and that in so well ordered a manner that one party was
never in the way of another.32
A detail, trivial in itself, may give a sense of the administrative detail that
went into the governance of Hangzhou: the balustrades along the canals.
Some time after Hangzhou began to grow, it was noticed that every year a
36 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
number of people, commonly revelers after a night on the town, were falling
into the canals and sometimes drowning. One of the governors of the city
directed that balustrades be built all along the banks of the canals, with gates
provided at convenient points for embarkation.
One may get a sense of the scope of Hangzhou’s administrative capability from statistics. In the 13 months from October 1268 to November
1269, for example, we know from the surviving records that a project to renovate the bridges of Hangzhou was carried out, involving 117
bridges within the ramparts and another 230 in the suburbs. Half of them
were rebuilt from scratch, and the other half repaired. Low bridges were
heightened and narrow ones widened. This was just one routine municipal
project, routinely reported.
In addition to its public facilities, Hangzhou numbered hundreds of
tea-houses, restaurants, theatres, and hotels. In the West, the concept of sumptuous dining and lodging outside the private home took an oddly long time
to develop —taverns serving meals had existed since ancient times, but the
first luxury restaurant didn’t open until 1782.[33] It wasn’t until 19C that
European travelers could begin to count on finding decent public accommodations. In Hangzhou of 12C, one could get cheap-but-good noodles,
meat pies, or oysters from small shops, as one does in today’s East Asia. Those
with more money to spend could choose a tea-house in a garden landscaped
with dwarf pines and hung with brightly colored lanterns, or they could dine
in one of the large restaurants hung with works of celebrated painters and
calligraphers and set with fine porcelain. If it were a hot summer day, the
diner might want to choose among the refreshing iced drinks —or iced foods,
for that matter —that were widely available. In medieval Europe of 12C, the
food of the rich still consisted largely of slabs of flesh of one kind or another, heavily spiced to hide signs of rot. In the restaurants of Hangzhou, one
contemporary wrote, “Hundreds of orders are given on all sides: this person
wants something hot, another something cold, a third something tepid, a
fourth something chilled; one wants cooked food, another raw, another
chooses roasted, another grilled.”34 The variety of Chinese food was as broad
then as it is today, and the people of Hangzhou could get just about any kind
they wanted —not just their own cuisine, but the cuisines of distant provinces
as well. As today, the Chinese delighted in the restaurant that served one special dish. There was the sweet soya soup at the Mixed-Wares Market, the fish
soup of Mother Song outside the Cash-Reserve Gate, and pig cooked in
ashes at the Longevity-and-Compassion Palace. Fifteen major markets dot-
A SENSE OF PLACE • 37
ted Hangzhou, each large enough to handle thousands of sellers and buyers
at one time.The specialization was staggering, with more than 200 shops selling nothing but varieties of salted fish.
The market in food was just one aspect of an economy that employed
many elements of modern commerce. Paper money had appeared in 9C in
the form of bills of exchange (“flying money”) to pay for goods purchased
from distant areas. Then private bankers began issuing certificates of deposit
that could be cashed for a three percent service charge. In 1023, one of the
most famous of these banks was acquired by the government and the certificates of deposit were converted to the first government-backed paper money.
The abacus, a primitive version of which had existed as early as –400, had
reached its final design by the Song, enabling arithmetic calculation faster
than any mechanical device until well into 20C.
China’s was a national economy, as goods moved along a road system
that rivaled the Romans’ and an even more extensive water system. Tens of
thousands of ships traveled the coastal sea-routes, the Yellow and Yangtze
rivers, and a vast system of internal canals and improved waterways.
Documents from the Song describe 10 types of sea-going vessels, 21 types of
functionally specific vessels (for example, floating restaurants, passenger boats,
ferries, manure boats), 20 vessels categorized by structure (including manpowered paddle-wheel boats), and 35 types of craft grouped by the river system they traveled or by port of origin.35
Oils, sugar, silk, lacquer ware, porcelain, iron and copper goods, rice, and
timber were routinely shipped throughout the nation. We know, for example, that a Daoist temple constructed in Kaifeng in north central China in
11C was constructed of pinewood brought from Gansu and Shanxi, cedar
from Shanxi, catalpa wood, camphor-tree wood and oak from Hunan and
Jiangxi, zelkova wood from Hunan and Zhejiang, cryptomeria from Hunan,
and several other woods from Hubei and Shanxi.36 Agriculture was already
specialized by the Song, with an economy that supported tea plantations, silk
cultivation, cattle ranching, and fish farming.
Specialization had also reached into industrial processes. China did
much more than merely invent paper, for example. By the Song Dynasty, the
paper industry was turning out papers for dozens of uses —elegant, heavy
stock for formal correspondence, light-weight, inexpensive paper for everyday use, and specialized papers suitable for painting, money, printing, wrapping, lanterns —and for the toilet as well. The magnitude of paper production was immense. Just one city in Hunan contributed 1.8 million sheets to
38 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
the government annually in lieu of taxes.37 Or there is the case of iron production. Song China in 11C seems to have produced as much iron as would
be produced in all of Europe in 1700, and the real price of iron fell to levels
that would not be seen in Europe until the turn of 19C.38
Specialization in agriculture and industry demanded correspondingly
sophisticated economic organization. China during the Song had already
developed a system of brokers that mediated between local and central markets. Wholesale and retail were concepts thoroughly understood in Song
China. So were contracts, interest, joint stock ventures, distributorships, franchises, warehousing, and commissions. Song China had professional managers, running businesses owned by others not related by blood. Money managers existed in Song China, investing funds on behalf of clients.39
But what of the world of the sciences? The answer is maddeningly
incomprehensible to a Westerner. It is as if the Chinese periodically dipped
into the world of science and effortlessly pulled out a few gems, then ignored
them. Some of these Chinese discoveries have become the stuff of conventional wisdom — gunpowder and paper being the most famous. But the
recountings by Westerners give these discoveries the flavor of accidents, as
if the Chinese stumbled onto something and then didn’t know what to do
with it.
Unsystematic the discoveries may have been, but there was nothing
accidental about them. Rather, they represent sheer cognitive ingenuity of a
remarkable order. When next you read the cliché that East Asians are intelligent but lack creative flair, consider, for example, Chinese mathematics.
China had no Euclid, no body of mathematical logic that started from first
premises. Nonetheless, by the middle of 3C the Chinese already knew the
value of / to five decimal places; by the end of 5C, they knew it lay between
3.1415926 and 3.1415927 (the best the West had done was four decimal
places).40 By the middle of 7C, Chinese mathematicians had methods for
dealing with indeterminate equations, arithmetical and geometric progressions, and the computation of otherwise immeasurable distance through a
form of trigonometry. Chinese mathematicians of the Song Dynasty knew
how to extract fourth roots, deal with equations containing powers up to the
tenth, and had anticipated a method for obtaining approximate solutions to
numerical equations that would not be developed in the West until 1819.
None of these accomplishments was produced from a theoretical system, but
through the creativity of individual scholars.
By the time of the Song, Chinese astronomy could call on a thousand
years of observations of sunspots.41 The armillary had been fully developed
A SENSE OF PLACE • 39
for 900 years in China, as had planetaria. Centuries before the Song, the
Chinese had identified the precession of the equinox and knew that the year
is not exactly 365.25 days. During the Song itself, Chinese astronomers correctly demonstrated the causes of solar and lunar eclipses. But again there was
no theory, no Ptolemaic characterization of the universe. The Chinese simply discovered certain things. Shen Gua, writing in 1086, outlined the principles of erosion, uplift, and sedimentation that are the foundation of earth
science, principles that would not be developed in the West for centuries, but
his book, Dream Pool Essays, sits alone, an anomaly.
Chinese medicine, unlike Chinese science, was backed by abundant
theory, but that theory is so alien to the Western understanding of physiology and pharmacology that Western scientists even today are only beginning
to understand the degree to which Chinese medicine is coordinate with
modern science.42 It worked, however, for a wide range of ailments. If you
were going to be ill in 12C and were given a choice of living in Europe or
China, there is no question about the right decision. Western medicine in
12C had forgotten most of what had been known by the Greeks and
Romans. Chinese physicians of 12C could alleviate pain more effectively
than Westerners had ever been able to do —acupuncture is a Chinese medical technique that Western physicians have learned to take seriously —and
could treat their patients effectively for a wide variety of serious diseases.
The vibrant Song economy and its eclectic scientific achievements
coexisted with an intellectual and aesthetic high culture. Like the upper classes of Rome, the upper classes of Song China drew on an artistic her-itage
that stretched centuries into the past, including access to a vast body
of work that is lost to us today. Unlike Rome, Song China did not live passively off that heritage. The canons of Chinese art that stretched back to the
Han a thousand years earlier are thought by many to have reached their peak
in the Song. It was an art that is still accessible to the modern eye. In many
ways, Chinese art of the Song —spare of line, secular, often impressionistic —
speaks directly to today’s artistic sensibility.
Art was cherished. “The delight [the Chinese] take in decoration, in
painting and in architecture, leads them to spend in this way sums of money
that would astonish you,” wrote Marco Polo. Nor was this passion limited to
the rich. Li Qingzhao, a famous woman poet of the Song, recalled how her
husband, De Fu, would take advantage of every break from his university
studies to pawn his clothing for a bit of cash and go to Xiang Guo Temple
in search of old prints. He would buy some fruit along with his newly
acquired treasures to bring home.
40 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
We would enjoy examining what he had bought while munching fruit
together. Two years later, when he got a post in the government, he started
to make as complete as possible a collection of rubbings or prints from
bronze or stone inscriptions and other ancient scripts. When a print was not
available, he would have a copy made and thus our collection of famous calligraphy and antiques began. Once a man tried to sell us Xu Xi’s painting of
“Peony” for 200,000 cash, and De Fu asked permission to take it home and
keep it for a few days and consider. We found no means to buy it and reluctantly returned it to the owner. De Fu and I were upset about it for days.43
Huge private and public collections were established and detailed art
catalogs published. Provenance was taken seriously, with connoisseurs in
various schools of painting, bronze, porcelain, and the other visual arts providing professional advice to the collector. And the leading artists? Not
disdained craftsmen as in Rome, but admired during their lives and occasionally becoming near-mythic cultural icons in death.
If art was a high pleasure, literature was a necessity. Chinese cultural life
intertwined poetry, philosophy, essays, and narratives into the political life of
the nation. A cultivated person was not only expected to be well versed in
the classics, he (or she) was also expected to be a skilled writer, especially of
poetry. A Chinese tradition of belles-lettres grew up during the Tang and Song
Dynasties that transcended even the high importance that had been attached
to scholarship in earlier dynasties. Aesthetics were only part of the importance of literature, however. Knowing Chinese literature was also a way to
achieve high rank, via the Chinese examination system.
By the time of the Song, the examination system was already centuries
old. Of the several categories of examination, the least important, leading
only to low positions, were the tests in law and mathematics. The test in the
Confucian classics was more prestigious and led to more powerful posts. The
most prestigious of all awards was the jin shi, the “presented scholar” degree,
based not just on the classics relating to philosophy and governance but on
the whole of Chinese literature.
Selecting officials on the basis of their mastery of literature and philosophy had several advantages. It ensured that most Chinese bureaucrats were
smart —the examinations had the effect of screening for IQ as well as the
ability to memorize. Another advantage of the examination system was its
emphasis on merit over family background, engaging the loyalties of the
lower classes by making it possible for a man of humble birth to pass the jin
shi and become a mandarin. Still a third advantage was that the examination
system co-opted the intellectual classes, who in other societies were often
A SENSE OF PLACE • 41
critics of the established order. Intellectuals in traditional China had a ready
avenue to power.
Above all, the examination system ensured that throughout the country, voluntarily, each generation of the most talented people in China steeped
themselves in the core cultural values of the empire. From a pragmatic standpoint, this was a good thing for preserving cultural continuity. But it was also
a good thing because those core cultural values constituted such a remarkable legacy in themselves, amalgamating properties that in the West would be
divided into religion and civic culture.
In matters purely religious, China was a mirror image of Rome. In
Rome, just about everyone formally acknowledged the Roman gods and
hardly anyone believed in them. In China, none of the three major belief systems—Confucianism, Daoism, Buddhism —even specified the existence of a
god, and the two with temples and priests (Daoism and Buddhism) were followed by small proportions of the Song population. And yet the typical
Chinese propitiated the spirits with the punctility of true believers. If the values that we call Chinese did not have as strong a religious component
as those of Hindu, Judaic, Christian, and Islamic cultures, they were nonetheless promulgated and, more importantly, lived. Marco Polo, arriving from
13C Europe, described the operational effect of this historically unique
cultural/religious synthesis in daily life:
The natives of the city [Hangzhou] are men of peaceful character, both from
education and from the example of their kings, whose disposition was the
same. They know nothing of handling arms and keep none in their houses.
You hear of no feuds or noisy quarrels or dissensions of any kind among
them. Both in their commercial dealings and in their manufactures they are
thoroughly honest and truthful, and there is such a degree of good will and
neighborly attachment among both men and women that one would take
the people who live in the same street to be all one family.44
Chinese social life was not as uniformly peaceful as Marco Polo
describes, but he was not far off the mark. Classical Chinese culture powerfully fostered an amicable, law-abiding, stable social life, and the reason is no
mystery. These issues, not epistemology or metaphysics, were the topics that
most deeply occupied Chinese philosophers. Westerners label this tradition
Confucian, but by the end of its development it incorporated, like a series of
Chinese boxes, glosses upon glosses of ancient texts that go back to at least
–8C and perhaps as far as –10C.
At the core of the Confucian ethic was the quality called ren, the
42 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
supreme virtue in man—a quality that combines elements of goodness,
benevolence, and love. This ethic was most essential for those with the most
power: “He who is magnanimous wins the multitude,” Confucius taught.
“He who is diligent attains his objective, and he who is kind can get service
from the people.”45 Indeed, to be a gentleman—another key concept in
Confucian thought —required one above all to embody ren. And lest one
think that a gentleman could get by with mouthing the proper platitudes,
Confucius added, “The gentleman first practices what he preaches and then
”46 preaches what he practices.
The Chinese way of governance was an organic whole. Once set in
motion, it was not a system that depended on a multitude of laws and punishments.The punishments that existed could be harsh —the death of a thousand cuts is another of those tidbits of Chinese lore that have fascinated
Westerners —but China was not a country governed by fear. One of the
defining Confucian tenets is this, from the Analects:“Lead the people by laws
and regulate them by penalties, and the people will try to keep out of jail,
but will have no sense of shame. Lead the people by virtue and restrain them
by the rules of decorum, and the people will have a sense of shame, and
” moreover will become good. 47
By the time of the Song Dynasty, Confucianism had governed Chinese
life for more than a thousand years. Then in 12C came Zhu Xi, who systematized Confucianism, gave it metaphysics, and, in concert with other eminent exegetes of the Song, produced neo-Confucianism, revitalizing this
uniquely comprehensive system for structuring a harmonious society. It
would serve as China’s cultural bedrock into 20C.
SAMUEL JOHNSON’S LONDON, 1737–1784
At two o’clock on an August afternoon in 1768, the bark Endeavor put to sea
from Plymouth under the command of second lieutenant James Cook, then
just thirty-nine years old. Cook’s orders were to sail southwest down the
Atlantic, double Cape Horn, and then make for Tahiti, a one-way voyage of
some 13,000 miles. The motive behind this expensive, lengthy, and dangerous trip was not trade. No diplomatic services were to be rendered, nor, for
that matter, did Cook have messages to convey to anyone at his destination.
The purpose of Endeavor’s voyage was to observe an astronomical phenomenon known as the transit of Venus.[48]
A transit of Venus occurs when Venus as observed from Earth crosses
A SENSE OF PLACE • 43
the face of the Sun. The transits occur in pairs, separated by eight years,
with each pair of transits separated by more than a century. There were no
transits of Venus in 20C, for example. A century prior to Cook’s departure,
English astronomer Edmond Halley had realized that the transit of Venus
offers a unique opportunity to measure precisely the distance from the earth
to the sun, by taking advantage of the phenomenon known as parallax—the
differences in the apparent position of a heavenly body depending on the
observer’s location. If the magnitude of the apparent displacement is known,
the application of basic trigonometry will yield the desired result. But to get
the data, people had to be waiting in place at widely dispersed points on the
globe when the auspicious day arrived, hence the trip to Tahiti.
In a request for the government’s support of the expedition, the British
Royal Society had pointed out that everybody else was going to do it and it
would be humiliating for Britain to hang back, because
. . . the British nation has been justly celebrated in the learned world, for
their knowledge of astronomy, in which they are inferior to no nation upon
earth, ancient or modern; and it would cast dishonour upon them should
they neglect to have correct observations made of this important phenomenon. . . .49
And so the British government decided to send a vessel halfway around
the world, hoping for clear skies on the appointed day.
Once the decision had been taken, the Admiralty decided to tack on
another task. After completing his astronomical observations, Cook was to
proceed southward, seeking out Terra Australis Incognita, the continent that
had long been thought to be somewhere at the bottom of the world, counterbalancing the land masses of the northern hemisphere. Upon discovering
it, he was to take care to describe the land, its features and soils, and collect
samples of its “beasts, birds, fishes and minerals, seeds of trees, fruits and
grains.”50 The naturalist who would assist him in this endeavor was one
Joseph Banks, 22 years old, a wealthy amateur educated at Harrow, Eton, and
Oxford, who was paying £10,000 — on the order of a million dollars in
today’s money —for the privilege of cramming his six-foot-four-inch frame
into a cabin six feet long and running a fair risk of dying over the next two
years.
Few episodes better capture the spirit of intellectual life in 18C Europe.
A passion to know was everywhere —to catalog and classify; to order; to probe
into the how and the why of things; to take the world apart and see what
made it tick. It was a small change in some ways —humans had been curious
• • •
44 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
since they became human —but by Cook’s time humans had found a way to
continually satisfy that curiosity. They had discovered how to accumulate
knowledge.
The rage to learn, understand, and then shape the world had its manifestations all over the Island. Perhaps Britain’s most portentous accomplishment
during the 1760s occurred in Scotland, in a room that Glasgow University
had given over to the use of a young instrument-maker named James
Watt. Some years earlier, Watt had been asked to repair a working model
of the steam engine, a balky, inefficient, and unreliable device. By the end of
the 1760s, Watt had created the engine that would power the Industrial
Revolution.
The implementation of that revolution was concentrated not around
London, but in a small region of central England, bounded on the west by
Shropshire’s Coalbrookdale, where Abraham Darby had first smelted iron
with coal in 1709; on the south by Birmingham, where mechanized cottonspinning began in the 1740s; on the east by Derby, where the world’s first recognizable factory opened in 1721; and on the north by Preston, where in
1732 Richard Arkwright, inventor and entrepreneur of the cotton textile
industry, was born. But for all the activity elsewhere, the indisputable center
of English creative life and to an important degree the center of Western
civilization —Paris was its only competitor —was London. “When a man is
tired of London he is tired of life,” Samuel Johnson famously wrote, and
never did the city merit the accolade more than during Johnson’s years there.
When he arrived in 1737, London was huge by the standards of the
time, even though it was still smaller than Hangzhou in 12C.The population
of London was approaching 700,000, making it more than twice as large as
any city in Europe except Paris.51 Within the confines of Great Britain, no
other city even came close. Cities like Birmingham and Manchester had
fewer than 30,000 inhabitants, and Oxford had only about 8,000.52
Londoners were crammed into an area that is a fraction of the city
we know today. Since the time of Elizabeth, the Crown had tried to restrict
new construction. Occasionally new areas were built from scratch, as after the
Great Fire of 1666, but within a few decades property owners had
subdivided the buildings, adding new entrances, and surreptitiously filling up
courtyards and back gardens with new structures. London became a rabbit-
A SENSE OF PLACE • 45
warren of buildings crisscrossed by tiny lanes —as of 1732, London counted
5,099 streets and alleys.53 Open country began at Hyde Park.54
The London Johnson knew was the London that Hogarth painted —
muddy, unpaved, with open sewers and a stinking Thames, lavish wealth facing desperate poverty in an intimacy that we can scarcely imagine today.
“Here lives a Personage of high Distinction,” wrote one observer,“next door
a Butcher with his stinking Shambles! A Tallow-Chandler shall front my
Lord’s nice Venetian window; and two or three brawny naked Curriers in
their Pits shall face a fine lady in her back Closet.”55 Fishmongers, theatres,
silversmiths, brickworks, brothels, hospitals, docks, chophouses, factories,
churches, gardens, grocers, palaces, tenements —all were jammed together on
the twisting streets. In the slums, a gin shop could be found in one of every
”56 four dwellings, advertising “Drunk for a penny, dead-drunk for twopence.
The crowds of pedestrians mingled every level of English society—“rambling, riding, rolling, rushing, jostling, mixing, bouncing, cracking and crashing in one vile ferment of stupidity and corruption,” complained Smollett’s
Squire Bramble.57
The noise was deafening and the stench prodigious. London had no
municipal program for collecting waste, no street-cleaners. Policing was like
Antonine Rome —nearly nonexistent. Until 1750, the City of London had
been patrolled by some 1,000 night watchmen who had become a national
joke — drunken and ineffectual, the “charlies” of derisive abuse. In 1750,
Henry Fielding hired some thief-takers who later evolved into the Bow
Street Runners, rudimentary police patrols. But for practical purposes a
citizen of London who ventured out of doors after dark should be prepared
to fend for himself. Hangzhou of seven centuries earlier had been cleaner
and safer.
The transportation system of Georgian Britain had yet to catch up with
the one enjoyed by Roman Britons 17 centuries earlier. By the 1780s, the
Newcastle & London Post Coach was advertising a service that would leave
Newcastle at four in the morning and get the passenger into London after
39 hours of continual travel, breaking only for meals, jouncing along rutted
roads at six miles an hour —phenomenally fast by previous standards.58 But a
Roman Briton making the same journey routinely did it in the same elapsed
time, on a much smoother road, with a full night’s sleep at a comfortable way
station to break the journey.
The British of 18C knew immeasurably more than the Romans about
the physics and mechanics of heat, but if you were looking for creature com-
46 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
forts, the villa of a wealthy Roman Briton with its central heating and good
plumbing would have been a more comfortable place to live than the palaces
built by Georgian aristocrats. And if you caught a chill during the winter
damp, good luck. Bleeding was still the treatment of choice for a wide
variety of ailments, germ theory was a century in the future, and hygiene
was unheard of. A new wife of 18C had to enter upon childbearing knowing that she must expect to lose half of her babies before they reached
adolescence and face odds of about one in 20 of dying in each childbirth
herself. All in all, if you were going to get sick, you were better off in Song
Hangzhou, and perhaps even in Antonine Rome, than in Johnson’s London.
British physicians and their continental counterparts had made progress
in preventing people from getting sick. One of the first controlled studies in
the history of medicine established in 1747 that scurvy could be prevented
by the juice of citrus fruits and thereby transformed the health of sailors on
long voyages. Western medicine was finally becoming a science of precisely
described symptoms and diseases, even if physicians still couldn’t cure many
of them.
Despite the bad hygiene and filthy streets, public health was improving,
mainly because plagues were slowly disappearing.The word plague evokes the
Black Death of mid-14C, but plagues had been a continuing fact of life. The
single city of Besançon reported plague 40 times between 1439 and 1640.59
London suffered too. As late as 1667, Sir William Petty still had reason to
expect about five plagues in the next century:
London within ye bills hath 696 thousand people in 108 thousand houses.
In pestilential yeares, which are one in twenty, there dye one sixth of ye people in ye plague and one fifth of all diseases. The people which ye next
plague of London will sweep away will be probably 120 thousand.60
But Sir William was wrong. Exactly why is still unclear, but the plague
disappeared from Western Europe after an outbreak in Marseilles in 1720.
Infectious diseases remained a problem —pandemics of typhus and influenza
swept most of Europe in the late 1730s and early 1740s, and influenza struck
London in 1782 —but the scale of mortality diminished. Other infectious
diseases, known today only by their descriptions in obsolete medical books,
disappeared altogether. Smallpox had been a killer rivaling the plague —a
medical text of 1775 estimated that it still affected 95 of every 100 people,
and killed 1 in 7.61 But in 1717 Mary Montagu published a treatise on the
Turkish use of pus to inoculate against smallpox. Only four years later,
Cotton Mather and Zabdiel Boylston used primitive statistical methods to
A SENSE OF PLACE • 47
demonstrate its effectiveness in Boston. By 1796, when Edward Jenner developed a safe method of inoculation using the cowpox virus, inroads against
smallpox had already been made in the upper classes and vaccination was
becoming widespread throughout Europe. Little by little, the power of disease to destroy was being circumscribed. Epidemics in 19C would continue
to carry off tens of thousands of people at a time, but in the last half of 18C,
Europe saw the end of the days when whole societies were routinely crippled by outbreaks of disease.
Famines subsided along with the plague. It is hard to realize today, but
famine was a common European phenomenon through 18C. France, for
example, among the richest of the European countries, experienced 13 general famines in 16C, 11 in 17C, and 16 in 18C, plus hundreds of local famines
that affected a single town or region. The explanation for the famines was
simple. The yields from cereal grains were low and the capacity to store
reserves primitive. Two bad harvests in a row, and people starved. It was during 18C that technological progress in agriculture began to break the grip of
that brutal arithmetic.
The most striking constant across imperial Rome, Song Hangzhou, and
Georgian London was a widespread passion for the arts. An inventory conducted in 1785 tells us that 650 individual businesses in London made their
money through books, from writing to printing to engraving to sales.62
When the newly established Royal Academy opened an exhibition of paintings in the spring of 1780, it drew 61,381 persons by the end of the year
—roughly 1 in every 12 Londoners in that one season alone, from a population that was overwhelmingly poor and illiterate.63 Crowds swarmed to the
two licensed dramatic companies of the era, Drury Lane and Covent Garden,
packing theatres that by the end of the century had been built and rebuilt
so that each accommodated 3,000 people at a time.64 London’s first professional concert series began in the 1760s, and by 1771 had led to a dedicated concert auditorium at the Pantheon on Oxford Street—“the
most elegant structure in Europe, if not on the globe” in the mind of one
observer—and then in 1775 to a 900-seat auditorium in Hanover Square and
Oxford Street.65
Whether they were attending the theatre, a concert, or an exhibition at
the Royal Academy, or buying a book at the local bookseller, Londoners in
18C had available to them a range of work that the citizens of neither imperial Rome nor classical China could approach. And yet the major artistic
genres were in curiously different phases, and the public’s attitude toward
their practitioners was mixed. Some fine painters were at work in 18C,
48 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
among them Britain’s own Reynolds, Gainsborough, and Hogarth. But the
prevailing British attitude toward these living artists, like the Romans toward
theirs, was scathing —to the influential art critic Anthony Ashley Cooper,
”66 contemporary British painters were “illiterate, vulgar and scarce sober.
History has treated the targets of Cooper’s scorn more respectfully, but the
world of art was still absorbing the extraordinary outpouring of great art during the Renaissance, and the output of 18C could not compete. Drama had
a similar problem. Despite a few luminaries such as Congreve, Goldsmith,
and Sheridan, the legacy of the Elizabethan era was so daunting that it still
cast a long shadow over playwrights of 18C. In contrast, fiction and poetry
were blossoming. Fielding and Richardson were turning out the earliest
examples of the genre that would peak in 19C, the domestic novel, and late
18C would see the first work of the great Romantic poets.
If you sought a golden age in 18C, the place to look was music.
Johnson’s London consisted of a half-century that saw parts or all of the
careers of Mozart, J. S. Bach, Haydn, and Handel. Any one of them would
have made the era musically distinguished. To have all four, plus Gluck,
Rameau, Telemann, Pergolesi, Domenico Scarlatti, and Stamitz at the same
time, plus Couperin and Vivaldi in the early decades of the century and
Beethoven showing his emerging genius at the end of it, makes 18C the most
densely packed century of realized musical genius in history. London did not
contribute people to this constellation of stars —it had not produced a major
composer since Henry Purcell in 17C —but it provided enthusiastic patrons.
When Joseph Haydn was brought to London late in the century, he was
astonished and overwhelmed by the British passion for music—“his presence
seems to have awakened such a degree of enthusiasm in the audience, as to
almost amount to a frenzy,” wrote another musician.67 In a sign of things
to come, the British backed their enthusiasm for the arts with cash. Haydn
cleared £350 for one concert in 1791 and £800 for another in 1794
—liberating sums for a composer who had felt himself little more than a glorified servant in the continental courts.
Densely packed is the right descriptor for Johnson’s intellectual London
writ large. The city was jammed with men of immense accomplishment,
sometimes resident, sometimes visitors, and they knew each other across disciplines and professions in a way that rarely happens today. In Johnson’s
London, this intellectual cross-fertilization was reified in The Club, which
formed in the winter of 1763–1764. It was nothing like the imposing institutions that became the famous London clubs of 19C, just a group of men
getting together every Monday night at the Turk’s Head in Gerrard Street.
A SENSE OF PLACE • 49
But those men included statesmen James Fox and William Wyndham, linguist
Sir William Jones, naturalist Sir Joseph Banks, painter Sir Joshua Reynolds,
dramatists Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan, actor David
Garrick, Bishop Percy, historian Edward Gibbon, Johnson himself, and
two men who together were to provide the intellectual templates for the
Whigs and the Tories of British politics for the next century, Adam Smith
and Edmund Burke. Other eras have had their roundtables and salons, but
in 18C London they were peopled by men who would change the intellectual shape of the West, for Samuel Johnson’s London was above all the
London of the Enlightenment.
By the 1750s the Enlightenment had become the continent’s child as
well, but it had been Britain’s baby. Isaac Newton’s revelation in Principia
Mathematica (1687) that the universe is rational, obeying fixed and predictable
laws, had changed the way that people perceived the universe. God was no
longer the interfering, jealous God of the Old Testament nor the loving
personal God of the New, but God the Clockmaker, setting the universe on
a course governed forever after by mathematically perfect immutable laws.
If only mortals had enough data, they could predict everything that happened, and the tool whereby they could do this in a clocklike universe was
reason. Reason, sweet and infallible, should be brought to bear on hoary traditions that governed the pursuit of knowledge, relationships between the
sexes and the social classes, standards of art and music, and the exercise of
political power.
In 1690, three years after Newton published Principia, John Locke, an
English physician and friend of Newton’s, published two short works that fit
perfectly with this emerging new world view. The first to appear was Essay
Concerning Human Understanding, proclaiming the doctrine of tabula rasa:
Humans came into the world as blank pages upon which experience writes
—a doctrine perfect for a world in which reason rules, perfect for a world
beginning to think that all things are possible. Human nature was not
immutable, nor was human history required to move in cycles. By applying
reason not only to institutions but to the socialization of the young, humans
could be improved along with their institutions. History henceforth could
take on a direction, and that direction was progress.
A few months later, Locke’s Second Treatise of Government was published,
averring that government is the servant of men, not the other way around,
and that men come into the world possessing natural rights to their own
bodies (and therefore to their labor) that governments can legitimately circumscribe in limited ways. We in the United States think of Locke as an
50 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
intellectual inspiration of the American Founders, which he was. But his
more immediate role in English life was to put in philosophical terms the
movement toward liberty that had swept England during its Glorious
Revolution and was to provide the foundation for the reforms that continued throughout 18C.
By the late 1720s, England’s combination of economic prosperity, social
stability, and civil liberties had no equivalent anywhere on the continent.The
young Voltaire, forced by circumstances to live in England (he had been
exiled for inappropriately challenging a nobleman to a duel), was entranced.
After returning to France, he wrote Letters on the English, praising their
virtues.The book was a sensation in French intellectual circles. Before Letters
on the English, according to report, there were but two Newtonians in all of
Paris; now, Parisian thinkers learned English, translated English works,
and borrowed from English fashion.68 Voltaire followed up with essays on
Newton and Locke, taking the Enlightenment to Paris, where it evolved in
its own way, producing some decades later a Revolution very different from
England’s Glorious one.
The philosophes of the Enlightenment, whether French, English, or
Scottish, included only a few actual philosophers. As a group they were more
like a meeting of The Club, thinkers from many fields who had a common
interest in starting with first principles, with human liberty heading the list.
The philosophes, in Peter Gay’s words, sought “freedom from arbitrary power,
freedom of speech, freedom of trade, freedom to realize one’s talents, freedom
of aesthetic response, freedom, in a word, of moral man to make his way in
”69 the world.
Some, like Rousseau, would be the inspiration for artistic and literary
movements that continue to this day. Another, the University of Glasgow’s
Adam Smith, would lay out an economic theory so influential that it would
be as powerful a force for economic growth in 19C as James Watt’s steam
engine would be for industrial growth. Published in 1776, Wealth of Nations
introduced three elementary principles that now are seen as common sense,
but which were at the time revolutionary. It was Smith who taught the world
that a voluntary exchange benefits both parties — trade is not a zero-sum
game in which one person wins while another loses, but win-win. It was
Smith who taught governments that the trick to becoming rich is competitive advantage —don’t try to subsidize the production of goods that others
can produce better or cheaper. It was Smith who invoked the metaphor of
the Invisible Hand to explain why a person whose only motive is to make
A SENSE OF PLACE • 51
money will be led to produce goods that other people need, of the right
quality, at prices they can afford, if only that person is constrained to compete with others who are also trying to make money. Beyond these specifics,
Smith changed forever the age-old assumption that wealth is a limited pie
over which governments and men fight to get the biggest piece. Wealth can
grow without limits —that was perhaps Smith’s most revolutionary idea of all.
Growth, accumulating knowledge, change —Johnson’s Britain was in a
ceaseless, restless state of becoming. In the decades when Johnson was in
London, the visible results were still limited. When Johnson died in 1784,
London was not physically much different from the way it had looked when
he arrived in 1737. The city was still lit by candles, people still traveled no
faster than a galloping horse, and they communicated no more rapidly than
a message could be conveyed on horseback.The middle class had grown during Johnson’s decades but was still a thin layer sandwiched between manual
laborers below and the landowning gentry above. Women had few more
rights in 1784 than they had enjoyed in 1737. Even among men, the right to
vote in 1784 was still restricted to a minority. Poverty and illiteracy were
rampant. On a long list of measures, a comparative ranking of Rome,
Hangzhou, and London at their respective observation points would show
London lagging. What London had that the other two cities did not was
dynamism. In 18C, the intellectual change was already kaleidoscopic. In a
few decades, every other kind of change would become kaleidoscopic as
well.
FOUR
A SENSE OF WONDER
And so we approach the point where the good stories end and the
numbers begin. I hope that the preceding chapters have helped set
the contexts that lie behind the numbers and at least temporarily fend off the
parochialisms of present time and present place that so easily seduce us.
The other purpose of this stage-setting has been to remind you that the
tables and statistics in the rest of the book stand for the remarkable achievements of flesh-and-blood human beings. To that end, it is important as we
proceed to keep in mind two other blind spots.
The first of these blind spots is the tendency to forget how problems
looked to the people who had to solve them. One reads a history of geology
and smiles at the wrongheadedness of the Neptunist theory of the evolution
of the earth. People seriously thought that rocks were precipitated from
a heavily saturated fluid that once covered the globe? One reads a history
of chemistry and smiles at the idea of phlogiston. People seriously thought
that combustion is explained by an “oily earth” hidden within materials that
burn? We identify with Hutton and Lavoisier, the ones who came up with the
right answers.
But it was not at all obvious to the scientists who first wrestled with
these problems, and it would not have been obvious to us. And so this antidote:The next time you find yourself driving through a rural landscape, look
at the surrounding terrain, forget everything you’ve ever learned about geology, and then imagine you’ve been told you must determine how that landscape was created —how rivers and mountains and rocks came to be. Or the
next time you light a candle, look at the flame, forget everything you’ve ever
learned about chemistry, and imagine trying to explain the mechanism of fire.
54 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Start with the assumption that you must learn it all from scratch, and the difficulty of the challenge that faced our forebears becomes real.
The second blind spot is the tendency to confuse that which has been
achieved with that which must inevitably have been achieved. It is easy to
assume that someone like Aristotle was not so much brilliant as fortunate
in being born when he was. A number of basic truths were going to be
figured out early in mankind’s intellectual history, and Aristotle gave voice to
some of them first. If he hadn’t, someone else soon would have. But is that
really true? Take as an example the discovery of formal logic in which
Aristotle played such a crucial role. Nobody had discovered logic (that we
know of ) in the civilizations of the preceding five millennia. Thinkers in the
non-Western world had another two millennia after Aristotle to discover
formal logic independently, but they didn’t. Were we in the West “bound”
to discover logic because of some underlying aspect of Western culture?
Maybe, but what we know for certain is that the invention of logic occurred
in only one time and one place, that it was done by a handful of individuals,
and that it changed the history of the world. Saying that a few ancient Greeks
merely got there first isn’t adequate acknowledgment of their leap of imagination and intellect.
The same complacency about the legacy we have inherited applies to
works of art. Because A Winter’s Tale, The Night Watch, and Beethoven’s Fifth
Symphony exist, it is easy to take their existence for granted. It is more
accurate to think of each as a priceless gift. If Beethoven had died at 35, as
Mozart did, we would have no Fifth Symphony —or Sixth, Seventh, Eighth,
or Ninth symphonies, for that matter. If Michelangelo had died at 35, we
would have no Moses, no Last Judgment, none of Michelangelo’s architecture,
and would be stranded with just a few tantalizing portions of the ceiling of
the Sistine Chapel. Or we can go the other direction, and try to imagine what
treasures we would have been given if Mozart had not died at 35,
Schubert at 31, Keats and Pergolesi at 26, Masaccio at 27. It is nowhere written that works of genius have to be created, that something in the air will
bring forth another Mozart if the first one falls. One may acknowledge the
undoubted role of the cultural context in fostering or inhibiting great art, but
still recall that it is not enough that the environment be favorable. Somebody
must actually do the deed.
Another thought experiment.This time, imagine that the responsibility
for doing the deed has fallen to you. When next you stand before a work of
representational art in an art museum —not necessarily a great work by a great
name, but one merely good enough to warrant a place in a respectable
A SENSE OF WONDER • 55
museum —put aside the theoretical artistic reasons for admiring it and focus
just on its technique —its control of light and shadow, use of color, rendering
of physical objects.Then imagine someone handing you a brush and a canvas
and saying,“Here, you try it.” Or when next you listen to a work in the classical repertory, imagine that you had to create a structure of coherent, beautiful sounds. To imagine being given such tasks is, for most of us, to force
upon ourselves a recognition of how far they are beyond our own powers.
their minds to it.
THE ART WE THINK WE CAN CREATE
We can all hum a made-up tune or sketch a picture of sorts, but few
of us think we might be able to compose great music or paint great
pictures. Writing is different. Every educated adult can write, and
many, with reason, think they write pretty well. It thus crosses the
minds of many that they could write good fiction if only they put
This offers a direct way of testing out my “Here, you try it”
thought experiment. There is no better way to appreciate the difficulty of creating even minimally adequate art, let alone great art, than
trying to write a paragraph of fiction. A daunting gulf separates
the stringing together of words into good sentences from the
creation of stories and characters that speak to people across time
and cultures.
In the chapters to come, I will refer to human accomplishment in
truckload lots. Great accomplishments will be discussed as outcomes of large
historical and cultural influences. The painstaking work of a lifetime may be
treated as one line in a database. These are standard operating procedures for
exploring the kinds of questions I ask of the data. But before embarking on
those discussions, it is well to begin by recalling that the achievements we will
be analyzing have been, literally, wonderful.
IDENTIFYING
THE PEOPLE
AND EVENTS
P A R T T W O
THAT MATTER
Part 2 presents the inventories of people and events essential to
the story of human accomplishment.
The topic is human excellence, not mere fame. Chapter 5 opens by
considering the nature of excellence in the arts and sciences and then
presents the methods used to compile inventories of significant figures
in the arts and sciences.
Chapter 6 presents the Lotka curve, the mathematical manifestation
of a fact that reappears whenever the eminence of artists and of scientists
is studied: a surprisingly small number of people loom over all the rest.
Chapter 7 presents the inventories of significant figures, describing what
kinds of contributors make the cut.
Chapter 8 focuses on the giants, the handful of figures who have
dominated their fields.
Chapter 9 turns from people to events, discussing the ways in which
identifying significant events poses different problems for the arts versus
the sciences. It includes a compilation of the most important events
in the sciences.
Chapter 10 shifts to another kind of event—not discrete discoveries,
inventions, or works of art, but 14 meta-inventions that expanded the
cognitive repertoire of Homo sapiens.
FIVE
EXCELLENCE AND
ITS IDENTIFICATION
In any list of the people and events preeminent in the history of human
accomplishment, some names and events are certain to be mentioned
more than others. But what are we measuring when we end up with names
like Beethoven and Shakespeare and Einstein at the top of the list? Why are
E=mc2 and the Sistine Chapel and The Divine Comedy sure to be part of our
inventory whereas other formulae and paintings and poems are not? Is the
decisive factor their fame? Arbitrary decisions of keepers of the Canon?
Authentic superiority?
The safe answer is fame, a value-neutral word that requires no explanation of why the Sistine Chapel keeps popping up whenever people write
about art. It just does, and the fact it does means that it is famous. The safe
answer is also close to my own operational answer throughout the rest of the
book, as I use eminence to characterize people and importance to characterize
events; words with meanings that overlap with fame.
But if fame were at the core of what I really meant, the exercise would
not be worth my time to conduct nor yours to read. Who cares who the most
famous artists are, if their fame signifies nothing more substantive than
celebrity? Let it be understood from the outset that I do not consider
eminence and importance to be slightly glorified measures of fame, but more
than that. They are reflections of excellence in human accomplishment. The
Sistine Chapel keeps popping up because it is home to one of the greatest
works of art ever to come from a human hand and mind.
In whose opinion? Who is to say that some paintings are fine art and
others are not? That some poems are greater than others? That some music is
classical and other music is pop? That the achievements of some scientists are
60 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
central and others are peripheral? In a world where judgmental has become an
insult, who is to judge?
We have a long and winding road to travel in this chapter. First, I will
describe what I define as excellence in the sciences and arts respectively. Next
comes a description of my reasons for concluding that standard historiometric methods do a pretty good job of identifying excellence in the terms I have
set. Then comes an overview of the procedures used to compile the inventories of accomplishment based on these methods. The chapter concludes with
short answers to basic questions about the validity of the inventories.
EXCELLENCE IN SCIENTIFIC ACCOMPLISHMENT
Scientific is a word I will use throughout the rest of the book as a label for
referring to the individual hard sciences (astronomy, biology, chemistry, the
earth sciences, and physics) plus mathematics, medicine, and technology. In
all of these human endeavors, the meaning of excellence is intimately
connected with the discovery or application of objective truth about how the
world or universe works.
A Workaday Definition of Truth
By truth, I mean nothing more abstruse than William James’s pragmatic view
that truth “. . . is a property of certain of our ideas. It means their ‘agreement,’
as falsity means their disagreement, with ‘reality.’” How are we to deal with
those words that James puts in quotes, “agreement” and “reality”? Again,
pragmatically: “True ideas are those that we can assimilate, validate, corroborate, and verify. False ideas are those we cannot.”1 Truth as I am using the term
similarly refers to knowledge that meets standard scientific criteria. A falsifiable hypothesis that has so far resisted falsification is a candidate for a truth.
The more extensive the failed efforts to falsify it, the better the candidate. If
a phenomenon can be replicated at will, science has made progress in understanding the truth of the dynamics of that phenomenon. Perfect, unvarying
replicability suggests that a truth has been identified. Accurate prediction in
non-experimental situations is another indicator of truth. Perfectly accurate
prediction suggests that a law of nature has been identified.
In the hard sciences and mathematics, excellence involves the discovery
of truth. In technology and medicine, excellence involves the application of
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 61
truth to produce desired results. Philosophy, related to science (remember
that scientists used to be called natural philosophers), is a poor cousin in this
regard—falsifiability, replicability, and prediction in matters of metaphysics,
ethics, and epistemology have yet to give us ways of comparing the truth
content of the work of Plato and Kant in the same way we can compare the
truth content of the work of Ptolemy and Copernicus. But philosophy at its
best is engaged in the same enterprise, the search for truth, even if the markers of success are less clear.
When I say that my use of the word truth is uncomplicated, I do not
mean that it is unambiguous. Truth in scientific endeavors is a moving target,
constantly subject to amendment or outright refutation. The edifice of scientific accomplishment can be seen as a process of convergence, sometimes with
major deviations and backslidings, on that final Truth with a capital T that we
may reasonably think will forever be incompletely known to us. But to say
that the current state of knowledge represents only our best approximation of
truth is not to say that truth doesn’t exist.
And so in three paragraphs I define my use of truth, a word that has been
the subject of countless philosophical meditations and, in recent decades, of
relentless academic attack. But adding another few dozen pages, or few
hundred, to flesh out those three paragraphs would accomplish nothing. Truth
in scientific endeavors has a workaday meaning that is broadly accepted, and
it satisfies me. My attitude is not unlike Samuel Johnson’s when James
Boswell claimed that Bishop Berkeley’s argument that matter does not exist
independently of the perceiver could not be refuted. “I refute it thus,” Johnson replied, kicking a large stone.2 In the question of whether science deals in
truth, my stone is our behavior in everyday life, where the same people who
tell us there is no such thing as objective truth get on airplanes without a
second thought. If the pilot is not in possession of a truth when he pulls back
the stick, what other word might we use?
Does Importance Equal Excellence
in Scientific Accomplishment?
In an ideal world, I would devise a measure that ordered scientific accomplishments according to the importance of the scientific truths that they
discovered or the extent to which they established a framework within which
scientific knowledge could be accumulated. At the top of the list would be
such events as the discoveries of the fundamental laws of physics, the devel-
62 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
opment of the great taxonomic systems, or the discoveries of basic physiological truths about living organisms.
In reality, historians of science use a variety of criteria for deciding how
much attention to give specific events, and some of those criteria confuse the
issue. Copernicus’s heliocentric model of the universe is an example. It was
an authentically important contribution to scientific truth and deserves a high
spot on its own merits, but it also was a pivotal event in Renaissance Europe
with political, religious, and cultural repercussions that transcended its scientific importance. A score based on the amount of attention given to it in the
history books is in that sense “too high” because it is based in part on things
that have nothing to do with the scientific discovery in itself.
I return to this issue in Chapters 8 and 9. I will observe for the moment
that, the occasional problem case aside, the correspondence between importance defined by the historians’ allocation of attention to events and excellence
as I am defining the term is close. You will have a chance to judge for yourself when you examine the leading scientists and events in the inventories
to come.
EXCELLENCE IN THE ARTS
Now we enter onto more contentious ground. The new proposition on the
table is that accomplishment in the arts is susceptible to judgments of intrinsic worth—excellence. Since I have identified scientific excellence with
truth, it is tempting to identify artistic excellence with beauty. But artistic
quality can be high or low in respect of dimensions for which the word beauty
narrowly defined is inadequate. Let me substitute the phrase high aesthetic
quality for what I have in mind by excellence in the arts. The question then
becomes whether high aesthetic quality has any objective meaning.
Just as it is one thing to say that the truth is hard to determine and
another to claim that truth does not exist, so is it one thing to say that
aesthetic standards are elusive and another to assert that such standards do not
exist. It is not a problem much thought about in our day. Chacun à son goût
has won out, and many people are not even aware that the argument has
another side. But countless generations preceding our own have grappled
with the problem of aesthetic judgment and standards. They discerned relationships that should inform our understandings today.
It is unnecessary to align the argument of this book with any particular
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 63
school of aesthetics. My objective is a limited one: to communicate why I
think that identifying excellence in the arts is possible. To that end I adopt a
minimalist approach consistent with many schools. It draws most directly
from a few basic observations by David Hume.
Expertise and Aesthetic Judgment
In 1757, Hume wrote an essay entitled “Of the Standard of Taste.” It opens
with a statement of the problem that, style aside, could have come from the
pen of a multiculturalist today:
The great variety of Taste . . . that prevails in the world is too obvious not to
have fallen under every one’s observation. Men of the most confined knowledge are able to remark a difference of taste in the narrow circle of their
acquaintance.... But those who can enlarge their view to contemplate
distant nations and remote ages are still more surprised at the great inconsistence and contrariety. We are apt to call barbarous whatever departs widely
from our own taste and apprehension; but soon find the epithet of reproach
retorted on us. And the highest arrogance and self-conceit is at last startled,
on observing an equal assurance on all sides, and scruples, amidst such a
contest of sentiment, to pronounce positively in its own favour.3
Hume understood as clearly as we do that cultural chauvinism is a
potential problem. Yet it is obvious in everyday life, as Hume continues, that
some works seem to endure across time and cultures. “The same Homer who
pleased at Athens and Rome two thousand years ago, is still admired at Paris
and at London,”he writes.4 Hume might observe today that the Handel of his
own era is still admired at Tokyo and New Delhi.
Are the enduring works better than the ones that fade? If so, are fallible
human beings able to say what it is that makes them better? When we are
talking about works of similar quality, saying that one is better than another is
difficult indeed. But at the extremes, the pedestrian versus the first rate, the
reality of difference in quality is more than a matter of opinion. One person
may assert with complete sincerity that a nude painted on black velvet is
more beautiful to him than Titian’s Venus of Urbino, but that is not the same as
saying that the two are of equal aesthetic quality.
Hume tackles this issue by distinguishing between two aspects of taste,
sentiment and judgment. “All sentiment is right,” Hume writes, because “no
sentiment represents what is really in the object.”5 Sentiment is a matter of
perception. When it comes to sentiment, we may not argue with the admirer
64 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
of nudes on black velvet. Judgment is a different matter, Hume says.
It refers to the attempt to make true statements about the object being
contemplated.
Nature has decided the relationship between certain rules of composition and the enduring attraction that they possess, Hume continues. He does
not know why the rules of composition are as they are. He rejects the views
of earlier thinkers that the rules can be deduced a priori. He makes the simpler
assertion, one that the neurophysiologists are beginning to document, that
human beings inherently find certain qualities attractive and others unattractive. So whereas perceptions of beauty and deformity are themselves sentiments, not qualities in the object itself, and men’s opinions of the beauty or
deformity of a particular object may vary widely, “it must be allowed that
there are certain qualities in objects which are fitted by nature to produce
those particular feelings.”6 These are the qualities that inhere to objects, and
to which judgment may be applied.
7
pointment.
THE GENETIC ROOTS OF AESTHETIC RESPONSES
Within a matter of years, we will understand a great deal about the
biological origins of Hume’s “qualities in objects which are fitted
by nature.” Progress has already been made in the fields of evolutionary psychology and neuroscience. Increased genetic knowledge
will feed the findings of both. The note gives some accessible
sources. So far, a fair generalization about the findings is that they
accord with traditional understandings of beauty. Humans are
adaptable up to a point—some of the music of Mozart and
Beethoven was initially considered dissonant and painful to listen
to—but only up to a point. Schoenberg’s hope that in time his
music would be hummed in the streets seems doomed to disapPeople have differing capacities for discerning those qualities—that is
Hume’s next assertion, and the next stumbling block for someone reading
Hume in 21C. Is it true that some people are better able to judge the objective quality of a work of art, or a novel, or a musical composition, than others
are? To make sure everyone understands where he stands on this question,
let me leave Hume for a moment and break down the assertion into smaller
steps.
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 65
The first, most elementary proposition is that people vary in their knowledge of any given field. That much seems beyond dispute.
The next assertion is that the nature of a person’s appreciation of a thing or
event varies with the level of knowledge that a person brings to it. All of us can easily
think of a range of subjects in which our own level of knowledge varies from
ignorant to expert. If you know a lot about baseball, for example, you and an
ignorant friend who accompanies you to the ballpark are watching different
games when there is one out, runners on first and third, and the batter is
ahead in the count.8The things you are thinking about and looking for as the
pitcher delivers the next pitch never cross your ignorant companion’s mind.
Is your friend as excited by the game as you? Having as much fun? Maybe or
maybe not, but that’s not the point.Your appreciation of what is happening is
objectively greater. You are better able to apprehend an underlying reality
inhering in the object, and it has nothing to do with your sentiments.
Hobbies provide more examples. If you are a gardener, what you see
when you visit Sissinghurst Castle is different from what a non-gardener sees.
Your judgment of the quality of the garden has an element of the objective
that goes beyond sentiments about how pretty the flowers are. If you are a
stamp collector, the reasons you value a particular stamp involve aspects of it
that someone who isn’t a stamp collector overlooks. If you are an oenophile,
your judgment of the quality of a wine has an element of the objective that
goes beyond sentiments of how good it tastes. Expertise changes the quality
of the experience, and also introduces an element of the objective.
I use the word objective gingerly. I am not defending the existence of a
set of objective rules that experts know and amateurs don’t (in the arts,
anyway). The element of the objective I have in mind involves only components of the expert’s assessment of a work of art, not the overall response to
it, which inextricably mixes judgment and sentiment. The degree of objectivity varies from expertise to expertise and varies on topics within the
expertise. I am willing to grant all sorts of caveats, but hold to a statistical
understanding of objective: given a large number of expert opinions about a
dozen specific qualities of a work of art, we will not see a random set of
responses, but ones that cluster around a central tendency.
This leaves plenty of room for disputes among experts. Baseball fans,
gardeners, stamp collectors, and oenophiles argue furiously about all sorts of
things within their fields of expertise. But even these arguments are informed
by common understandings that transcend sentiments. In aesthetics, Kant
labeled this quality disinterestedness and held it to be an essential aspect of any
aesthetic judgment. Judgments influenced by one’s personal gratification in
66 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
an object “ . . . can lay no claim at all to a universally valid delight,” he
wrote. “Taste that requires an added element of charm and emotion for its
delight, not to speak of adopting this as the measure of its approval, has not
yet emerged from barbarism.”9
Can human beings attain this kind of detachment, or are they kidding
themselves when they profess to be making statements about art, or literature—or gardens or wines or stamps—that are independent of their
emotional response? Everyday experience tells us that disinterestedness is not
only possible but common. Knowledgeable people in every field routinely
admire achievements that are not to their own taste and rate people who are
not their personal favorites above people who are. The baseball fan admires
the technical excellence of a notoriously boorish player. The gardener who
doesn’t care for topiary admires a well-executed example. The wine critic
who gets more personal pleasure out of burgundy gives a higher rating to a
bottle of rhône that is a better realization of its type.[10]
I take from such observations my third proposition, that the relationship
of expertise to judgment forms a basis for treating excellence in the arts as a measurable trait. This is obviously the most controversial of the three assertions and
does not lend itself to incontrovertible proof. An explicit statement of the
position will at least let us know where we may disagree at the end.
I am talking about an indirect measure of excellence, not a measure of
the thing itself. Physicists study subatomic particles not by examining them
directly, but by the tracks they leave. The crowd’s roar tells an experienced
football fan whether the pass was complete or incomplete, a short gain or a
long one. I deal with artistic excellence and the judgments of experts in analogous ways: If we measure the attention they give to different objects of their
expertise, we can infer something about what they think of them.
The logic is that, by and large, the reason people who know a lot about
a subject prefer A to B is because A is better than B—better in a sense that is
intrinsic to the nature of the excellence in the field in question. Those who
know the most about music devote so much attention to Bach because
understanding Bach calls upon every bit of fine discrimination and knowledge that the expert can bring to the table. The prolonged study of Bach does
not become boring, because Bach keeps presenting new facets for examination. A lesser composer does not pose the same challenges. His mysteries can
be deciphered more quickly. He does not reward study as Bach does. Or to
go back to my original example, the person who knows a lot about art can
look at Titian’s Venus of Urbino for a long time and the looking alone—not the
social context of Titian’s era, not the meaning of the female nude in the
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 67
construction of gender, not what sort of person Titian was, but just the
looking—absorbs the full attention of the art expert. Titian offers a lot to look
at—to contemplate—for someone who knows about art. That same knowledgeable person cannot contemplate the nude painted on black velvet. He
can think about its social context. He can think about the meaning of the
female nude in the construction of gender. He can wonder about what sort
of person the artist was. But there’s not much to get out of the looking.
The argument is that people who know the most about an artistic field
are drawn to certain works. The qualities that draw their attention are those
that offer the biggest payoff in the aesthetics of the art, and this payoff is based
on qualities distinct from subjective sentiments.
YOUR OPINION OF EXPERTISE IN YOUR OWN
FIELD OF EXPERTISE
Experts are in bad odor these days. In courtrooms, expert witnesses
flatly contradict each other. In the media, experts analyze the news
in ways that reflect Hume’s concept of sentiment rather than his
concept of judgment. But away from the spotlight, expertise still has
a meaning that virtually all readers can understand for themselves
because virtually all of you can call upon something in your life on
which you are an expert.
Now ask yourself whether you share this common tendency:
On topics about which we know little, we are dismissive of the
importance of expertise (“I don’t know much about art, but I know
what I like”). On topics about which we know a great deal, we are
dismissive of amateur opinions. The difference between these two
reactions is that one has an empirical basis and the other doesn’t. On
topics about which we know little, we by definition have no way of
knowing that expertise is unimportant. On topics about which we
know a lot, we have concrete reasons for concluding that amateur
observations are either wrong or boringly obvious.
Caveats need to be added to that statement. Of course some experts are
driven by contemporary intellectual fashion and devote their time to topics
for reasons having nothing to do with aesthetic excellence. Of course some
people who claim to be experts are faking it. Of course some people get into
a field not because they find its subject matter fascinating, but because of
68 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
other interests that they then impose upon the field. The list of ways in which
the judgments of any particular expert, or self-proclaimed expert, can be
wrongheaded is long indeed. But that brings us back to Hume and his observations about safety in numbers. We cannot know that any particular expert
in a field is making an accurate judgment about a particular object at a particular time. His opinion may be clouded by anything from his sentiment to a
bout of dyspepsia. But we are saved from these occasional lapses by the
consensus that emerges across critics and across time. Each individual critic is
reflecting in some way the underlying qualities that inhere in a work, independently of sentiment, and the experts’ combined judgments cancel out the
sentiments, which are likely to be what a statistician would call random
noise.[11]
In discussing such arguments with friends and colleagues, I have found
that their responses seem to depend on how comfortable they are with statistical distributions. To some, the idea that even one person with discerning
taste can dislike Bach (which happens to be true of one widely-read critic)
points to insuperable difficulties. To others, outliers are a fact of life—there’s
always the odd case in every large sample—and the existence of a reliable
consensus is the important thing. I side with the latter. To summarize the
position of this book regarding the arts: Excellence in the arts is defined in
terms of high aesthetic quality. The combined evaluations of experts can
provide a usable measure of high aesthetic quality.
The Impossibility of Being Nonjudgmental
To accept the position I just laid out requires one to adopt considerable
humility about the arts in which one is not expert. While I am free not to
enjoy the music of Richard Wagner, it is silly for me to try to argue that
Richard Wagner does not deserve his standing as one of the greatest
composers. That’s a matter of judgment and I’m not competent to judge
(Mark Twain said that “Wagner’s music is better than it sounds,” which seems
about right to me12). Surrendering that independent judgment is irksome,
and gets more so as one’s knowledge approaches the fringes of expertise. I
know more about literature than I know about music, and I nonetheless do
not enjoy the later novels of Henry James that are most highly regarded by
the experts. But my wife is an expert on Henry James and over the years I
have had to accept that I don’t know what I’m talking about.
In dealing with such situations, Hume’s distinction between sentiment
and judgment is invaluable. One is not required to surrender one’s opinions,
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 69
but merely to acknowledge their nature. I am not able to argue that the later
Henry James does not write well; all I can do is assert that his later style is not
to my taste—an assertion that is true and valid within its limits. The cliché “I
don’t know much about art, but I know what I like” is in this sense a precise
and admirable preface to whatever comment comes next.
Another bothersome implication of the position I have laid out is that I
must have an answer to a charge that goes something like this:
If you think that we should take the word of experts about what’s good and bad, are
you prepared to accept that John Cage and Andy Warhol belong up there with Brahms
and Titian? That melody and harmony are boring and outdated? That representational
art is boring and outdated? That the concept of beauty is meaningless? That’s what one
school of experts is saying these days.
The direct answer to that objection is that I am choosing one type of
expertise and rejecting another, allying myself with the classic aesthetic tradition and rejecting the alternative tradition that sprang up in 20C. A capsule
history of aesthetics may help explain why I make that choice.
Human history is replete with forgotten knowledge of the kind I
invoked in Chapter 2, but we identify such losses with ancient history. Other
kinds of knowledge have been forgotten more recently than that. In the case
of aesthetics, we have witnessed almost total amnesia overtake the West in just
the last century.
Perhaps the word itself is partly to blame. Aesthetics was coined around
1750 by an obscure German philosopher named Alexander Baumgarten,
who got it from the Greek word aesthesis (perception). By the time Kant
wrote the most influential of all works on aesthetics, The Critique of Judgment
(1790), the word was used synonymously with the judgment of beauty. The
word aesthete followed, which to many readers may call to mind Bernard
Berenson or John Ruskin, fussy men who seemed to be obsessed with “taste.”
In fact, even though the word aesthetics itself is new, inquiries into beauty and
the judgment of beauty have been an important topic of inquiry for more
than 2,300 years. The results of these centuries of work were various and
contentious, in the same way that writings about epistemology and ethics
have been various and contentious—at odds in some respects, but also bound
together by a certain common understanding of the nature of the topic. In
the case of aesthetics, this common understanding was that works of art are
subject to judgment. Some works are better than others, not just as a matter
of opinion, but according to underlying standards of excellence.
In the West, systematic inquiry into the nature of beauty post-
70 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
dated the appearance of the arts by some thousands of years, skipping
the Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations.13 It had entered the Chinese
intellectual dialogue by the time of Confucius and appeared in Greece during
the age of Plato.14 In India, aesthetic inquiry was taking form by 5C.15 Once
established, aesthetics became a topic that attracted the attention of most of
the great philosophers. In the West, these included Aristotle, Augustine,
Hume, Kant, Schiller, and Hegel. In China, the study of aesthetics was intertwined with social and political thought, the subject of a scholarly tradition at
least as elaborate as anything in the Western tradition.
Then, over the course of 20C, aesthetics disappeared—not just “encountered opposition” or “lost influence,” but, for practical purposes,
vanished from intellectual discourse. Many scholars have recounted how the
classic conception of aesthetics came to take such a beating during 20C.16 I
will give only the sketchiest outline here.
The revolution began in the first half of 20C with influential new
voices, especially those of Benedetto Croce and John Dewey.17 Their message
as it percolated to the wider world (their actual writings were more nuanced)
was that objective standards of beauty are absurd, that we must rescue art from
the stuffy confines of museums and concert halls, and that what counts is the
artist’s obligation to vent his creative impulse, to express himself, to challenge
the onlooker. If we the audience don’t understand what the artist is saying,
that’s our problem, not his.
At about the same time that classic aesthetic standards were being challenged, another influential movement got underway. It was embodied in the
title of one of its pioneering works, The Meaning of Meaning, by C. K. Ogden
and I. A. Richards (1923).18 Out of this inquiry came semiotics—the study of
the ways in which words, concepts, and arguments are, beneath their superficial meanings, functioning as signs of something else. Semiotics launched us
on the path to the postmodernism that now dominates the academic study of
literature, art, music, politics, and sociology. It uses “social construction” as a
catch-all explanation of human differences and institutions, mocks the idea
that an objective truth exists, and has given rise to the everything-is-equallyvalid-in-its-own-context relativism.
In aesthetics, the legacy of postmodernism has been a wholesale rejection of the idea that there is anything worth talking about. People foolishly
used to think that objective aesthetic judgments were possible, this attitude
holds, but in 20C we realized that objective aesthetic statements are impossible because they are culturally bound. Today’s mindset incorporates a heedlessness that would have dismayed Dewey, Croce, Ogden, and Richards.
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 71
Today, few postmodernists bother to refute classic aesthetic thinking or even
concede an obligation to be conversant with it.
So when I acknowledge that I am picking which experts I choose to
defer to, it is not quite as arbitrary as saying that I prefer a particular school
that was fashionable in a particular time and place. Rather, I am allying myself
with a view of the nature of aesthetic inquiry that can without strain encompass everyone from Aristotle and Confucius to Hume, Kant, and beyond—a
long, broad, and distinguished tradition indeed. I am rejecting a postmodernist alternative of recent origin that within a few decades of its founding
had become so politicized that its original merits were lost.
In saying this, I should acknowledge that I find it impossible to take
postmodernism seriously. Harold Bloom, referring to the postmodernist
critique of Shakespeare, captures what is, to me, its essential silliness:
[T]he procedure is to begin with a political stance all your own, far out and
away from Shakespeare’s plays, and then to locate some marginal bit of
English Renaissance social history that seems to sustain your stance. Social
fragment in hand, you move in from outside upon the poor play, and find
some connection, however established, between your supposed social fact
and Shakespeare’s words. It would cheer me to be persuaded that I am
parodying the operations of the professors and directors of what I call
“Resentment”—those critics who value theory over the literature itself—but
I have given a plain account of the going thing, whether in the classroom or
on the stage.19
Readers who want to investigate more detailed reasons for my dismissiveness may consult the titles in the note.20 Here, I put it as an assertion: If
the criteria for the choice are rootedness in human experience, seriousness of
purpose, and intellectual depth, choosing the classic aesthetic tradition over
postmodernism is not a close call.
This brings us to a broader issue than postmodernism narrowly defined.
Despite postmodernism’s influence in academia, the number of dogmatic
postmodernists in the wider population is small, and I doubt if many readers
are among them. The widespread attitude these days is an extreme reluctance
to be “judgmental” in any arena, an ethos that has spread across questions of
morality, religion, politics, and the arts.
My first objection to this stance is that being nonjudgmental is internally contradictory and an impossibility. Return to the extreme cases: If you
refuse to accept that there are any objective differences, expressible as
continua from negative to positive, between the nude painted on black velvet
and Titian’s Venus of Urbino, between a Harlequin romance and Pride and Prej-
72 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
udice, between How Much Is That Doggy in the Window and Eine Kleine Nachtmusik, you are not standing above the fray, refusing to be judgmental. It is a
judgment on the grandest of all scales to say that How Much Is That Doggy
in the Window is, in terms of its quality as a musical composition, indiscriminable from Eine Kleine Nachtmusik. And if you really believe it, you have also
made a sweeping judgment about the capacity of the human mind to assess
information.
The impossibility of being nonjudgmental does not go away as the
differences in quality become smaller. The nature of the judgments merely
changes. When we are comparing Venus of Urbino with a Rembrandt selfportrait, we immediately understand that no objective dimension enables us
to say that one work is better than the other. But there remain dimensions on
which the two paintings differ, and those dimensions lend themselves to
comparisons in which one work may be found superior to the other. One
may choose to examine those differences or not, but one does not have the
option of saying that no differences exist.
Nor does one have the option of saying that differences exist but that
one will not judge them. To notice a difference is to have an opinion about
it—unless one refuses to think. And that is my ultimate objection to the
nonjudgmental frame of mind. We can refuse to voice our opinions, our
judgments, but we cannot keep from having them unless we refuse to think
about what is before our eyes. To refuse to think is to reject that which makes
a human life human. In saying that excellence in the arts is defined in terms
of high aesthetic quality, I do not mean to trivialize the complications of
determining high aesthetic quality. I do insist that to deny the existence of
such a thing as high aesthetic quality is to take the lazy way out.
THE OPERATIONAL MEASURES OF EXCELLENCE
This discussion of the meaning of excellence has raised all sorts of issues that
do not lend themselves to hard and fast conclusions. When we turn instead to
a framework for operationalizing the definitions I have proposed, we find
firmer ground. Whether consistency of judgment across critics reflects what
Hume thinks it does—genuine excellence—or whether it merely reflects
jointly held sentiments is debatable. But whether the consistency itself exists
is an empirical question that can be settled definitively.
The quest to measure the gradations of greatness goes back to 1869 and
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 73
the publication of Francis Galton’s Hereditary Genius, an early document in
the field that would become known as historiometry.21 Galton was the first to
hypothesize, and then support with data, that reputation is a useful measure
of a person’s importance. “By reputation,” he wrote, “I mean the opinion of
contemporaries revised by posterity—the favorable result of a critical analysis
of each man’s character, by many biographers.”22 He obtained his classifications by examining a biographical dictionary and various sources of
obituaries.
Galton and his immediate successors were self-critical about their
results.23 Did a subject’s reputation rest on his accomplishments or his social
standing? Were the accomplishments the direct result of the ability of the
subject, or was he merely in the right place at the right time? These problems
of interpretation were real, but as time went on, it became apparent that they
were tractable.24 Once adjustments had been made, the major reference
works and histories were found to have two roles in determining eminence—
the descriptor that soon replaced Galton’s original word,“reputation.”
First, these works could be used to identify the population of people
who were worthy of study. The founding document of historiometry,
Adolphe Quetelet’s 1835 study of productivity and age among dramatists, was
based on plays included in French and English theatrical repertories.25 Others
have based their populations on everyone who merited at least one column
in an encyclopedia,26 everyone who was the subject of a biography in a public
library,27 or everyone who was included in at least one of three biographical
dictionaries.28
Second, these reference works and histories could be used to calibrate
eminence within the population of qualified people. The gradations were
based on the amount of space devoted to different figures—space measured,
for example, in terms of the number of pages of a book in which a person is
mentioned, or the number of columns devoted to an entry in a biographical
dictionary. J. McKeen Cattell was the first to gradate eminence in this way a
full century ago, using six major biographical dictionaries from Britain, the
United States, France, and Germany. Cattell discarded everyone who did not
appear in at least two of his sources and measured the space allotted to the
remaining sample. He then took the top 1,000 and ranked them in order,
adding a “probable error” to indicate how much confidence could be
attached to the ranking.29 The scholars who have followed in Cattell’s wake
have used a profusion of specific procedures to measure eminence, but all of
them come down to the same rationale:When people knowledgeable in their
74 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
fields attempt to write balanced and comprehensive accounts of who did
what, they tend to allocate space according to the importance of the person
they are talking about.
To see how this procedure works in practice, a specific example may
help. Our topic, we shall say, is Western art. The first source that comes to
hand is a staple of undergraduate art courses, Art Through the Ages, still
commonly referred to as “Gardner” after Helen Gardner, its original author.
In the sixth edition (1975), Michelangelo has the highest total of page references and examples of works devoted to him, more than twice the number
devoted to either Picasso or Donatello, tied for number two. Then comes a
tie among Giotto, Delacroix, and Bernini, followed by a tie among Leonardo,
Rembrandt, and Dürer, and then still another tie between van Eyck and
Raphael.[30] The list provides a nice illustration of what statistical tendency
means. There are a few surprises—does Delacroix really belong in the top 11
in the history of Western art? Some famous names are missing from this top
11. But the tendency for important artists to get the most space is evident.
After examining the index of Gardner’s Art Through the Ages, we turn
to the index of another major history, H. W. Janson’s History of Art.31 In the
fifth edition (1997), Michelangelo is once again on top. Then, in order,
come Picasso, Leonardo, and Donatello. Raphael and van Eyck are tied for
fifth, followed by Dürer, Titian, and then a tie among Giotto, Bernini, and
Masaccio.
Notice both the similarities and differences between this list of the top
11 and the one from Gardner. The most striking point is that 9 names were
on both lists. Notice also how using just 2 sources already begins to correct
for the deficiencies of either. Delacroix, who seemed to have too much space
devoted to him in Gardner, has yet to appear in Janson’s list. If we combine
the 2 sources, Delacroix’s rating will be knocked down considerably. Janson’s
top 10 has Titian and Masaccio, important painters who did not make Gardner’s top 10. Their scores will go up in a combined list.
For our third list, we leave the English and the single-volume history,
and instead use the 12-volume Lexikon der Kunst (1990), edited by Wolf
Stadler and compiled with the assistance of an international board of contributors. Picasso barely edges out Michelangelo for the most page citations,
followed in order by Rembrandt, Dürer, then the quartet of Bernini,
Leonardo, Raphael, and Velazquez (tied), and next Titian and Rubens (tied).
Eight of Stadler’s top 10 are on one of the other two lists. Six artists—
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 75
Michelangelo, Picasso, Leonardo, Dürer, Raphael, and Bernini—are on all
three lists.
These shared judgments at the top of the list of artists go deeper into the
ranks. A total of 184 painters and sculptors were mentioned in all three
sources. The correlation coefficients for the ratings obtained from the sources
are .85 for Gardner and Janson,.75 for Janson and Stadler, and .76 for Gardner
and Stadler. It is such high correlations among histories of the same field, not
the anecdotal evidence I have just presented, that has led to the extensive use
of such measures of eminence in the technical literature. To summarize what
the source of that correlation is, and the position that underlies the rest of this
book:
The high correlations among sources are a natural consequence of the attempt by
knowledgeable critics, devoted to their subject, to give the most attention to the most
important people. Because different critics are tapping into a common understanding of
importance in their field, they make similar choices.Various factors go into the estimate
of importance, but they are in turn substantially associated with excellence. The same
rationale applies to events: Attention has been accorded to events in accordance with authors’ estimates of their importance, and that importance is
substantially associated with excellence.
±
WHAT IS A CORRELATION COEFFICIENT?
A correlation coefficient is a number ranging from –1 to +1 that
mathematically expresses the degree to which one phenomenon is
linked to another. Height and weight, for example, have a positive
correlation (the taller, the heavier, usually). A positive correlation is
one that falls between 0 and +1, with +1 being a perfectly linear
relationship. A negative correlation falls between 0 and –1, with –1
representing a perfectly linear inverse relationship. A correlation of 0
means no linear relationship whatsoever. Correlations in excess of
.7, as in the correlations among Gardner, Janson, and Stadler, are
high for most topics in the social sciences. A more general discussion
of correlation and statistics is given in Appendix 1.
76 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
THE INVENTORIES: AN OVERVIEW
Armed with this framework for investigating the eminence of people and the
importance of events, I assembled databases of people and events into what I
hereafter call inventories of human accomplishment. What follows is the bare
minimum needed to understand how the concepts discussed in the foregoing
pages are used for the inventories. I have reserved most of the technical detail
for Appendix 2.
Delimiting Accomplishment
What qualifies as a human accomplishment? To think about such a question
is to think about how we evaluate ourselves as individuals and as a species.
What is important? What is not?
In the Introduction, I invoked the image of a résumé of the human
species. Let me return to that metaphor, because it has shaped the choice of
topics to include and exclude. Its utility lies in the meaning of the word
résumé—not a report card, diary, or chronology, but evidence of a person’s
capacities. A résumé of the species demonstrates our capacities as a species.
Because it is a résumé of the species, its emphasis is the original discovery, the invention, the unique creation. Sometimes this can naturally be
associated with an individual; sometimes not. It is possible to put the
composer of the Kreutzer sonata in the music inventory—there is just one
such person—but it is not possible to assign a person to the accomplishment
of the species known as “learned to play beautiful music with the violin.”The
great violinists who have performed the Kreutzer sonata are not part of the
inventory.
One other thing about a résumé: it makes no pretense at balance.
Neither do the inventories. They are intended to represent our species at
its best.
The Categories of Accomplishment
The inventories may be broadly categorized under the familiar phrase “the
arts and sciences,” but in practice I created separate databases in twelve
domains: literature, visual arts (limited to sculpture and painting), music,
astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth sciences, physics, mathematics, medicine,
technology, and philosophy.
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 77
THE OMITTED CATEGORIES OF ACCOMPLISHMENT
The two great categories of human accomplishment that I have
omitted from the inventories are commerce and governance. After
reviewing histories and chronologies of those fields, my judgment
was that while it was possible to compile inventories of people and
events, the compilations were unlikely to have either the face validity or the statistical reliability of the inventories for the arts and
sciences. The process whereby commerce and governance have
developed is too dissimilar from the process in the arts and sciences.
I ignore some specific categories within the arts. I obtained data
on architects in the course of assembling the inventory for the visual
arts, but the treatment of architecture varied widely from source to
source. When all the data were assembled I decided that combining
architects with painters and sculptors would not add much (great
architectural accomplishment went roughly in tandem, in both
timing and geography, with great accomplishment in painting and
sculpture) and ran the risks of combining apples and oranges. The
visual arts inventory also omits such categories as jewelry, cabinetry,
and decoration. Dance could not be treated as a separate category
except within the last few centuries at most, and even then the documentation for dance is of a different order from the documentation
for the other arts.
The social sciences are omitted. The sources I reviewed were
inconsistent in the level of detail they devoted to the social sciences,
and the scholarship devoted exclusively to the history of the social
sciences does not yet permit the kind of multiple-source compilation
that was possible for the hard sciences, medicine, mathematics, and
technology. Anthropology, technically classified under earth sciences
and therefore one of the hard sciences, was also omitted, partly
because of uneven treatment in the sources and partly because
anthropology as it evolved in 20C moved away from physical anthropology and toward topics that share more with sociology than with
the hard sciences.
78 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Each of the eight inventories involving scientific endeavors have separate inventories for persons and events. Coverage in all of the scientific inventories is worldwide.
The arts and philosophy have inventories based only on persons, not
works, for reasons discussed in Chapter 9. Worldwide coverage is not feasible
in the arts and philosophy inventories, because all sources, no matter how
broad their scope, demonstrated some degree of skew toward the tradition in
which they were written. Philosophy was broken into separate inventories
for China, India, and the West. Literature was broken into separate inventories for the Arab world, China, India, Japan, and the West. The visual arts were
broken into separate inventories for China, Japan, and the West. A single
music inventory was prepared, limited to the West.
The decision about which geographic areas to cover was based on pragmatic judgments. The first question was how extensive the work was in a
given field. Thus a separate philosophy inventory was not prepared for Japan
because so much of Japanese philosophy derives from Chinese sources. A
separate philosophy inventory was not prepared for the Arab world because
so much of Arabic philosophic writing consists of commentaries on the
Greeks. The second question, applied specifically to the arts, was whether
work was attributed. The reasons for requiring that an artistic tradition be
based on named artists arise from technical issues that make inventories of
artistic works more problematic than inventories of artists. These issues are
discussed at length in Chapter 9. Thus a separate visual arts inventory was not
prepared for India because so much of Indian art is anonymous. The Chinese
art inventory is restricted to painting, because so much of Chinese sculpture
was the work of anonymous craftsmen. Music inventories were not compiled
for any tradition except the West, because only the West has a substantial
tradition of composed pieces by named composers. Lest enthusiasts for one
of the omitted traditions feel slighted, I will put the point in italics: That an
inventory does not exist for an artistic tradition of anonymous art is not a commentary
on the quality of the art, but on the technical problems associated with compiling inventories based on works of art rather than artists. In Chapter 11, the discussion of
European dominance explicitly considers the issue of anonymous artistic
traditions (see page 260).
The Unweighted Measure of Eminence: Significant Figures
Eminence will be our proxy measure for excellence in persons, using multiple
sources. Earlier, I gave the example of the correlation among three art history
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 79
sources. Now leap ahead to the point at which I have assembled data from
many sources, each with its useful but imperfect distribution of the attention
it devotes to the different figures in the story it tells. The details of what
happens next in the creation of the inventories are described in detail in
Appendix 2. Here, you need to be familiar with the meaning of two terms
that will be used throughout the remainder of this book: significant figures and
index scores.
A significant figure is defined as anyone who is mentioned in at least 50
percent of the qualified sources for a given inventory, with qualified source
being one that meets certain criteria of comprehensiveness in covering the
topic in question. In effect, this is an unweighted measure of eminence—a
binary, yes/no measure that says nothing about how much attention a person
got in these sources, but merely says that at least half of the sources for this
field mentioned him.
The Weighted Measure of Eminence: Index Scores
The second term you will be seeing frequently is index scores. In simplest
terms, it measures how the significant figures stack up against one another. It
provides a weighted measure.
The computation of index scores varied from inventory to inventory. The general principle was to use all the information available, which
varied by inventory and source—for example, the number of index page
references, column inches of text, number of plates of artistic works—
collected, combined, and converted to a metric that is common to all of
the inventories.
The common raw score across inventories represents in effect the average percentage of material devoted to a given person. For example, the raw
score of Chopin is 1.06, meaning (ignoring technical caveats) that, in the 16
sources used for the Western music inventory, Chopin averaged 1.06 percent
of the attention distributed among all the significant figures in the music
inventory.
These raw scores varied widely in their range and from inventory to
inventory. In the Western art inventory, for example, the highest raw index
score was only 2.2 percent (Michelangelo) compared to a whopping 17.4
percent top score in the Chinese philosophy inventory (Confucius). To facilitate comparisons across inventories, I converted the raw scores in the various
inventories into a common scale in which the lowest score and highest scores
are always 1 and 100 respectively, and the distribution in between matches the
80 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
distribution of the raw index scores. In other words, it is a linear transformation, and the shape of the raw and transformed distributions are precisely the
same. These are the index scores.
SHORT ANSWERS TO BASIC QUESTIONS
When describing these inventories to friends and colleagues during the years
I was preparing them, I found that a few questions always came up immediately. The full answers to them take considerable space, and are to be found in
the various chapters where they are most relevant and in the technical appendices. Because it is likely that these questions are already in your mind, it may
be helpful to give brief answers now.
How valid and reliable are these measures of eminence
and importance?
There are two ways of assessing whether the scores I present are meaningful.
The simplest is to ask whether the results possess face validity. Face validity in
this instance means that the rank order produced by these measures looks
reasonable to a knowledgeable observer, so that one’s reaction is, “That’s
about what I would expect.”Whether the inventories fit that description is up
to you to decide.
The second way of assessing the measures is by examining their statistical reliability. A statistically reliable index is one that is stable, meaning that the
scores continue to look pretty much the same for any large subset of the
sources. “Pretty much the same” translates technically into the statement that
if you were to split the sources for any given inventory into two groups,
prepare separate measures from each half, then correlate the two sets of measures, then repeat that process for every permutation of split halves, the average correlation coefficient would be high. For the inventories used in Human
Accomplishment, the reliability coefficients are at or above .9 for 13 of the 20,
with a median of .93. These are extremely high reliabilities for social science
indexes in general, but are typical of the reliability of indexes of eminence.32
Aside from their importance in assessing the scores within each inventory, these high reliabilities give reason to believe that the results from this set
of sources will be similar to the results from any other similar set of sources.
Insofar as the sources used to prepare the inventories qualify as comprehensive and balanced, the high reliabilities of the indexes presented here are
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 81
evidence that the estimates of eminence are reflections of the state of expert
opinion (in the classic tradition), as of the last half of 20C.[33]
So far I have been talking about the reliability and validity of the index
scores. A separate issue is whether the people and events chosen for inclusion
in the inventory would be the same no matter who chose them. The 50-
percent criterion was chosen specifically because tests of the sources indicated
that it produced stable samples, with stability in the choice of persons and
events being analogous to reliability in the calculation of scores. As discussed
more fully in Chapter 7: If you were to go out and assemble a dozen histories, biographical dictionaries, and encyclopedias of music and prepare your
own inventory, using comparable procedures, you would end up with a
population of composers that would be roughly the same in size and would
include all the major figures and a high proportion of the minor figures that
are in my inventory. Do not misunderstand: my population of significant
figures is not a uniquely correct set. Your inventory might contain dozens of
marginally significant people who were mentioned in 55 percent of your
sources but only 45 percent of mine, and vice versa. But the distribution of
your set of orphans and my set of orphans over time and geography would be
similar. The statistical profiles of the two inventories would be effectively
indistinguishable.
How much are these estimates of eminence a matter
of current fashion?
“Reflections of the state of expert opinion as of the last half of 20C” raises the
next question. To what extent are we taking a snapshot of expert opinion at
an arbitrary point in time that is mostly a matter of fashion and may be quite
different a hundred years from now?
For assessing recent people and events, this objection has force. Will
string theory and punctuated equilibrium turn out to be major scientific
discoveries? Insights that are not quite right but eventually inspire the right
answer? Major goofs? Will Andy Warhol and Thomas Pynchon be seen as
significant figures in art and literature or will they soon be forgotten?
The principal way I have dealt with this problem is to assume that
answers to such questions are little better than guesses, and to avoid such
guesses by cutting off the inventories at 1950. This cutoff date means that I
have excluded people and events in the scientific inventories that will be of
major historic importance, but there is plenty of material for analyzing
human accomplishment in the sciences without the events of the last 50
82 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
years. In the arts, it is not clear that cutting off the inventories at 1950
involves the loss of much material at all. No doubt some art, music, and
literature created from 1950 to the present will survive, but it is hard to imagine that the last half-century will be seen as producing an abundance of timeless work.
Does fashion remain a problem for assessing events and people before
1950? The answer depends on the inventory. For inventories dealing with the
sciences, technology, mathematics, and medicine, fashionability seems to be
only a minor problem. Given the pace of contemporary science, 50 years
of reexamination and replication of findings is a long time for a false finding
to survive.
Fashion poses more of a threat in the arts. By cutting off the inventory
at 1950, I have reduced one aspect of the problem, the problem of delayed
recognition. The starving painter in his garret, creating masterpieces that will
be appreciated only after his death, is a cultural cliché, but we have had more
than 50 years now to identify those previously ignored artists, composers, and
writers. It seems unlikely that many geniuses are still left languishing—the
putatively ignored geniuses of the past were seldom ignored for more than a
few decades.
For both the arts and the sciences, 50 years is not long enough to deal
with the other aspect of the problem, which involves what has been variously
called the discount effect or (Dean Simonton’s phrase) epochcentric bias.
34 As
Oswald Spengler put it, “The 19th century a.d. seems to us infinitely fuller
and more important than, say, the 19th century b.c.; but the moon, too, seems
to us bigger than Jupiter or Saturn,”35 and the result is that recent work gets
more attention than it will turn out to deserve in the long run.
Sometimes recent work gets disproportionate attention because it is
more accessible in its language or sensibility than a text of a few centuries
earlier. Sometimes it is seen as more relevant to the concerns of contemporary audiences. Whatever the reasons, it has been established that the attention devoted to an historical event decays as its date moves deeper into the
past for reasons that have nothing to do with its intrinsic importance.36 The
cutoff date of 1950 avoids the worst of the potential epochcentric bias, but
how much might remain? I am not sure. If at the end of the book I were in
the position of arguing that the most recent century has also seen the highest
rates of accomplishment, the uncertainty would be problematic. That is not
where the story comes out, however, so whatever epochcentric bias remains
actually gives a margin of error for the argument I will be making, that the
density of accomplishment has declined (see Chapter 21).
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 83
What about problems of fashion that might go back much further
than 1900? Even the greatest names, including Shakespeare and Bach, have
experienced ups and downs in reputation. Presumably such vagaries of fashion will mean that inventories in 25C will show a somewhat different set
of rankings from the inventories I present at the beginning of 21C. But
the ups and downs are often overstated. Johann Sebastian Bach is a case in
point. Bach was underestimated in the first century after his death, but he was
by no means obscure. He was admired and studied by Mozart. Beethoven
was deeply influenced by Bach, whom he called the “immortal god of
harmony.”[37] Even the most adamant 18C partisans of progressive music (the
critics who provided us with dismissive quotes about Bach) usually acknowledged his greatness in their less strident writings.38 He would have ranked
lower in an inventory of musical accomplishment prepared in 1800 than he
does today, but he would have been a major figure even then. By 1900 he
would have been about as near the top as he is now.
The method of constructing the inventories also offers some protection
against fads. It protects against sudden infatuations ( Jane Austen’s sudden
surge in popularity in the 1980s and 1990s, for example) by using resources
that were prepared over several decades, and it protects against parochial fads
(it was only Anglophone countries that joined in the Austen fad) by using
sources written in several different countries and languages.
A third protection lies in the wider pool of critical judgment in today’s
world than in earlier centuries. In Bach’s case, one reason his reputation took
time to develop was the physical inaccessibility of his work. Those who didn’t
happen to be attending church services in a certain part of Germany on
certain Sundays never heard much of Bach’s oeuvre. As late as the 1940s, music
historian Paul Lang could write of Bach’s work, “How tightly the scholar’s
room is still closed, how inaccessible to the millions of music lovers,” lamenting that “The large concert hall, the only place where we encounter Bach’s
music, is not his rightful element.”39 A decade later, with the invention of the
long-playing record, that barrier began to shrink. Similarly, the accessibility
of high-quality color reproductions of art has increased dramatically in the
last half-century. Today’s appraisal of pre-20C artists may still suffer some
element of modishness, but it is based on widespread availability of all the
relevant work. This helps to damp the amplitude of swings in fashion.
In sum, the expert opinion that lies behind the inventories does indeed
represent the view of late 20C, and it will not be immutable, but there is no
reason to think that fashion has deformed the broad patterns that form the
basis for the discussion.
84 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
What about Eurocentrism, sexism, racism,
chauvinism, and elitism?
The inventories are dominated by the accomplishments of white males. This
raises issues of bias that are a familiar part of today’s intellectual landscape.
When it comes to the inventories used for Human Accomplishment, one may
predict that each of the specific allegations of bias will be a variation on a
theme that goes something like this:
Our understanding of every field of human accomplishment has been confined and
biased by its own canon: the novels, plays, poems, paintings, sculptures, symphonies,
sonatas, and operas that the intellectual establishment has designated as great. This
designation of greatness is artificial, a function of the mindset of the members of the
establishment rather than of objective criteria of excellence (objective criteria that cannot
exist). Even in science and technology, our view of human accomplishment is distorted
by preconceptions of what is important. Once the canon in any given field has been
established, it takes on a life of its own. Of course the sources used to compile the inventories show correlations in their allocations of space. They are all copying from one
another, buying into the same narrow definition of what is good and bad.
As this general view is disentangled—deconstructed?—into its component allegations, it becomes possible to examine the degree to which it makes
sense. The components that loom largest are Eurocentrism, sexism, racism,
national chauvinism, and elitism. What follows are short summaries of how
the allegations appear to relate to the inventories, once again presented with
the understanding that there is more to come.
Eurocentrism. The question of Eurocentrism gets a chapter of its own
(Chapter 11). For now, these summary points: For the philosophy and arts
inventories, I have mooted most aspects of Eurocentrism by creating separate
inventories for non-European traditions. For example, the inventory of
Chinese artists is not in competition with Western artists. When assessing the
inventory, the only way that Eurocentrism could be a problem is if Western
writers on Chinese art have a systematically different perspective than
Chinese writers on Chinese art, and this was not the case. Similar comments
apply to the other inventories drawn from non-European traditions. By
creating separate inventories for the Arab world, China, India, and Japan,
while creating a combined inventory for all of the West, I also introduced a
systematic inflation of the number of non-Western significant figures, a point
which I discuss at length in Chapter 11.
Eurocentrism is a potential problem for the scientific inventories, each
EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION • 85
of which is a worldwide compilation of persons and events. The view I
brought to these inventories is that, ultimately, each deals with universal
truths. Chinese and Western painting may not be comparable, but Chinese
and Western science are. The Pythagorean Theorem may be named for a
Greek, but a right triangle has the same relationship between its sides and
hypotenuse everywhere. A bamboo bridge over a Chinese canal and a stone
bridge over a Dutch canal both carry their loads because of the same laws
of physics.
When it comes to the period from –800 onward, the period for which
I shall be analyzing the inventories, historians of science have done excellent
work in reconstructing who discovered what. Nor is there much residual
disagreement among historians of science from different cultures—no
Chinese or Indian texts claim a significant set of scientific or mathematical
discoveries that are not acknowledged as well by Western experts on those
subjects. Since the act of discovery—being first—is the requisite for getting
into an inventory, this reduces the number of uncertainties to a small set.[40]
I have been unable to find evidence that inventories of scientific, mathematical, technological, or medical accomplishment drawn from reputable sources
in any non-Western culture would look much different from the inventories
we will be working with.
Chauvinism. National chauvinism within the West remains a problem.
Works purporting to cover all of the Western world are skewed toward the
nationality of the author. For example, British art historians tend to give
more space to Constable and Turner than Italian art historians do, and French
historians of philosophy tend to include French thinkers that hardly anyone
else mentions.
An examination of these tendencies reveals that the effect of chauvinistic tendencies is minor to begin with and eliminated if the sources come from
a mix of nations. Therefore the inventories for the West (visual arts, music,
literature, and philosophy) employ sources that have been balanced among
the major European nations (Britain, France, Germany, Italy, and Spain) plus
the United States and a scattering of other nations ( Japan, Argentina,
Denmark). A number of the compilations are also the product of multinational teams.
Examination revealed that the effect of chauvinistic tendencies for most
of the inventories were minor to begin with and eliminated by using sources
from a mix of nations. The exception was literature. A German can listen to
a work byVivaldi as easily as he can listen to one by Bach, and an Englishman
can look at a painting by Monet as easily as one by Constable. The same
86 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
cannot be said of literature, because of the language barrier. German historians of literature give disproportionate attention to German and Austrian
authors, English historians to English and American authors, and so on. The
selection of significant figures and computation of their index scores were
therefore based exclusively on sources not written in the language of the
author in question (e.g., Thackeray’s selection as a significant figure and his
index score are based exclusively on sources not written in English).
Sexism. This sensitive topic also gets most of a chapter to itself (Chapter 12). If one is to approach that material dispassionately, it is important to
distinguish between two questions. Has sexism been a barrier to accomplishment among women? Yes, without doubt. But that barrier is not the subject
of this book. The question relevant to our purposes is whether significant
accomplishments by women have gone unrecognized in the inventories. To
that question, the answer seems to be just as clearly “no.”The last 30 years
have seen a cottage industry in books on achievement by women and a
proliferation of courses in universities on women’s accomplishment. The vast
majority of the sources used to compile the inventories have not only had
access to this scholarship, they have been prepared in an era when pressure to
include people other than males has been intense.
Racism. The comments about sexism apply equally to racism. Nonwhites living in Europe and the United States through 1950 suffered severe
discrimination, which helps explain their small numbers in the inventories.
But there is no evidence that important non-white contributors to the arts
and sciences during that period are ignored in the sources used to prepare the
inventories. The bias in sources written during the last few decades is in the
direction of over-emphasizing, not neglecting, the contributions of nonwhites.
Elitism. Is a book on human accomplishment inherently elitist? With
regard to social background, education, IQ, wealth, or influence: No. With
regard to excellence: Yes.
SIX
THE LOTKA CURVE
It is a fact that takes some getting used to, but the evidence for it is overwhelming: When you assemble the human résumé, only a few thousand
people stand apart from the rest. Among them, the people who are indispensable to the story of human accomplishment number in the hundreds.
Among those hundreds, a handful stand conspicuously above everyone else.
This chapter lays out the empirical phenomenon driving this conclusion, the
Lotka curve. The next chapter describes what “a few thousand,”“hundreds,”
and “handful” mean in terms of the members of the specific inventories.
THE “THIS CAN’T BE RIGHT” DISTRIBUTION
OF EMINENCE
To see just how strange the distribution of eminence is, it is useful to take a
moment to think about how
talents are distributed in humans.
They usually take the form of a
normal distribution, also known
as the bell curve. It looks like this:
On almost any human trait,
most people are bunched in the
middle, with the number of
people who are either talented or
untalented diminishing rapidly as
one approaches the extremes. This
is true of the talents for which we No talent Highest possible talent
88 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
have formal measures, such as intelligence, but it also seems to be true of any
trait that affects success in life. Industriousness? A few people are really lazy
and a few are compulsive 18-hour-a-day workers, but most people are somewhere in between. The same may be said of charm, enthusiasm, intensity,
punctuality, and just about any other personality characteristic you can name.
Now suppose that we are talking about artistic talent and the 479 artists
who made it into the Western visual arts inventory we will be using for the
rest of the book. Obviously, they are all somewhere on the right-hand side of
the bell curve. Since we are talking about only 479 people out of all the
people who have lived since –800,
it seems fair to assume that they are
far out on that tail. In other words,
the distribution of artistic talent in
the visual arts inventory is not a
bell curve, but looks more like this:
Technically, what you are
looking at is the portion of a bell
curve from three standard deviations on out (for more about standard deviations and the normal
distribution, see Appendix 1), but
the precise segment of the curve
isn’t important. The point is that all of those 479 artists are presumably very,
very talented compared to the rest of the population and are somewhere out
on the relatively flat portion of the normal curve. At the same time, common
sense tells us that artistic talent isn’t the only thing that determines the excellence of artists. It is not necessarily true that the eminence of the artists will
track precisely with their artistic talent, nor is it even necessarily true that the
excellence of the artists (were we able to measure that quality directly) would
track precisely with artistic talent, nor that all the people with the most artistic talent ever realize that talent. All we know for sure is that those 479 bring
a narrower range of ability to the table than does the population at large. The
most plausible guess is that the range is actually extremely narrow, with
almost all of the difference among the eminence of artists being attributable
to something other than simple talent.
Extraordinary talent Highest possible talent
What then do we expect the distribution of eminence to be? We know
that at least one person will have a score of 100 and another will have a score
of 1—that much is ensured by the way the index scores are calculated.[1] But
even though someone such as Michelangelo has to have a score of 100, that
THE LOTKA CURVE • 89
still leaves plenty of artists such as Rembrandt, Giotto, Monet, Cézanne,
Goya, Rubens, Titian, Picasso, van Gogh, Dürer, Raphael, and a few dozen
others, who get a great deal of space in art histories and are bound to have
high scores.
But the history of art is not written in ways that correspond to this
reasonable expectation. When the computer spits out the distribution of
index scores for the Western art inventory, it looks like the following figure.
The “this can’t be right” distribution of index scores
in the Western art inventory
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Index Score
No. of Artists
1–9 10s 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s 70s 80s 90s
Note: Index scores are limited to Western artists who were active from 1200 to 1950.
Fully 71 percent of the 479 significant figures in the Western art inventory have scores in the first decile.[2] Only 4 artists have scores of 60 or higher,
and one of those (the 100-point score) was obligatory. The upper half of my
100-point scale is nearly unpopulated.
When confronted with radical results that look suspicious, one strategy
is to see what happens when a different kind of measure is used. The index
scores are based on the amount of space that artists get, combining measures
of the total amount of text devoted to them and the number of plates showing their work. What happens if we tighten up on the requirement for getting
into the inventory, getting rid of minor artists who might be cluttering up the
90 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
lower end of the index scores, and use a more egalitarian measure that cuts
down the advantage of the most famous? To get rid of the minor figures, I
restrict the sample to artists who had at least one picture or sculpture shown
as a plate in the sources. To make the measure more egalitarian, I switch
from the total amount of space given to an artist to a simple count of the
number of different paintings or sculptures represented in those plates—
Michelangelo no longer gets credit for all the different times that a plate
of the Sistine Chapel is shown. The Sistine Chapel counts the same as a
Grandma Moses painting.
It would seem that the result should at least dampen to some degree the
skew in the distribution of index scores. But it doesn’t. On the contrary, it
makes matters worse, as illustrated in the chart on the facing page.
Fifty-four percent of the artists who had at least one work to their credit
in all the sources combined had only one work. The shape of the distribution
continued to show a highly skewed distribution—even more skewed than the
original one.
Other attempts to straighten out this skew and produce a scale in which
scores are more evenly spread across the range also fail. Try as one might, it is
impossible to produce a measure that plausibly represents the attention given
to different artists and that also shows anything except a highly skewed distribution. Something is going on with the distribution of eminence among
Western artists that has to be confronted and explained.
If it had affected only the Western art inventory, I would have put this
story in a box or an endnote. But I have presented a typical case, not an
exception. The same shape is found in the other inventories. It is not limited
just to this book or just to measures of eminence. Scholars investigating analogous phenomena have been finding these radically skewed distributions for
80 years.
ALFRED LOTKA’S DISCOVERY
The first person to put numbers to this phenomenon was a Hungarian-born
American demographer named Alfred James Lotka. In the mid-1920s, he set
out to quantify the contributions of scientists to the scientific literature by
counting the number of articles they had published, using the indexes of
Chemical Abstracts and Auerbach’s Geschichtstafeln der Physik for his data.3 Lotka’s
first discovery was that about 60 percent of all the authors represented in his
database had published just a single article. The other was that the number of
THE LOTKA CURVE • 91
Substituting a supposedly more egalitarian measure
makes the distribution even more skewed
60
Percentage of Significant Figures
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
No. of Different Works Shown in the Sources
for the Western Art Inventory
Note: Index scores are limited to Western artists who were active from 1200 to 1950.
scientists who had published greater numbers of articles plunged drastically in
a hyperbolic curve of the type shown on page 92.
The mathematics of the curve are given in the note.[4] What the mathematics come down to is an equation saying that in most cases the percentage of persons with one article will be in the region of 60 percent of all the
people who write any article. Although the equation is sometimes called
Lotka’s law, it really isn’t a law, because it does not give an a priori way to
predict the values for a given distribution. Apart from that, subsequent work
has demonstrated that the specific distributions of productivity are too varied
to settle on .6 as a reliable estimate for the proportion of persons who will
have just one article.5 But if we discard the notion of a law and stick with the
more basic idea of a hyperbolic curve of the type shown in the preceding
figure, it is appropriate to call his discovery the Lotka curve.
Others have since proposed different ways of specifying the mathematics of the curve. Science historian Derek de Solla Price suggested Price’s Law,
whereby half of all contributions to a given field are produced by the square
root of the number of contributors.6 The accuracy of Price’s Law appears to
92 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Lotka’s curve describing the relationship between the scientific
literature and the contributors to it
Percentage of Contributors
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
No. of Publications
depend on the number of contributors—it tends to become less valid as the
number of contributors to a field grows larger—and on how tightly the
universe of contributions is defined.7 Psychologist Colin Martindale has
argued that an equation developed by George Yule for an unrelated purpose
best describes the distribution of eminence.8 But these are uncertainties about
the precise mathematical formulation of the relationship. There is no active
disagreement in the literature about the general form of the empirical distribution. Whether we are talking about the arts or the sciences, the distribution
of any known aggregate measure of human accomplishment by individuals
looks like the Lotka curve. In the words of Dean Simonton, so much
evidence has accumulated that this general pattern may by now be said to
represent an “undeniable law of historiometry.”9
WHY NOT A BELL CURVE?
But why? As I noted when I began the discussion, human talents are not
skewed in this way; they form normal distributions. Why should measures of
THE LOTKA CURVE • 93
accomplishment and eminence be so distributed? A number of theories have
been advanced.[10]
The natural first impulse was to think that the Lotka curve really just
represents the right-hand tail of a bell curve. Psychologist Wayne Dennis,
examining the productivity of American psychologists in the early 1950s, was
the first to advance this explanation in print.11 But Herbert Simon quickly
responded with a mathematical demonstration that Dennis’s data were too
extreme to be part of the right tail of a normal distribution.12 You can see
the sense of Simon’s argument for yourself by comparing the Lotka curve on
page 92 with the right-hand side of the bell curve I showed on page 88. The
right-hand tail of the bell curve is not nearly as skewed as the Lotka curve.
Something else must be at work.
The earliest and most commonsensical explanation for the “something
else” is that the source of great accomplishment is multidimensional—it does
not appear just because a person is highly intelligent or highly creative or
highly anything else. Several traits have to appear in combination. The
pioneer of this view was British polymath Francis Galton in the late 1800s.
Even though he had been instrumental in creating the modern concept of
intelligence, Galton argued that intelligence alone was not enough to explain
genius. Rather, he appealed to “the concrete triple event, of ability combined
with zeal and with capacity for hard labour.”13 Ninety years later, William
Shockley specified how the individual components of human accomplishment, normally distributed, can in combination produce the type of hyperbolic distribution—highly skewed right, with an elongated tail—exemplified
by the Lotka curve.14
A second explanation calls upon what S. K. Merton has called “the
Matthew effect,”15 referring to Matthew 25:29: “Unto every one that hath
shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall
be taken away even that which he hath.” Simplified, the argument, labeled
accumulative advantage, goes like this:
Imagine a hundred young scientists, each submitting a paper for publication to his field’s premier journal. Assume that all of the papers are equally
good. The space in the premier journal is scarce, and only one of the papers
is accepted. The lucky young scientist whose paper is chosen now has several
advantages working in his favor. His confidence goes up, making it easier to
write the next article. The fact that he has been published in a prestigious
journal makes placing the next article easier. The likelihood that he enters the
tenure track at a top university increases, and winning that tenured position
makes it easier for him to conduct high-quality research and to get his subse-
94 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
quent articles placed. Meanwhile, those who were rejected suffer setbacks
that are mirror images of the advantages enjoyed by the lucky one. Those
who were successful the first time are more likely to write more articles and
to get them published; those who were unsuccessful are less likely to write
more articles and less likely to get them placed.16 Over the long run, and with
large samples of scientists, the result will be a Lotka curve of publications.
Success breeds success; failure breeds failure—such is the underlying logic of
accumulative advantage. Like the multiple-factor theories, it corresponds to
real-world examples that most people have encountered.
Dean Simonton has developed a third approach, called the chanceconfiguration theory, that is at once the most ambitious and the most complex
of the current explanations.17 It seeks not just to explain the skewed distribution of intellectual productivity across samples of scientists and artists, but also
to model the fundamental creative process at work. Simonton has elaborated
and modified the chance-configuration theory over two decades, and it
includes mathematical specifications that would take us far afield. Put colloquially, Simonton envisions a world in which each creative individual starts
his career with a large stock of creative raw materials such as research
hypotheses or artistic ideas or musical themes. These raw materials lend
themselves to a huge number of combinations. Out of all the combinations
that a creative person could create from his stock of raw materials, he has time
to develop only a comparative handful. He concentrates on those that seem
to have the most potential. This results in a series of finished products that are
presented to the world, sometimes successfully and sometimes not. The ratio
of hits to misses can be low, as low as 1 to 100, but the hits can still be sufficient to make him famous (Galton’s “capacity for hard labour” coming into
play).18 Simonton is able to explain a variety of phenomena about productivity and career trajectories with the chance-configuration model. The relevant
point for our purposes is that the number of successful combinations is not
normally distributed. The precise degree of exponential growth depends on
specific assumptions that I will not go into, but the growth is explosive under
a wide range of assumptions and reproduces the Lotka curve.
FAME OR EXCELLENCE?
Mathematically, there is no problem explaining why the distribution of
eminence forms a Lotka curve. Any of the above explanations suffices. But
when it comes to the substantive question—why do the scores of a few
THE LOTKA CURVE • 95
people soar so far above the rest?—one obvious possibility has yet to be
mentioned:The Lotka curve is explained by differences in excellence. Shakespeare gets more attention than everyone else because Shakespeare wrote
better than everyone else.
There are reasons to resist that explanation, if only because the skew in
the Lotka curve is so extreme. As Colin Martindale asked in his analysis of
literary fame, how is one to interpret the datum that Shakespeare has 9,118
books written about him while Marlowe has just 205? That Shakespeare was
44 times better than Marlowe?19
The Lotka Curve and Face Validity
The first and simplest way to think about whether the Lotka curve captures
fame or excellence is to examine the names of the people at the top and ask
whether they belong there. The technical term for this way of looking at the
problem is face validity, meaning, “On the face of it, these results make sense.”
We will be discussing the people at the top of the index scores at length in
Chapter 8, but you can quickly check out the face validity of the index scores
by looking at the table on page 96 with lists of the five top-ranking persons
in each inventory.
A case could be made for some people who did not crack the top
five, but just about everyone who did make it is there for a reason that easily
corresponds to real excellence in his field. One way of confirming this is
to go to basic sources in each field and look at the qualitative discussions
of these people. Virtually without exception, the discussion will have some
phrase in it that says, in one form or another, that experts consider this
person to be among the best who ever lived. For many of the names, you
will not need to go that far, because you are already familiar with their
reputations. The names speak for themselves.
The face validity test has a troubling circularity about it, however. The
Lotka curve puts a handful of people out at the right-hand edge. They turn
out to be the people whom we already know about because they are so
famous. And while it may be true that the history books talk about them as
being the best, not just the most famous, we still lack an objective measuring
stick for being sure that we are not looking at celebrity, or the effects of an
established canon, or some other artificial reason for their eminence that
contaminates the value of the index scores as measures of excellence.
In an odd way, the radical skew of the curve that everyone has found
when examining eminence makes it easier, not harder, to explore whether
96 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
THE TOP FIVES
Astronomy Biology Chemistry Earth Sciences
Galileo Charles Darwin Antoine Lavoisier Charles Lyell
Johannes Kepler Aristotle Jöns Berzelius James Hutton
William Herschel Jean-Baptiste Lamarck Carl Scheele William Smith
Pierre-Simon Georges Cuvier Joseph Priestley Agricola
de Laplace Thomas Hunt Morgan Humphrey Davy Abraham Werner
Nicolas Copernicus
Physics Mathematics Medicine Technology
Isaac Newton Leonhard Euler
Albert Einstein Isaac Newton
Ernest Rutherford Carl Gauss
Michael Faraday Euclid
Galileo Pierre-Simon
de Laplace
Louis Pasteur Thomas Edison
Robert Koch James Watt
Hippocrates Leonardo da Vinci
Galen Christiaan Huygens
Paracelsus Archimedes
Chinese Art Chinese Literature Chinese Philosophy Arabic Literature
Gu Kaizhi Du Fu
Zhao Mengfu Li Bo
Wu Daozi Bo Juyi
Mu Yuan Su Dongpo
Dong Qichan Han Yu
Confucius al-Mutanabbi
Laozi Abu Nuwas
Zhu Xi al-Ma’arri
Mencius Imru’ al-Qays
Zhuangzi Abu Tammam
Japanese Art Japanese Literature Indian Literature Indian Philosophy
Toyo Sesshu Matsuo Basho
Tawaraya Sotatsu Chikamatsu
Ogata Korin Monzaemon
Hasegawa Tohaku Murasaki Shikibu
Kano Eitoku Ihara Saikaku
Mori Ogai
Kalidasa Sankara
Vyasa Nagarjuna
Valmiki Ramanuja
Asvaghosa Buddha
Bhartrhari Madhva
Western Art Western Literature Western Music Western Philosophy
Michelangelo William Shakespeare Ludwig van Aristotle
Pablo Picasso Johann von Goethe Beethoven Plato
Raphael Dante Alighieri Wolfgang Amadeus Immanuel Kant
Leonardo da Vinci Virgil Mozart Rene Descartes
Titian Homer Johann Sebastian Georg Hegel
Bach
Richard Wagner
Franz Joseph Haydn
we are observing a measure of fame or of accomplishment. In the preceding
chapter, I described my reasons for thinking that excellence underlies the
measures of eminence I am using. That explanation was necessarily qualitative. Now we have before us a concrete, highly distinctive mathematical shape
to use for making a prediction: If the Lotka curve reflects excellence, not just fame,
it will also be found when we turn to fields that have objective measures of excellence.
THE LOTKA CURVE • 97
The World of Sports as a Source of Clear-Cut Cases
It is surprising and a little depressing to realize how few fields of human
endeavor have objective measures of excellence. Measures of success are abundant. Money income can be a useful measure of success among persons
within certain occupations. Number of elections won can be a useful measure of success for politicians. But linking success with excellence is tricky.
The businessmen with the largest income packages, the writers with the
biggest book sales, and the composers with the biggest album sales are not
necessarily the people whom their peers judge to be the best businessmen,
writers, or composers. A congressman who is reelected twenty times is a
more successful politician than the one who gets beaten after one term, but
the accumulative advantage of incumbency contributes to that success. Even
measures of success are subject to complications. Mortality rates for physicians can be misleading for a surgeon who deliberately takes on the most
difficult cases.
One of the rare fields of human endeavor in which an objective measure of excellence is available is sports. The best source of measures within
sports involves games where individuals compete alone (e.g., golf and tennis)
or achievements in team sports that do not depend on the cooperation of
teammates (e.g., batting average in baseball). Within this subset, the most
unambiguous measures of excellence come from sports in which the result is
determined by an objective process rather than by judges (diving or gymnastics). I will use professional golf as my extended example, and then briefly
present parallel results from other sports.
The Professional Golf Association (PGA) compiles individual statistics
on the component skills that go into the game of golf, enabling a comparison between those component skills and overall excellence. The figure on
the next page shows four of these component skills for card-carrying
members of the male tour: driving distance, percentage of fairways hit,
percentage of greens reached in the regulation number of strokes, and average number of putts per round. The dots represent the actual data. The line in
each figure represents the mathematically perfect bell curve for these data.[20]
You will seldom find a closer match with a bell curve in real-world data
than you see in those four examples. What makes the distributions especially
striking is that they are produced by a tiny sliver from the far right-hand tail
of the distribution of all male golfers. Nobody who becomes a regular on the
PGA tour is a “poor” putter or striker of the ball, if the reference group is
everyone who plays these games. And yet even the men within that elite
group fall into a normal distribution on the component skills of golf.[21]
Now we turn to an undisputed measure of excellence in golf: tournament victories.[22] For the sample, I wanted to define a set of golfers who had
completed their careers and had demonstrated that they were capable of playing at a high level on the pro tour. I settled upon all golfers who had made
the cut (survived to the last two rounds) of the men’s PGA Championship at
least once from 1970 to 1989, and who had completed their careers by the
end of 2001. A total of 361 golfers met these criteria. How many tournaments had they won?
98 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The component skills of golf form bell curves
even among professionals
Source: Author’s analysis, Professional Golf Association statistics for exempt PGA players,
1991–2000.
50 60 70
Percentage of Greens Hit in Regulation
27.5 28 28.5 29 29.5 30 30.5
Average Putts per Round
235 245 255 265 275 285 295 305
Driving Distance in Yards
50 60 70 80
Percentage of Fairways Hit
THE LOTKA CURVE • 99
The most decisive finding is that, among this elite group of golfers, 53
percent failed to win even a single tournament during the entire course of
their careers. If you want evidence that winning a golf tournament is difficult,
here it is. More than half of this highly selected set of professional golfers
couldn’t do it in years of trying.
Now we turn to the 47 percent who did achieve at least one victory.
The figure below shows the distribution of number of victories.
A hyperbolic curve appears instead of the bell curve that described the
component skills. Notice, however, that the percentage with a single victory
is only 26 percent, not close to the concentration with a single entry (in the
region of 60 percent) that inspired Lotka, Price, and the others to examine
the extreme skew of accomplishment. The steepness of the decline is also
accentuated by the high maximum, which goes all the way out to 71.
When the measure is tournament victories, the bell curve is replaced
by a Lotka curve, but one of comparatively modest skew
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Percentage of Eligible Players
No. of PGA Tour Victories
“Eligible players” consists of all players who were under the age of 45 as of 1970, had
made the cut of the men’s PGA Championship at least once from 1970 to 1989, who
had retired or passed the age of 45 by the end of the 2001 season, and had won at least
one tournament in the course of their careers.
Source: Author’s analysis, PGA and career statistics obtained from the PGA and ESPN
web sites.
100 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The skew is still pronounced. Of the minority who won any tournaments, almost all won only 1, 2, or 3. A handful of players won between 3 and
25 tournaments. Only 4 players won more than 30. At the far right-hand tail
of the graph are Arnold Palmer, with 61 PGA victories, and Jack Nicklaus,
who won 71.
Now let us ratchet the bar several notches higher. We have already seen
how hard it is for a professional to win even one tournament, but it remains
true that a majority of players who win one golf tournament go on to win
another, suggesting that some accumulative advantage is at work. But any golf
fan could give you another explanation: In most PGA tour events, only some
of the top players participate. The figure on page 99 doesn’t tell us what
happens when all the top players are present and all of them are highly motivated to win. To examine that situation, we focus on the ultimate measure of
excellence in professional golf, the Majors—the U.S. Open, British Open,
PGA, and Masters.
Once again I limit the sample of players to men who had completed
their careers as of the end of 2001,[23] but the requirement that really slashes
the population is that the player had to have won at least one Major in the
course of his career. The sample of Majors includes all U.S. and British Opens
since 1900, and all PGA and Masters championships since those tournaments
began (1916 and 1934 respectively). The figure opposite shows the distribution of victories.
We are back to a curve in which close to 60 percent of all the people
who achieved one accomplishment achieved only one. In assessing the
figure’s implications, it is important to remember the sample. We are no
longer talking just about professional golfers, or even about professional
golfers who have proved they can win a tournament, but about the elite of
the elite, men who had the nerve and skill to win a tournament that all of the
best players in the world wanted desperately to win. And yet the distribution
of these data is about as skewed as the distribution of the ability of academics
to publish journal articles.
Are we looking at fame or excellence? One of the satisfying simplicities
of sports is that we can answer that question without agonizing. The men at
the right-hand tail are not where they are because of social constructions that
artificially designate them as the best. No keepers of the golf canon awarded
Jack Nicklaus his 71 PGA tour victories or his 18 professional Majors. The
champions sit where they are because they were the best at what they did.
The phenomenon I have described for professional golfers in the 1970s
through 1980s fits the champions of golf in other eras. It also applies to other
THE LOTKA CURVE • 101
competitions. I have investigated four examples—running, baseball, tennis,
and chess—in some detail. In each of these cases, the component skills show
normal distributions. Season batting averages in baseball are normally distributed. So is the speed of first serve in tennis, the distribution of running times
in marathons, and ELO rating (produced by a mechanistic process) in chess,
along with all of the other component skills I was able to explore.
Converting the component skills into major achievements is the trick
in these sports as it is in golf. The figure on the next page shows a measure of
excellence in each of those sports: combined number of wins in the Boston
and New York marathons for running, number of batting championships for
baseball, number of Grand Slam titles for tennis, and points in world championship matches for chess. Once again, as in the case of golf, the bell curve
disappears and the Lotka curve reemerges when measures of component skills
are replaced by measures of overall excellence.
As the measure of excellence becomes
more demanding, the Lotka curve becomes more extreme Percentage of Eligible Players
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
No. of Victories in the Majors
“Eligible players” consists of all players who had retired or passed the age of 45 by the
end of the 2001 season and had won at least one Major in the course of their careers.
Source: Author’s analysis, Statistics for the U.S. Open, British Open, PGA Championship,
and Masters Tournament as given on their respective web sites.
102 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Four other examples of measures of competitive excellence
that produce Lotka curves
1 3 5 7 9
Winners of Major League
Batting Championships
Winners of the Boston and
Chess Championships
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
0
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
0 2 4 6 8
0 4 8 12 16 20
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
0 50 100 150 200
11
New York Marathons
Winners of Tennis
Grand Slam Titles
Winners of Points in World
Combined No. of Wins
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
No. of Championships
10 12
No. of Grand Slams Cumulative Points
Sources: The official web sites for Major League Baseball and the four tennis grand slam
tournaments; a web site of marathon information (marathonguide.com) and a web site
with data on world chess championships (mark-weeks.com/chess).
AN EXPLANATION: DIFFICULTY
As we consider whether the Lotka curves in the arts and sciences reflect fame
or excellence, the rule of parsimony comes into play: If direct measures of
excellence in sports show the same distribution as indirect measures of excel-
THE LOTKA CURVE • 103
lence in the other fields, the least complicated explanation is that we are
observing the same phenomenon in both cases.
The patterns in the sports examples also suggest why excellence is
hyperbolically distributed.[24] The harder the task, the more likely that the
modal number of such accomplishments among the people who try to
achieve it will be zero and the next most common number will be one. The
harder the task, the steeper will be the reduction in each incremental number
of successes. It is in the nature of difficulty. Of course hardly any professional
golfer wins even one of the Majors. It’s too hard.
In parallel, the reason that the component skills tend to be distributed
in bell curves is that the easier the task, the more likely that almost anybody
will be able to do it many times. We may visualize this simple explanation in
terms of a continuum. Suppose that we array tasks from the easiest to the
hardest in any given field. At the “easiest” end lies something so simple that
everyone can do it almost every time. If we observe multiple repetitions in a
sample of people working in this field, we will observe a hyperbolic curve,
but the mirror image of the ones we have been looking at so far, skewed to
the right instead of to the left. The number of people with many misses will
be vanishingly small and those with 100 percent successes will be high. As the
difficulty of the task increases, the curve will first become less skewed to the right, then
become a normal curve, and, as the task continues to become harder, will shift toward
the left-skewed shape of a Lotka curve.
The Difficulty Explanation Applied to Golf
All of this conforms to experiences that should resonate with just about
anybody who has pushed himself to take harder and harder courses in school,
who has tried to climb a corporate ladder, or who has taken a passionate
interest in some difficult hobby. But to spell it out in terms of our continuing
example of golf: Any professional golfer will have one-putt greens and hit the
fairway with towering drives, typically many times in every round. For a
professional golfer, these are easy accomplishments. But to be near the lead
on Sunday morning means that you have strung together an unusually large
number of those one-putt greens, drives in the fairway, and a half-dozen
other individually easy accomplishments over the course of the three successive rounds that begin the tournament. This is not so easy. Now, on Sunday,
the opportunity to win the tournament is within reach. The individually
simple tasks must be done under increased psychological pressure that makes
104 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
the breath come shorter and the hands shake as you line up the putt. The
number of people who are good enough to have survived the first three days
to put themselves in that position is small; the number who can play well on
Sunday under those conditions is smaller still. And now suppose it is not just
any Sunday in any tournament, but instead that you are on the tee of the
Road Hole at St. Andrews in the British Open with a one-stroke lead. The
number of people who can deal with that situation even a single time has
dwindled to a few handfuls in every generation. To do such things repeatedly
is given to a handful of golfers per century. Hence Lotka curves.
We need not ignore the logic of the accumulative advantage argument,
which stresses the importance of the initial achievement. In the golf world
as in other sports, it is a cliché that winning the first championship is harder
than winning the second, and the reason for the cliché has to do with selfconfidence. But some people can take that first victory and build upon it
while others cannot—this is one of the psychological strengths of champions
that is just as much a part of their makeup as fast reflexes or dazzling hand-eye
coordination. It was a commonplace among professional golfers that other
players in Jack Nicklaus’s generation could come up with more sensational
shots than he could. The others just couldn’t win as well as Nicklaus could. It
is also a cliché in sports that great champions acquire an awe factor that works
in their favor. As chess champion Bobby Fischer wryly observed, he never
played an opponent who was at his best. But every great champion acquires
that additional advantage by winning in the first place. The complex of qualities that constitute genius transcends any simple catalog of skills.
Incremental differences in sports also give us a way to think about what
qualitative superiority does and doesn’t mean. A few pages ago, I mentioned
Colin Martindale’s finding that 44 times as many books have been written
about Shakespeare as about Marlowe, and his plausible doubt that Shakespeare is 44 times better than Marlowe. The analogies with sports help to
recast the meaning of such disparities. Ted Williams won six American League
batting titles while Lou Gehrig won just one—a ratio of six to one. The
meaning of that comparison is not that Williams was six times as good a hitter
as Gehrig (Williams’s lifetime batting average was only four points higher
than Gehrig’s). Rather, it is a measure that explains why Ted Williams is
always in the conversation when baseball fans argue about who was the greatest hitter of all time and Lou Gehrig is not. The measures that produce Lotka
curves not only discriminate the excellent from the mediocre, but the unparalleled from the merely excellent.
THE LOTKA CURVE • 105
Why Difficulty Is Also the Most Plausible Explanation
for Lotka Curves in the Arts and Sciences
It is easier to acknowledge the dominance of a few people in athletics, where
measures of winning and losing are woven into the nature of the enterprise,
than it is in the arts and sciences. But the same logic transfers. Let us return
for a moment to the finding that initially inspired Lotka: 60 percent of the
people who publish scientific articles publish just one. Could this be changed
if editorial boards of journals were fairer, or if we encouraged the people who
dropped out after the first article to write another?
To some extent, yes, for the accomplishment in question is not one of
the hardest ones. If a $100,000 fee were offered for second published article,
a great many people could find it in themselves to come up with a second
one that would be published by some journal. If we kept offering another
$100,000 for each additional article, we could eventually produce something
resembling a bell curve, even if it remained a highly skewed one.
Suppose instead that the accomplishment in question is getting an article into Nature, one of the premier scientific journals, and a $100,000 fee is
offered for publishing a second article in Nature. Now “trying harder”
becomes noticeably less effective. Nor do the arguments about accumulative
advantage sound convincing. It is all very well to have greater confidence, or
to have gotten a better academic position, but confidence and tenure don’t
help much in coming up with another research finding that will win the stiff
competition for space in Nature. To publish that second Nature article you
need more than incentive.You must also be exceedingly good at what you do.
In this light, consider the difficulty of getting into the inventories
compiled for this book. Now your assignment is to do something that historians of your field will consider worth mentioning a century from now. Just
putting it in words brings home how difficult a task you have been given.
Judging from past experience, hardly anyone who is an intellectual celebrity
today will merit a sidelong glance a century from now. How many readers
under the age of 50 recognize the names of Mortimer Adler or Walter Lippmann? Each was as famous in the first half of 20C as Carl Sagan or George F.
Will has been more recently, but contemporary fame is no help in making the
history books. If, a century after you are dead, you still have a single picture
hanging in a museum, a single composition still being played by the world’s
orchestras, or a single scientific finding still being cited in the technical journals, you will have put yourself in a tiny company. No wonder the most
common frequency of such feats even in that elite group is just one.
106 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
These remarks by no means dispose of the argument about whether we
are looking at fame or excellence. But the data on Lotka curves in fields
where the only explanation is excellence gets us past an important hurdle.
Many of the discussions of Lotka curves in the literature to date have sought
explanations that do not call on real superiority as an explanation for why
some people produce more than others. They advance instead some variation
on a theme in which some people luck out. The explanation can be simpler.
Some people are authentically the best at what they do. There is no meaning
in the statement that Shakespeare was 44 times better than Marlowe. There is
meaning in the statement that, as good a playwright as Marlowe was, Shakespeare was hugely greater. The large difference separating the index scores of
Marlowe and Shakespeare reflects the clarity of that verdict.
SEVEN
THE PEOPLE
WHO MATTER I:
SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
In recounting human accomplishment in the arts, sciences, and philosophy
for the last 2,800 years, who are the people without whom the story is
incomplete?
The discussion of the Lotka curve provided part of the answer: The
index scores give us a way of identifying the giants in every field who stand
out conspicuously from all the rest. They are the topic of Chapter 8. But
before getting to them, what about the rest, those who may not loom quite
so large but who qualify as individuals “without whom the story is incomplete”? This chapter describes who they are and how they have been chosen.
The task is to establish a criterion for deciding whether a person is in
or out. When Alfred Lotka discovered the Lotka curve, he had already
selected a subset of the population of scientists in which he was interested,
chemists who had published at least one article. That criterion constitutes a
clear bright line distinguishing his subset from the total population of
chemists. The subset of golfers who win at least one tour tournament is separated by a clear bright line from the total population of professional golfers.
No equivalent line separates “the people without whom the story is incomplete” from the rest. I tackle this task first by establishing the outer boundaries
of that potential population, then looking for a reasonable way to define the
inner circle.
108 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
ESTABLISHING THE OUTER BOUNDARIES
OF THE POPULATION
Establishing the outer boundaries of the population is easy. Modern scholars
have helpfully produced large and comprehensive biographical dictionaries
with the avowed purpose of containing everyone who is worth mentioning
in their particular field. For the sciences, an international consortium of
scholars has been laboring for more than four decades on the Dictionary of
Scientific Biography, now up to 18 volumes.1 In philosophy, we have the Encyclopédie Philosophique Universelle,
2 only two volumes, but fat ones. For Western
art, we may turn to the 17-volume Enciclopedia Universale dell’Arte compiled
by the Istituto per la Collaborazione Culturale. At least one such encyclopedic reference work is among the sources for every inventory.
The entries in an encyclopedic source typically number in the thousands. The problem is that a large proportion of those people do not come
close to any reasonable definition of “people without whom the story is
incomplete.”To see this, consider the case of music. In all, the music inventory combines information from 16 sources. Here is a sampling of the people
who are mentioned by one, but no more than one, of those 16. To approximate randomness, I have chosen the first such person mentioned for the first
five letters of the alphabet:
• Jeno Ádám, 1896–1982. Hungarian composer, conductor, and educator, known chiefly for his role in the reform of Hungarian musical
education.
• Valentin Babst, 16C. Mentioned in 16C sources in a discussion of the
vernacular religious songs for congregational singing.
• Vinzenzo Calestani, 1589–c. 1617. Taught music to the wealthy
Mastiani family and published a collection of pieces for one and two
voices with continuo.
• Innocentius Dammonis, 16C. Mentioned in 16C sources as a composer
represented in a collection of polyphonic laudi that Petrucci brought
out in 1508.
• Piotr Elert, d.c. 1685. Mentioned in 17C sources as a composer of one
of the operas composed by members of the Royal Chapel at Warsaw
at the command of Wladyslaw IV of Poland.
Accomplished as these people surely were, they are not crucial to the
development of Western music. Readers who worry that important contrib-
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT FIGURES • 109
utors have slipped through the net may rest easy. Undiscovered geniuses
undoubtedly exist in the sense that people who could have been great scientists or artists or philosophers never got the chance to realize their potential,
but the idea that undiscovered scientists or artists or philosophers who actually contributed important works have failed to get consideration does not
square with the mind-numbing level of detail included in contemporary
reference works.
NARROWING THE FIELD
We need a way to narrow the field. Large, well-regarded general histories of
a field are the natural tool for doing that—natural, because the historian’s task
is to sift through the mass of historical material represented by the encyclopedic sources, winnowing out the marginal and retaining the significant.
Suppose (staying with music as our example) we take as our first
approximation of “people without whom the story is incomplete” those who
are included in three major histories of music. We begin with Donald Grout’s
magisterial History of Western Music (5th ed., 1996), weighing in at a hefty 862
pages.3 It contains at least a mention of 512 different composers.[4] Then we
turn to Lucien Rebatet’s Une Histoire de la Musique (1969), a French history
of music almost 600 pages long.5 Rebatet mentions 643 composers. Then we
move on to Germany and examine Weltgeschichte der Musik (1976), written by
six authors headed by Kurt Honolka. It is 640 pages long and mentions 653
composers.
So we have three major
histories of the same topic covering the same period of time.
Whom do they consider essential to an account of Western
music? The Venn diagram at the
right (drawn only approximately
to scale) shows the number of
composers that were shared, and
not shared, among them.
Honolka
110
44
63
189
106
198
295
Grout Rebatet
In all, the three sources mentioned 1,005 unique composers —a large
number, but fewer than half those mentioned in The Harvard Biographical
Dictionary of Music (1996). Histories are far more selective than the encyclopedic sources. On the other hand, 497 of the composers—half of them—
110 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
were mentioned in just one of the three volumes. It is clear that each author
did his own homework and made decisions about whom to include that were
not shared by the other two, a desirable characteristic when trying to assemble independent judgments of experts.
Since our purpose is to focus on the people without whom the story is
incomplete, the element in the Venn diagram that attracts the most interest is
that inner circle with the number 295, denoting the composers that all three
sources saw fit to include. The logic is that if three major sources, each of
which exhibits considerable independence in its preparation, all mentioned a
person, that person probably did something significant.
Now imagine that we continue to add a fourth source, then a fifth, and
so on. With each additional source, the total number of composers who are
mentioned by at least somebody grows or at least holds steady, and the
number who are mentioned by everybody shrinks. But another thing
happens as we add more sources: the twin curves formed by the composers
mentioned by somebody and the composers mentioned by everybody begin
to flatten. The actual curves produced by the 12 most comprehensive sources
used for the Western music inventory are shown on the facing page, starting
with the most comprehensive source and working down.
What you see in that figure is typical of all the inventories. The black
dot at the far left represents the most comprehensive source of the 12, the
Harvard Biographical Dictionary of Music (1996), containing entries for 2,242
composers.[6] Even though the other encyclopedic sources were individually
extensive, they added only 236 more names. By the fifth source, the total
number of names was within two persons of the maximum it would reach
after the twelfth.
Meanwhile, the number of composers so central to the story of Western music that every writer on the subject has to include them dropped
rapidly after the first few sources and never completely leveled off through
the first 12 sources. But it did flatten out substantially around the six-source
mark. In this tendency of both lines to reach asymptotes lies a strategy for
identifying significant figures: require that a significant figure be mentioned
by at least a certain percentage of the sources.
A criterion that demands that a person be mentioned in every source is
too severe—that defines the indispensable, not the merely excellent. A criterion that asks only that a person be mentioned in any source at all is too lax—
the encyclopedic sources include too many obviously marginal figures. Along
the continuum from a single source to 100 percent of the sources, where
should we draw the line?
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT FIGURES • 111
The aggregate numbers of people mentioned in any
and all sources level out quickly
0
1000
2000
3000
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 8
No. of Composers
Cumulative No. of Sources
Composers mentioned by anyone
Composers mentioned by everyone
10 11 12
Note: Sources are entered in descending order of their number of composers.
SELECTING THE SIGNIFICANT
Inevitably, any cutoff point has an element of the arbitrary. My choice was to
draw the line at 50 percent. Everyone who is mentioned in at least 50 percent
of the qualified sources is designated a significant figure and enters the samples
for analysis in the rest of the book. The technical considerations behind the
choice of 50 percent are discussed in Appendix 2, but they come down to a
search for a balance between the competing goals of large sample size and
high sample stability.
The virtues of a large sample size are obvious. The larger the samples,
the greater the analytic leverage in discerning patterns in the data and in testing whether those patterns are real or illusory. The importance of sample
stability is to ensure that the results of the analysis are not sensitive to the
sources I happened to choose. I originally intended to include everyone who
was mentioned in at least 20 percent of the sources. This more relaxed cutoff
112 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
FAUX LOTKA
Do not confuse the falling line in the figure on page 111 with a
Lotka curve. It isn’t, partly for mathematical reasons but most
importantly because Lotka curves cannot be made to appear or
disappear depending on the choice of sources. Lotka curves represent the way difficult accomplishment is distributed, no matter how
one slices the data and no matter what sources are used. In contrast,
the falling line is highly sensitive to choice of sources. For example,
I could make that line drop shallowly if I confined all of my sources
to encyclopedic ones that include thousands of composers, or I
could make it fall more steeply if I were to combine just one encyclopedic source with histories listing only a few hundred composers
per history.
The one thing I cannot do with the falling line, no matter what
sources I use, is force it to converge on zero. As long as the sources
represent major, comprehensive histories of Western music, several
dozen figures will be mentioned in every source. This does raise an
issue, however. If I were to include, say, a 100-page pocket history of
music that discussed only a handful of major composers, I could artificially minimize that number. It is thus important to define a floor
of comprehensiveness for the histories that were used to select
significant figures. The floor that was selected is discussed in Appendix 2. To illustrate its effect: In the case of the music inventory, any
source had to include a minimum of 283 composers who had been
mentioned by a second source as well.
rule would have produced a larger sample (about double). But as an empirical matter, the price of that larger sample would have been a set of significant
figures that could change drastically with fairly minor changes in the mix of
sources (see Appendix 2 for documentation on this and the subsequent statements about sample stability). This does not necessarily mean that the alternative samples would have produced different results in the analyses that form
the later chapters of the book, but it was a danger to worry about. Setting the
cutoff point at 50 percent produced samples that are demonstrably insensitive
to changes in the configuration of sources, as long as one observes a few basic
guidelines in selecting the sources.
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT FIGURES • 113
The 50 percent criterion produces a sample of 4,002, broken down by
inventory as shown in the table below.
THE SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Inventory Number
The Sciences
Astronomy 124
Biology 193
Chemistry 204
Earth Sciences 85
Physics 218
Mathematics 191
Medicine 160
Technology 239
Not classifiable 28
Philosophy
China 39
India 45
The West 155
Visual Arts
China 111
Japan 81
The West 479
Literature
Arab World 82
China 83
India 43
Japan 85
The West 835
Music (Western) 522
Total 4,002
These 4,002 are, for operational purposes, the people who matter—
operationally, because obviously this precise set of people would not be identified if one were to replicate the research. Throughout the rest of the book,
the frequently-used phrase significant figures will refer to this specific set of
people. A complete list of all of them is given in Appendix 5 along with
national origin, index score, and the year in which each person turned 40 (or
died, whichever came first).
114 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
BROTHERS, LEGENDS, AND POLYMATHS
Nine of the 4,002 are not individuals at all, but relatives whose work was so
intertwined that to put them into the inventory as individuals would be
double counting. The nine entries in question are those for the Vivarini
family, the Le Nain brothers, and the Limbourg brothers (Western art), the
Grimm brothers and Goncourt brothers (Western literature), and four pairs
of brothers in technology: the Lumières, who made major advances in cinematography; the Biros, who invented the ballpoint pen; the Montgolfiers,
who began manned balloon flights; and, of course, the Wrights, inventors of
the airplane.
At least one of the 4,002 and perhaps as many as four didn’t exist at all.
The one who certainly didn’t exist is Nicolas Bourbaki, the pseudonym used
by a group of French mathematicians. The three questionable ones are the
epic poets Homer (Iliad and Odyssey), Vyasa (Mahabharata), and Valmiki
(Ramayana). As for that other notorious dispute about authorship, I will use
the name William Shakespeare to stand for whoever wrote the works of
Shakespeare—somebody wrote them—and let others worry about who he
really was.
The roster of significant figures consists of 3,869 unique individuals.
The difference between 4,002 and 3,869 is explained by people who were in
two, three, or four different inventories. In all, 116 people qualified in more
than one inventory. This does not mean that we have 116 genuine polymaths,
in the sense of people whose expertise spanned disparate fields. Many of the
people who qualified in more than one inventory (42 percent of them)
were people who show up in related scientific inventories (e.g., biology and
medicine, physics and mathematics). Another third consists of people who
qualified in philosophy and literature, or philosophy and a scientific inventory—not surprising, since until a few centuries ago the distinctions among
philosophy, science, and literature were blurred.
If we restrict polymath to mean people who made major contributions
that called for conspicuously different knowledges and skills, the best candidate—no surprise here—is Leonardo da Vinci, who qualified for the art, biology, physics, and technology inventories. Aristotle is the other authentic
polymath, though he technically qualified for just the biology and philosophy
inventories. This artificially restricts the recognition of Aristotle’s exceptionally broad range of contributions—for example, his contributions that fall
under philosophy include seminal contributions to aesthetics, political
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT FIGURES • 115
theory, and logic, entirely apart from his contributions to ethics and epistemology. Others worthy of mention are René Descartes, who is part of the
philosophy, mathematics, biology, and physics inventories; and Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, with substantial contributions to both literature and philosophy
plus minor contributions to music.
These various considerations mean that it is difficult to refer to the total
number of people in the inventories—shall we count the brothers separately?
Count the probable legends? Count unique names or total appearances? I will
stick with 4,002 as a convenient way of referring to the total number of
significant figures, with the understanding that it is a convenience.
WHAT SEPARATES THE SIGNIFICANT
FROM THE NON-SIGNIFICANT?
The shortcoming of the 50 percent rule is that it does not provide a clear
bright line. No qualitative difference separates the people just below the
cutoff from those just above. Whereas it is easy to argue the qualitative superiority of those at the top, it is not possible to do so for the significant figures
who barely qualified versus the non-significant figures who fell just short.
Consider some Americans close to the cutoff line in the arts. Clifford
Odets and Willa Cather qualify as significant figures in Western literature
while Maxwell Anderson and Pearl Buck (despite her Nobel Prize) do not.
Duke Ellington and Jerome Kern qualify in Western music while Cole Porter
and Richard Rodgers do not. George Bellows and Thomas Hart Benton
qualify in Western art while Frederic Church and Frederic Remington do
not. In each of these instances, those who qualified and those who failed did
so by narrow margins. I cannot imagine an objective case to be made for the
superiority of the names that qualified, and I can easily imagine those names
switching places if I were to add or subtract a few sources.
But let’s not go too far. Those who failed to qualify by larger margins
typically have résumés that are qualitatively inferior to the résumés of those
who made the cut. And when famous names that failed by a large margin
catch our eye, they can inspire a useful sense of perspective about artists and
scientists who may loom large to us but not so large to the wider world.
For example, Dorothy Parker and James Thurber are names that American
readers will recognize. Each has been the subject of dissertations, learned articles, biographies, and at least one movie dealing with their lives and work.
116 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
But they are mentioned in fewer than 20 percent of reference works and
histories of literature written by people other than Americans. Is this just
because Americans aren’t sufficiently appreciated by the rest of the world? Is
Europe too snooty to give credit to vibrant American voices? But Europe has
had no trouble noticing American voices such as John Steinbeck, Mark
Twain, John Dos Passos, Theodore Dreiser, and Ernest Hemingway in 100
percent of the sources. Eighty or 90 percent of such sources found room for
Upton Sinclair, Thomas Wolfe, Bret Harte, Sinclair Lewis, and Jack London.
It is well to consider the possibility that with whatever fondness we may
reread Dorothy Parker and James Thurber, the story of Western literature is
effectively complete without them.
I have gone out of my way to pick the best known of those who were
are not part of the sample. They are rare. Besides sample stability, the 50
percent rule has a virtue that became evident only as I explored the work of
the people who had been omitted: It cut out people who had no business
being in the inventory. For every borderline case, dozens of others clearly did
not belong in the inventory because they were not engaged in the same kind
of enterprise as the people who qualified. Many of those mentioned in a
quarter or a third of the sources achieved their reputations as teachers, educators, popularizers, or performers, not as research scientists, composers,
painters, sculptors, or writers. A lesser standard, such as the 20 percent rule I
had initially contemplated, runs serious dangers of changing the nature of the
pool to one heavily loaded with people who, though distinguished, did not
make the creative contributions that constitute our topic.
The best way to think about the set of significant figures is that it
includes 100 percent of everyone who has to be part of the story of their
respective fields; nearly 100 percent of everyone who even comes close to
that standard; and some very large sample of everyone else who is authentically significant in the qualitative sense of that word. I will close by giving you
a concrete illustration of how deep into the ranks the inventory of significant
figures dips. On the facing page are the five people at the bottom of the list
of significant figures in each of the scientific inventories and each of the Western inventories (i.e., those with the five lowest index scores). How many of
them can you identify?
None is a household name. Three of the names are, in effect, ringers—
the Davy is Edmund, not the famous Humphrey; the von Mises is Richard,
not his famous brother Ludwig; and the Strutt is Robert, not his famous
father, John. Everyone is likely to recognize a few of the others, but, despite
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT FIGURES • 117
THE FIVE BOTTOM-RANKING PEOPLE IN THE SCIENTIFIC
AND WESTERN ARTS INVENTORIES
Western Art Western Literature Western Music
Francesco Solimena Johann Hebel Thomas Simpson
François Clouet Bernard Mandeville John Hothby
Adriaen de Vries Alfred Mombert Marbrianus Orto
Il Sodoma Dubose Heyward Joannes Gallus
Bertram of Minden Joseph Roth Mattheus le Maistre
Western Philosophy Astronomy Biology
Ralph Cudworth Anders Celsius Jules Bordet
Roscellinus Thomas Wright Albert Szent-Györgi
William of Champeaux John Plaskett Alexandre Yersin
Alexander of Hales John Michell Vincent du Vigneaud
Antiphon of Athens Nevil Maskelyne Benjamin Duggar
Chemistry Earth Sciences Mathematics
Otto Unverdorben John Tuzo Wilson Emil Artin
Henri Deville John Wesley Powell William Clifford
Edmund Davy Vagn Ekman Leonard Dickson
Pierre-Joseph Macquer William Ferrel Joseph Wedderburn
William Cullen C.H.D. Buys-Ballot Richard von Mises
Medicine Physics Technology
Charles Huggins Jordanus de Nemore William Nicholson
William Gorgas Homi Bhabha Girolamo Cardano
Valerius Cordus Ernst Chladni William Crookes
George Crile Robert Strutt H. Duhamel du Monceau
Simon Flexner Bernard Lyot Charles Steinmetz
the requirement that all had to be mentioned in at least 50 percent of the
qualifying sources to gain their place, even experts are unlikely to know
offhand anything except the name and a few elementary facts about most of
the names at the bottom. Setting the cutoff at 50 percent includes almost
everyone who is famous and large numbers of the obscure.
EIGHT
THE PEOPLE
WHO MATTER II:
THE GIANTS
Any plausible measure of eminence ends up identifying a few people
who are widely separated from the rest. Giant was the word Johannes
Brahms chose to express this phenomenon as seen from the inside. Brahms
was an active composer by the age of 20 and had achieved international
acclaim in his early thirties, yet he did not publish his first symphony until he
was 44 years old. Ordinarily briskly efficient, Brahms had been fussing with
it for more than 20 years. Why the procrastination? Because someone had
written nine symphonies a few decades earlier and set an appalling standard.
“You have no idea,” Brahms told his friends, “how it feels for someone like
me to hear behind him the tramp of a giant like Beethoven.”1 That image,
invoked by a man who in others’ eyes was a giant himself, is as good a way as
any of thinking about the men who are alone on the tail of the Lotka curve.
THE TOP TWENTIES
On the pages that follow I show separate lists of the people with the top 20
index scores in each of the inventories. The purpose of the lists is to show
how the top-ranked people in each inventory compare with one other.
Including 20 means that we have gone beyond the giants to the merely great
in every field, but the inclusiveness helps set the scores of the people at the
top in context.
In evaluating these lists, misinterpretations can be avoided by remembering three points. The first is that specific ranks and index scores can stimulate
interesting discussion, but they are not analytically important. It is entertaining to
see who comes out in what place—that’s why lists of the top 10 or top 100
120 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
are so popular, and why I have shown you how the top 20 come out. But few
of these orderings are etched in stone. It is hard to imagine any set of sources
dislodging Michelangelo, Confucius, or Shakespeare from their first-place
rankings, but just about everyone else could easily rise or fall several places if
the set of sources were altered. High statistical reliability for the index as a
whole does not mean that orderings of specific individuals remain the same
across subsets of sources. Nor does it make any difference whether they do.
The dynamics we will be examining in the rest of the book depend on
groups, statistical tendencies, and patterns, not on whether Debussy should
have been lower than eighth in the Western music inventory or whether
Berlioz belongs precisely at twelfth.
The appropriate way to look at the rankings is as if they were bicyclists
in the Tour de France, who are counted as having the same time if they cross
the day’s finish line in the same group. Figures with index scores in the same
vicinity should be counted as having the same score. A qualitative reading of
the 16 sources used to create the music index reveals that Debussy and
Berlioz both belong among the most important figures in Western music, and
that’s where their index scores put them. That same qualitative reading of
those sources reveals that no historian of music puts them anywhere near
Beethoven, Mozart, and Bach—and the index scores appropriately show a
considerable gap between Debussy and Berlioz and the peak. The value of the
indexes is not that they identify the precise ranks of people at the top, but that
they broadly order large numbers of figures.
The second key point is that index scores are not comparable across inventories. Consider the inventories for Western and Chinese art. Four Chinese
artists have inventory scores of 80 or higher, compared to a single Western
artist. This does not mean that Chinese art produced four great artists while
the West produced but one. It tells us only that, in the evaluations of Western
art, one man stands out further from the rest than in the evaluations of
Chinese art. It could be that the West had a hundred painters greater than any
in China (assuming that such judgments were possible), or vice versa. A given
inventory tells us only how the prominent figures are distributed within that
inventory, not across inventories.
This leads to the third key point, that the index scores measure the frog relative to the size of the pond, and the sizes of the ponds vary substantially. It so
happens that the available sources permit me to treat all the countries of the
West as a cultural whole, comparing philosophic and artistic figures across the
countries that comprise the West, and there is analytic advantage in doing so.
The available sources do not permit me to compare (with any confidence)
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 121
philosophic and artistic figures across even China and Japan and India, let
alone to include the West in the comparison, and so each of those countries
has a separate inventory. In other words, the Western pond for the philosophy
and arts inventories is bigger than the ponds for China, India, and Japan (an
important point that will return in another context. See page 250). To take a
specific example, Ibsen is not even shown in the figure for the top 20 in Western literature, because he came in 24th. But he had to compete with everyone in Western literature, whereas Basho had to compete only with everyone
in Japanese literature to attain his first-place standing. If I had shown instead
a graph for the top Norwegian writers, Ibsen would have been the unrivaled
number one, towering over number two (Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, 131st in the
Western literature inventory). It would be nice to have some common measuring rod for comparing the sizes of the ponds, but none of the quantitative
possibilities I have been able to test have proved satisfactory in the end. The
best we can do is treat each inventory for what it is, and then talk about
which people within that inventory have gotten the most attention. The
concluding chart in the set for the scientific inventories (see page 130) offers
a concrete example of this point. It shows the top 20 for the combined
inventories of the hard sciences, mathematics, and medicine. The sciences
have worldwide coverage and in that sense constitute a single pond. But
within the sciences, different fields get different levels of attention, with
physics receiving the most and the earth sciences the least. No one from
technology or the earth sciences makes the top 20 on the combined index.
Far from it—Thomas Edison, top-ranked in technology, ranks only 50th
in the combined index. Charles Lyell, top-ranked in earth sciences, ranks
58th.
Enough caveats. Here are the charts of the top 20 philosophers, artists,
and scientific figures by inventory. I have coded the scores by shades to make
it easy to move from one list to another and get a quick sense of how the
distribution of giants and near-giants varies across the inventories. Black
denotes those with scores of 90 and above, dark blue those with scores of
70–90, progressively lighter blue for scores of 50–70 and 20–50, and white for
scores below 20.
122 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
question to illustrate a major
theme in the text (“System
”
in the application of mathe- 30
32
33
35
37
37
38
39
45
47
49
53
57
68
73
75
79
88
93
100
Eddington
Hale
Bessel
Baade
Cassini
Brahe
Laplace
W
Galileo
ASTRONOMY
Significant figures: 124
Index reliability: .92
Galileo’s first-place position
(based exclusively on his
achievements in astronomy) is
easy to understand. As the first
person to use a telescope to
study the night sky, he made a
long list of basic discoveries
about the moon, sun, and
planets. Does it make sense
that a figure as famous as
Copernicus ranks fifth while a
figure as obscure as William
Herschel is third? I use this
Builders Versus Brick Layers,
see page 147). That discussion
should convey what an
extraordinary range of accomplishments Herschel amassed,
despite his obscurity among
the general public.
Other than Herschel, the
person who to a layman may
seem high on the list is PierreSimon Laplace. His place rests
on his role as a seminal figure
matics to the problems of
celestial motion plus his development of the nebular hypothesis to explain the
formation of stars and a prescient prediction of the existence of black holes.
Astronomy is notable for having two native-born Americans among the top 20
(the technology index is the only other one): Edwin Hubble, ranked twelfth, determined that Andromeda is a galaxy, revolutionizing our understanding of the
universe’s size, and demonstrated Hubble’s Law, confirming that the universe is
expanding. George Ellery Hale, fifteenth, is most famous for his role in developing
the large telescopes at Mount Wilson and Palomar, but he also invented the spectroheliograph and discovered that sunspots are subject to an electromagnetic field.
Hevelius
Kuiper
Olbers
Hertzsprung
Huggins
Hubble
Hipparchus
Halley
Ptolemy
Copernicus
. Herschel
Kepler
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 123
BIOLOGY
discipline that the top 20
accomplishment including,
because their major accomBut his
classified the wild plants of
DNA.
37
37
38
38
41
42
43
44
45
45
47
48
48
51
59
75
83
88
94
100
Haller
Mendel
Spallanzani
Malpighi
Hales
Linnaeus
Morgan
Cuvier
Darwin
Significant figures: 193
Index reliability: .88
Biology is such a sprawling
represent different types of
among others, botany, zoology,
evolution, genetics, and physiology. Note that some top
biologists (Pasteur is the most
famous example) are missing,
plishments are associated with
the etiology and treatment of
disease. They show up in the
medicine inventory.
The roles of the top two
figures, Darwin and Aristotle,
are widely known. Lamarck is
a lesser known figure identified with Lamarckism, a
mistaken theory of evolution.
Systême des Animaux
sans Vertèbres founded modern
invertebrate zoology, the
three-volume Flore Française
France, and his work on
evolution, while ultimately
proved wrong, was pivotal in
stimulating others’ thinking
about evolution. He also introduced the very term biology. Georges Cuvier, another
figure not well known to the general public, founded comparative anatomy as a
discipline and made major contributions to both biological classification and
morphology in general.
For Americans, the biology inventory is noteworthy because it includes a nativeborn American among the top five, the only American to climb so high in the hard
sciences. His name is Thomas Hunt Morgan, whose seminal work in the first three
decades of 20C established much of our knowledge of genes and chromosomes in
the era preceding electron microscopy and the discovery of the structure of
Pliny
Haeckel
Ray
von Baer
de Vries
Bernard
Swammerdam
Schwann
Harvey
Lamarck
Aristotle
124 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
without close competition
Élémentaire de Chemie stated
matter and is generally
accepted as the founding text
cially so in their cases.
22
23
25
25
25
27
27
29
30
31
31
33
37
38
42
46
49
53
67
100
Bunsen
Soddy
Helmont
Liebig
Black
Dalton
Scheele
Berzelius
CHEMISTRY
Significant figures: 204
Index reliability: .93
That Lavoisier is in first place
should be no surprise.
Lavoisier had major accomplishments in theory (Traité
the law of conservation of
of quantitative chemistry),
experimentation (he deciphered the process of combustion, found that diamond
consists of carbon, and discovered the composition of air),
and practice (he developed the
first list of known elements
and established a system of
chemical nomenclature).
The ordering of those who
follow Lavoisier reflects a
peculiarity of the chemistry
inventory. Chronologies of
events in chemistry consistently include the discovery of
each element as an event. This
is understandable—each
element is a building block
from which much else may
follow, and the discovery of each new element was a genuinely significant event.
But it also happens that a few chemists, especially Berzelius, Scheele, and Davy, were
on hand just as some of the basic techniques for isolating elements became available
(e.g., electrolysis). They each discovered several elements using these powerful new
techniques, thereby accumulating large scores from the chronology sources. All of
them belong in the top rank of chemists, but their scores are somewhat inflated by
their luck in timing—always a factor in determining who discovers what, but espeKlaproth
Mendeleyev
Kekulé
Pauling
Berthollet
Crookes
Ramsay
Gay-Lussac
Boyle
Davy
Priestley
Lavoisier
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 125
the influence of idiosyncrasies
although .81 is still
”
tions Ewing
Mitscherlich
V
Chamberlin
Sedgwick
Mosander
Agassiz
W
Hutton
26
29
29
29
29
31
31
33
33
35
37
37
37
40
40
46
51
55
77
100
EARTH SCIENCES
Significant figures: 85
Index reliability: .81
Earth sciences, an umbrella
term for geology, oceanography, and aeronomy, produced
the least reliable of the inventories. One reason is that the
science sources gave less attention to the earth sciences than
to any of the other scientific
categories. As the material
devoted to a field decreases,
in the sources tends to
increase, and one of the side
effects is lower reliability,
respectable.
The relative positions of
the top two figures, Charles
Lyell followed by James
Hutton, is qualitatively
arguable. Hutton’s original
monograph, “Concerning the
System of the Earth,
published in 1785, followed by
his full-scale treatment ten
years later in Theory of the
Earth, with Proofs and Illustra-
, introduced the uniformitarian view of earth’s
development, displacing earlier and incorrect theories, and founded geology as an
organized field of study. This seminal contribution could be argued to justify giving
him pride of place over Lyell, who came along two generations later. But if Hutton
began geology as an organized field of study, Lyell’s three-volume The Principles of
Geology (1830) could be said to have founded modern geology itself, establishing
that geological formations are created over millions of years and setting a new time
frame not only for the earth sciences but for collateral disciplines. Add to that Lyell’s
other major contributions, and his first-place rank is plausible.
Cleve
. Bjerknes
Brongniart
Wegener
Desmarest
Saussure
Guettard
Maury
Murchison
Werner
Agricola
. Smith
Lyell
126 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
types of uranium radiation,
36
37
37
39
40
40
41
41
42
43
47
50
50
52
57
83
86
88
100
100
Huygens
Dirac
Heisenberg
P
Bohr
Galileo
Einstein
PHYSICS
Significant figures: 218
Index reliability: .95
Isaac Newton and Albert
Einstein are separated by a
hair. Newton had, at the
fourth decimal place, the
higher raw score, but
Einstein got more space in 9
out of the 15 sources. A tie is
fitting. Galileo’s high rank
(based exclusively on his
accomplishments in physics,
as is Newton’s) will also
surprise no one.
Ernest Rutherford,
ranked third, discovered two
alpha and beta rays; discovered the nucleus of the atom,
leading to an understanding
of the true structure of the
atom; invented the alphaparticle counter; used
atomic bombardment to alter
atomic nuclei, constituting
the first controlled nuclear
reaction; discovered the
proton; and demonstrated
that uranium and thorium
break down into a series of
radioactive intermediate elements. These were just his major accomplishments.
Michael Faraday, ranked fourth, was a protean figure and as famous in England
as Edison and Bell would later become in the United States. Again limiting the list
to just major accomplishments, it was Faraday who discovered that a changing
magnetic force can generate electricity (the basis of electrical generators), discovered that electrical forces can produce motion (the basis of electric motors), and
worked out the basic laws governing chemical reactions when an electric current
is passed through a solution.
Hooke
T. Young
Gilbert
Joule
M. Curie
Fermi
Kirchhoff
. Curie
Maxwell
J. Thomson
Cavendish
Faraday
Rutherford
Newton
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 127
Elements
33
34
35
36
36
36
37
39
40
40
47
47
50
54
72
72
81
83
89
100
Fibonacci
Viète
Diophantus
Riemann
Cantor
Leibniz
Gauss
Euclid
Euler
MATHEMATICS
Significant figures: 191
Index reliability: .93
Historians of mathematics
form no consensus about
who is the greatest mathematician. The ordering in this
inventory could easily be
shifted by tweaking the rules
for combining the sources.
Everyone agrees that the topranked mathematician, Leonhard Euler, belongs
somewhere close to the top,
but his score is partly a function of his immense productivity. His published work is
enough to fill more than
ninety volumes.
If the criterion for the
rankings were pure mathematical genius, many would
put Carl Gauss in first place.
Unlike Euler, Gauss was
reluctant to publish, and it
appears from his notebooks
that a number of major
discoveries credited to others
were discovered first by him
but never revealed.
If the criterion were fame,
Newton would win. His
second-place finish is based exclusively on his accomplishments in mathematics,
excluding his contributions in physics and optics.
If the criterion were influence, Euclid would probably come in first. He is an
example of how fame and influence can be won by a brilliant synthesis of the work
of others. In his , Euclid contributed some new theorems of his own, but
his major achievement was to combine the scattered but extensive geometric
knowledge of his day, refining and organizing the whole into a book that became
the West’s standard geometry text for more than two thousand years.
Archimedes
Cauchy
Wallis
Legendre
Cardano
Jak. Bernoulli
Hilbert
Pascal
Descartes
Fermat
Newton
128 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
MEDICINE
Deciding whether specific
accomplishment under mediin most of their medical
Hunter
Domagk
Sydenham
Kitasato
Lister
Fleming
McCollum
Laënnec
P
Galen
Hippocrates
34
34
34
36
36
38
40
42
43
44
46
47
49
54
59
68
74
90
93
100
Significant figures: 160
Index reliability: .87
achievements belong in the
medicine inventory or the
biology inventory was a
chronic problem. The general
rule to was to classify an
cine only if it was related to
the identification, etiology, or
treatment of disease. Thus, for
example, the discovery of
microorganisms is classified
under biology, while the
discovery that a microorganism causes a certain disease is
classified under medicine.
Using this rule, Louis Pasteur
is an unsurprising winner of
first place. Readers will also be
familiar with Hippocrates and
Galen, both of whom were
founders of medicine as a
profession while being wrong
pronouncements.
Robert Koch, who was
active in the last quarter of
19C, is not a household name
as Pasteur is, but he deserves to
be. He isolated the bacilli that cause tuberculosis, cholera, and anthrax respectively
and transformed the study of infectious diseases. He introduced important public
health practices and steam sterilization of medical instruments. “Koch’s postulates”
are still used as a guide for research into the causes of infectious diseases.
Freud shows up because of his contributions to the clinical description of mental
illnesses and his introduction of the use of cocaine as an anesthetic, both of which
were classified under medicine. His writings on psychoanalysis were classified under
psychology and are not part of his index score for this inventory.
Semmelweiss
Freud
Carrel
Vesalius
Behring
Paré
. Ehrlich
Paracelsus
Koch
Pasteur
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 129
TECHNOLOGY
fundamentally changed the
Far behind Edison and
But his mind ran ahead of
his ability to implement.
landmark accomplishments
mission of sound.
Stephenson
Nobel
Wheatstone
Franklin
Babbage
Bessemer
Smeaton
Huygens
Edison
30
30
31
31
32
32
32
32
32
33
33
34
37
43
50
51
51
60
100
100
Significant figures: 239
Index reliability: .84
Thomas Edison, at the end
of 19C an icon who rivaled
presidents in fame and
esteem, is the only American
who is at the top of any
index. I show him effectively
tied with James Watt,
rounding up his actual index
score of 99.4. Their accomplishments have different
profiles. Edison invented
many things while Watt
capability of one very big
thing, the steam engine.
Watt are Leonardo da Vinci,
Christiaan Huygens,
Archimedes, and Marconi.
Leonardo attracts the
attention of historians of
technology for his brilliant
ideas, far ahead of his time.
Christiaan Huygens is one of
the great polymaths of
history. In addition to his
in astronomy, mathematics, and physics (none of which affect his score in the technology index), he improved optical glasses and invented the first pendulum escapement and the first hairspring for the balance wheel of a clock, fundamentally
improving timekeeping. Archimedes shows up in the technology inventory
primarily for his invention of the screw pump, the discovery of the principle of the
lever, and his development of the pulley. Marconi, like many of the people who
follow him in the top 20—Smeaton, Siemens, Newcomen, Nobel, Morse, Papin,
and Stephenson—is known for one major invention, in his case the wireless transMorse
Papin
Faraday
Wilkinson
C. Siemens
Newcomen
Vitruvius
Marconi
Archimedes
Leonardo
Watt
130 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
COMBINED SCIENCES
size of the pond and
combining accomplishments
35
36
36
37
39
40
40
41
43
46
46
48
48
49
51
51
53
78
89
100
Euclid
Berzelius
Darwin
Euler
Leibniz
Einstein
Laplace
Huygens
Galileo
Significant figures: 1,445
Index reliability: .94
This graph shows what
happens when everyone
from the separate hard
science inventories plus
mathematics, medicine, and
technology is thrown into
the same pond. The color
coding retains the values
each person attained in his
own specialty, as shown in
the preceding graphs, to
indicate how increasing the
across fields changes the
relative attention devoted to
these eminent people.
The list may be seen as
the triumph of the polymaths. Only five out the
20—Lavoisier, Einstein,
Rutherford, Berzelius, and
Euclid—can be said to have
remained within a single
field. In the cases of Aristotle, Descartes, and Leibniz,
this ordering doesn’t even
represent their full polymathic sweep—none of
them gets any credit here for his philosophic writings.
The graph is also notable for those who are missing. No one from the earth
sciences made it into the top 20 on the combined rankings, while only Huygens
made it from the technology inventory—but largely because of his major contributions to physics. Meanwhile, eight out the 20 were also in the top 20 in the
physics inventory, indicating how dominant that discipline was through 1950.
Since then, one may speculate, biology has made major inroads on that dominance
via its transforming discoveries in genetics and neuroscience.
Maxwell
Rutherford
Hooke
Ptolemy
Pasteur
Faraday
Descartes
Lavoisier
Kepler
Aristotle
Newton
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 131
CHINESE PHILOSOPHY
Despite the wide gap that
nance of Confucianism in
Confucius.
to some that Zhu Xi
in making Confucianism the
8
8
8
8
9
9
10
11
13
14
15
16
22
24
29
39
40
51
69
100
Huineng
Zhangzai
Lu Xiangshan
Hanfei
Daizhen
Zhou Duni
Cheng Hao
Dong Zhongshu
Mozi
Xunzi
Zhuangzi
Mencius
Zhuxi
Laozi
Confucius
Significant figures: 39
Index reliability: .96
separates Confucius from
Laozi, the graph actually
understates the real domiChinese thought. In addition
to Confucius himself, the
third- and fourth-ranked
philosophers, Zhu Xi and
Mencius, were exegetes of
It may come as a surprise
outranked Mencius, who is
better known to the Western
public, but this ordering is
consistent across all the philosophy sources, both those
written by Chinese and those
written by foreigners.
Mencius played a crucial role
state philosophy in –4C, but
Zhu Xi receives still more
attention, by substantial
margins, for his reinvigoration
of Confucianism in 12C. For
that matter, it was Zhu Xi
who was responsible for
making Mencius as well known as he is today, by including Mencius’s work as part
of “The Four Books” that became the central texts for both primary education and
the civil service examinations.
The Chinese philosophy index continues all the way to 1950 because, unlike
Chinese art and literature, there is no break between the philosophy of classical
China and the philosophy of post-classical China.
Zou Yan
Kang Yuwei
Feng Yulan
Chengi
Wang Yangming
132 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
INDIAN PHILOSOPHY
does not include the author of
Upanishads,
the last component of the
Upanishads
some of the names of the indithem has a sufficiently central
The named philosopher
cius dominated the Chinese
insights of the Upanishads,
9
9
9
10
10
11
11
12
13
13
13
14
15
16
21
28
47
55
56
100
Asanga
Nimbarka
Dasgupta
Gaudapada
Dignaga
Buddha
Nagarjuna
Sankara
Significant figures: 45
Index reliability: .93
A curiosity of the Indian
philosophy index is that it
the most important single
work in Indian philosophy,
and indeed the first work that
historians of philosophy call
philosophy: the
Veda, the founding document
of Hinduism. A collection of
108 discourses, the
was transmitted orally for an
indeterminate period. We have
vidual authors, but none of
role to qualify for major
credit, let alone to take credit
for authorship of the work as a
whole.
who dominates the index even
more decisively than Confuphilosophy index is Sankara,
who added metaphysics and
system to the haphazard
became the leading exponent of the Advaita Vedanta school of philosophy, and
whose thought still forms the mainstream of modern Hinduism.
After Sankara, lagging far behind, are Nagarjuna, who founded Mahayana
Buddhism, and Ramanuja, second only to Sankara in Vedanta thought, who tried to
pull Hinduism toward an appreciation of the phenomenal world and the knowledge
it can provide us. Why does Buddha languish in fourth place? Because, despite his
place alongside Abraham, Jesus, and Muhammad as founders of the world’s great
religions, Buddhism has always been secondary to Hinduism in India, both as
philosophy (which is the basis for Buddha’s inclusion here) and as a religion.
Bhartrhari
Kumarila
Vallabha
Aurobindo
Vacaspatimitra
Udayana
Vasubandhu
Vivekananda
Carvaka
Patanjali
Madhva
Ramanuja
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 133
WESTERN PHILOSOPHY
Chinese and Indian philosothe Upanishads
17
17
17
18
19
20
21
24
26
27
27
30
36
37
39
46
51
74
87
100
Fichte
Rousseau
Russell
Hobbes
Nietszche
Schopenhauer
Socrates
Leibniz
Spinoza
Augustine
Hume
Aquinas
Hegel
Kant
Plato
Significant figures: 155
Index reliability: .96
Western philosophy, like
phy, is dominated by a handful
of figures. Only 15 Western
philosophers had index scores
of 20 or higher, and only 4 of
those 16 had index scores over
50. Aristotle and Plato are
separated by a large enough
gap to warrant treating their
scores as different, with the
continuing warning not to
make too much of it.
What separates the Western
and Asian philosophy inventories is represented by Kant,
standing in third place. In
China, the great figures after
Confucius and Laozi were
their exegetes and reinterpreters. The same was true in
India of the great figures after
and Buddha—
even Sankara was an interpreter of an existing tradition.
The West followed that pattern
through 17C, with all the
great figures drawing substantially from the Platonic or
Aristotelian traditions. But then came Kant, whose contributions amounted to an
expansion of philosophic thought after the founders that is unique among the three
great philosophic traditions. He was followed by the innovative and influential 19C
contributions of Hegel, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche.
Some anomalies: If Bertrand Russell’s score seems high, the explanation lies in
his triple role as a philosopher, logician, and a historian of philosophy. Political
thinkers were treated as secondary figures in some of the sources, which affected the
scores of Locke, Hobbes, and Rousseau as well as familiar names not part of the top
20 (e.g., Cicero and Machiavelli).
Plotinus
Berkeley
Locke
Descartes
Aristotle
134 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
WESTERN MUSIC
whether the neck-and-neck
as tied at 100 seemed the 26
27
30
30
31
32
35
39
41
42
44
45
45
45
46
56
80
87
100
100
Gluck
Mendelssohn
Chopin
Brahms
Schoenberg
Berlioz
Schumann
Liszt
Handel
Significant figures: 523
Index reliability: .97
One reason that the Western
music inventory has 16
sources, even though a highly
reliable index had been
reached with 10, was to see
scores of Beethoven and
Mozart might separate. They
did not. I show them as tied
with scores of 100. Strictly
speaking, their scores were not
identical. But the difference
was both trivial and ambiguous. Ten of the 16 sources gave
more space to Beethoven than
to Mozart. The sum of the
scores from all 16 sources put
Beethoven on top. But when I
discarded the high and low
scores for computing the
index scores—a standard
precaution against giving
undue influence to an aberrant
source—Mozart slipped into
the lead by the slimmest of
margins. Showing both men
reasonable choice. I have put
Beethoven on top in the chart
because a qualitative reading of the sources indicates that, though the authors admire
Mozart unreservedly, Beethoven is impossible to put second to anyone.
Casual fans of concert music, asked to guess the top four, usually include Mozart,
Beethoven, and Bach, but are likely to guess Haydn or Brahms as the fourth. Few
think of Wagner. In contrast, a professional violist whom I asked to guess said
Beethoven and Mozart were number one and two (“of course”) and then asked
matter-of-factly, “Who came in third, Bach or Wagner?” His reaction reflects
Wagner’s high standing among experts, consistent with his index score.
Weber
Verdi
Monteverdi
Schubert
Debussy
Stravinsky
Haydn
Wagner
J. S. Bach
Mozart
Beethoven
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 135
Only painting had a consistent tradition of named
guished Chinese traditions
not attain his semiMichelangelo had not been
Muqi
Shitao
Su Shi
Shen Zhou
Huizong
Ni Zan
Mi Fu
Xia Gui
Guo Xi
Dong Qichang
Gu Kaizhi
Zhao Mengfu
46
47
48
50
50
54
54
56
59
63
68
70
71
72
76
78
80
83
100
100
CHINESE PAINTING
Significant figures: 111
Index reliability: .91
artists in China. The inventory thus ignores distinin sculpture and ceramics.
Gu Kaizhi’s index score
was 98.9, but he was ranked
above Zhao Mengfu in a
majority of the sources;
hence the tie. But interpreting these scores is problematic. Gu Kaizhi (fl. 4C) and
the third-ranked artist, Wu
Daoxi (fl. 8C), have no
surviving works of certain
authenticity. The early critics after Gu Kaizhi’s death
differed in their evaluations
of his work, with some of
them unimpressed. He did
legendary reputation until
the Tang Dynasty, four
hundred years later—as if
recognized as more than
merely very good until 20C.
This reliance on secondary
accounts leads to a large degree of uncertainty about who belongs where.
Significant figures are identified throughout the range from –800 to 1950, but
index scores are computed only for artists through the end of 18C, as the Qing
dynasty spiraled downhill. As in India, important creative cultural activity effectively shut down during an interval between the collapse of the traditional civilization and its reformulation in 20C, and many of the sources plainly treated
modern artists with separate criteria.
Wen Zhengming
Wu Zhen
Wang Meng
Dong Yuan
Wang Wei
Huang Gongwang
Ma Yuan
Wu Daozi
136 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Rimpa
Rimpa
Sanraku
Buson
Hokusai
Eitoku
Sotatsu
Sesshu
33
34
34
35
35
36
38
39
40
43
43
49
51
58
60
65
65
91
98
100
JAPANESE ART
Significant figures: 81
Index reliability: .93
Japan has no counterparts to
China’s Gu Kaizhi or
Greece’s Zeuxis, artists of
legendary genius for whom
no works survive. Provenance
is often a problem in assigning works to the top-ranking
Japanese artists, but enough
solidly attributable examples
exist for modern art historians to assess their achievements directly.
The top three appear in
chronological order. Sesshu
was active in the last half of
15C. A Zen monk, he is
considered the greatest master
of the monochrome ink style,
though he used color to great
effect late in his career.
Sotatsu followed in the early
17C, founder of the
school that in turn affected
Japanese painting though its
successive phases. Korin, the
second great master of the
school, was active in
early 18C. He was the
brother of Ogata Kenzan,
often considered to be Japan’s greatest potter and himself tenth in the top 20.
An oddity in the index, and another reminder that specific ranks are not to be
confused with holy writ, is the discrepancy between the index scores of Sotatsu
(98) and Koetsu (60). They are closely linked in their work and were founders of
the same school. If the criterion is all-around artistic accomplishment in calligraphy, pottery, and design as well as painting, Koetsu is sometimes given priority over
Sotatsu. But the qualitative descriptions of their art at its best suggest that Sotatsu is
a step beyond Koetsu. Perhaps the difference in their index scores is commensurate
with that qualitative difference.
Shubun
Utamaro
Okyo
Taiga
Motonobu
Tan’yu
Hiroshige
Jocho
Kenzan
Unkei
Kukai
Koetsu
Tohaku
Korin
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 137
copies is a fraction of the space
38
40
41
41
41
42
42
43
43
49
50
53
54
56
56
60
61
73
77
100
Gauguin
Masaccio
Monet
Donatello
Rubens
Cézanne
Giotto
Rembrandt
Titian
Raphael
Picasso
Michelangelo
WESTERN ART
Significant figures: 479
Index reliability: .95
Significant figures in Western
art were identified from
ancient Greece onward, but
index scores were assigned
only to figures who postdated
1200. In Western art histories,
the space devoted to the
Greek masters known only by
reputation or from scattered
given over to the post-1200
masters, and the reason has
nothing to do with their relative merit. Rather, the experts
have little material to go on,
and are correspondingly brief.
Michelangelo’s dominance
obscures an important fact
about the Western art inventory: A large number of artists
of the first rank get close to
equal treatment. For example,
if we recomputed the index
scores after deleting Michelangelo, all of the top 20 would
have index scores of 50 or
higher. Only Picasso and
Raphael would stand apart
from the rest, with the scores
thereafter forming such a gradual slope that no adjacent pair of scores are significantly different. But subtracting Michelangelo from Western art is something that
can be done only by a computer.
The presence of Picasso in second place will surprise and perhaps outrage some
readers. The amount of space accorded to him reflects not just the high regard in
which his art is held, but also his seminal role in several phases of the break with
classicism that occurred in late 19C and early 20C.
Van Gogh
Goya
Van Eyck
Velazquez
Caravaggio
Bernini
Dürer
Leonardo
138 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
22
27
28
29
30
31
32
34
40
42
43
44
46
49
50
54
60
73
79
100
ibn Battuta
Labid ibn Rabi
’Antarah ibn Shaddad
Akhtal
al-Farazdaq
Nabighah
al-Hamadhani
al-Mutanabbi
ARABIC LITERATURE
Significant figures: 82
Index reliability: .88
The roster of significant
figures include those who
wrote in either Arabic or
Persian, and includes persons
writing through 1950. The
index scores are limited to
persons writing in Arabic prior
to 19C—in effect, Islamic
literature.
Islamic literature operated
under two theological
constraints. Drama was
considered to be a representational art and forbidden. Realistic fiction was considered to
be a form of lying, and also
forbidden. The poetry that
came to play such a large part
in Arabic literature thus was
pushed in the direction of
poetry and panegyrics that are
ornate, elliptical, and given to
fantastical uses of the language
that are said to be not only
untranslatable but to draw
from an Arabic sensibility that
it is difficult for anyone not
Arabic to appreciate.
Al-Mutanabbi’s wide
margin over everyone else is consistent with the qualitative descriptions of his work.
The first line in any entry about him is likely to say outright that he is the best classic Arabic poet of all time. Abu Nawas is in second place, though his racy poetry is
frowned upon by orthodox Muslims. He seems to have taken to heart his famous
line “Accumulate as many sins as you can,” making him a vivid contrast to the thirdranked Arabic writer, also a poet, al-Ma’arri, who led an abstemious, secluded life.
ibn al-Muqaffa’
ibn al-Farid
’Umar ibn Abi Rabi’ah
Abu al-’Atahiyah
Zuhayr
Jarir
al-Buhturi
al-Hariri
Abu Tammam
Imru’ al-Qays
al-Ma’arri
Abu Nuwas
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 139
tically depending on whether
one chooses to consider the
philosophical classics as literaphilosophic classics transcend
in Chinese thought (if he is
32
33
34
34
34
35
37
40
41
45
49
61
68
68
78
80
83
86
87
100
Cao Xueqin
Ma Zhiyuan
Luo Guanzhong
Ban Gu
Liu Zongyuan
Guan Hanqing
Sima Qian
Su Dungpo
Li Bo
Du Fu
CHINESE LITERATURE
Significant figures: 83
Index reliability: .89
The ordering in the Chinese
literature index changes drasture. If they were to be
included, then Confucius,
Laozi, and Mencius would
rank first, sixth, and seventh
in Chinese literature. There
are good arguments for
including them. The Chinese
philosophy. But Confucius is
so extraordinarily dominant
included, Du Fu’s score is a
mere 42) that including him
reduces everyone else to alsorans, which does not reflect
the special stature of China’s
greatest writers outside of
philosophy. So the top 20
shown in the graph exclude
philosophers and critics while
including poets, dramatists,
fiction writers, historians, and
essayists.
Du Fu is barely known in
the West. He is not only ranked first here but, according to those who are in a position to evaluate such things, was one of the greatest poets ever, anywhere. The
problem for Western readers is that the aesthetic nuances and layers of meaning in
great Chinese poetry cannot be retained in even the best translations.
Significant figures are included through 1950 in the Chinese literature inventory,
but index scores are computed only for authors who flourished before the end of
18C, for the same reasons described for the Chinese art inventory.
Song Yu
Wang Shifu
Wang Wei
Sima Xiangru
Yuan Zhen
Ouyang Xiu
Tao Cian
Qu Yuan
Han Yu
Bo Juyi
140 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
the and Mahabemphasized that these
in 1913.
Bilhana
Sudraka
Mira Bai
Kabir
Banabhatta
Bhasa
Dandin
Kalidasa
8
11
11
11
13
14
14
16
19
20
21
21
23
23
26
27
30
72
77
100
INDIAN LITERATURE
Significant figures: 43
Index reliability: .91
The Indian literature inventory is overwhelmingly dominated by just three figures:
Kalidasa, the great poet and
dramatist, and Valmiki and
Vyasa, the putative authors of
Ramayana
harata respectively. The
fourth- and fifth-ranked
authors, the poet Asvaghosa
and the romancier/critic
Dandin, have index scores of
just 26. No other inventory
drops off so sharply, so
quickly. The Indian literature
inventory is also odd in that
two of the top three authors
are semi-legendary figures
whose historical reality is
even more questionable than
Homer’s. Finally, it is unique
in that the era of great writing ends so early. Kalidasa is
the most recent of the big
three in Indian literature, and
he lived (with the usual
caveats surrounding Indian
dates) in 5C. It should be
comments refer to the body of formal work. The Hindu tradition of fables is one of
the richest in the world, but little of it is associated with specific authors.
As in the cases of Chinese art and literature, significant figures are identified
throughout the range from –800 to 1950, but the index scores for the Indian
literature inventory stop at figures who wrote through 17C, before the Mughal
empire began the decline that ended in the subjugation of the subcontinent by the
British over the next century. The Indian literary tradition revived in late 19C. It
quickly reached the heights with Rabindranath Tagore, who won the Nobel Prize
Kautilya
Amaru
Namdev
Somadeva
Harsa
Jayadeva
Bhavabhuti
Tulsidas
Bhartrhari
Asvaghosa
Valmiki
Vyasa
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 141
and the master of haiku;
the
The
haikai,
haiku.
23,500 haikai
42
43
44
44
46
48
52
54
56
57
57
57
60
64
67
75
79
86
94
100
Bakin
Kafu
Shonagon
Soseki
Shiki
Ogai
Saikaku
Murasaki
Chikamatsu
Basho
JAPANESE LITERATURE
Significant figures: 85
Index reliability: .86
The Japanese literature inventory is characterized by a large
number of writers who
receive substantial attention
rather than by a few dominant
figures. The variety in the first
four rankings is of interest:
Basho (1644–1694), by
consensus Japan’s greatest poet
Chikamatsu (1653–1725), by
consensus Japan’s greatest
dramatist, writing mostly for
bunraku (puppet theatre);
Murasaki Shikibu
(c. 978–1014), author of
Tale of Genji, by consensus
Japan’s greatest work of literature (and the highest ranking
woman in any of the inventories); and Saikaku
(1642–1693), writer of brilliant erotic tales and famous
for his speed-writing of
humorous linked-verse poems
that were the source of
He is said to have written
in one twentyfour hour period, a rate of
more than 16 per minute (a story that is hard to believe).
Unlike China and India, Japan did not experience a substantial gap between the
end of the old order and the emergence of the new, a transition which in Japan took
just a few decades at the end of 19C. Both the Japanese art and literature inventories
continue from the earliest figures through to 1950.
Narihira
Teika
Hitomaro
Naoya
Jun’ichiro
Kyoden
Toson
Shoyo
Kawabata
Tsurayuki
142 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Scott in nineteenth?
In the cases of Rousseau
Rousseau and
32
33
34
35
35
35
38
40
40
41
42
42
43
47
48
54
55
62
81
Ibsen
Scott
Racine
Horace
Schiller
Hugo
Rousseau
Homer
Dante
Goethe
100
Boccaccio
WESTERN LITERATURE
Significant figures: 835
Index reliability: .95
The first five places are hard to
argue with. Shakespeare,
Goethe, Dante,Virgil, and
Homer are giants in Western
literature by anyone’s standards. Shakespeare stands
noticeably apart even from the
other four. Of all the giants in
all the fields, Shakespeare is the
one who seems to leave historians stretching for some way
to convey his awesome impact
not just on literature but on
the modern West.
After the top five, one can
expect to hear cries of indignation. What is Rousseau
doing in sixth place? Voltaire
in seventh? Byron in ninth?
and Voltaire, the ratings partly
reflect their combined fiction
and nonfiction. But even
when I recomputed indexes
based exclusively on fictional
work, they ranked high,
because of the difference
between histories of literature
and of the other arts. Historians of music and the visual arts discuss composers and
artists almost exclusively in terms of their place in their artistic worlds. Histories of
literature spend more space on the influence of authors, including authors of fiction,
on social and political movements—the Enlightenment in the case of
Voltaire, the Romantic movement in the case of Byron and Scott. This tendency
contaminates the Western literature index as a representation of purely literary
excellence, but it appropriately reflects the way in which Western literature has
been intertwined with politics and society.
Euripides
Petrarch
Dostoevsky
L. Tolstoy
Byron
Molière
Voltaire
Virgil
Shakespeare
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 143
The handful with the plain black bars is a select list indeed. With apologies to very great names who fell just short, consider those in black, denoting
index scores of 90 and above:
Astronomy Galileo and Kepler
Biology Darwin and Aristotle
Chemistry Lavoisier
Earth sciences Lyell
Physics Newton and Einstein
Mathematics Euler
Medicine Pasteur, Hippocrates, and Koch
Technology Edison and Watt
Combined scientific Newton
Chinese philosophy Confucius
Indian philosophy Sankara
Western philosophy Aristotle
Western music Beethoven and Mozart
Chinese painting Gu Kaizhi and Zhao Mengfu
Japanese painting Sesshu, Sotatsu, and Korin
Western art Michelangelo
Arabic literature al-Mutanabbi
Chinese literature Du Fu
Indian literature Kalidasa
Japanese literature Basho and Chikamatsu Monzaemon
Western literature Shakespeare
What can we make of these 30 people? All are male. Among the 14 in
the scientific inventories, which have worldwide coverage, all but one are
from Europe (Edison is the lone exception). Two people qualified for their
black bar in 2 indexes: Aristotle in biology and Western philosophy, and
Newton in physics and the combined science index.[2]
Of the 30, just 3 (Confucius, Hippocrates, and Aristotle) lived prior to
Christ and just 6 (Gu Kaizhi, Kalidasa, Du Fu, Sankara, al-Mutanabbi, and
Zhao Mengfu) lived in the first 1,400 years after Christ. Eighteen of the
remaining 21 who came after 1400 were concentrated in the three centuries
from 1600–1900.
These tidbits mark issues (e.g.,Why Europe? Why no women?) that we
will take up in due course, but the most obvious question is,
144 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
WHY THEM?
When we have painters as great as Raphael, Leonardo,Titian, Dürer, Picasso,
and a few dozen other huge figures, what is it about Michelangelo that has
led historians of Western art to pay the most attention to him? Why Aristotle instead of Locke or Descartes? Why Einstein instead of Bohr or Maxwell?
Philosophy: Defining a Culture
The three philosophy inventories offer the most straightforward answer: The
men at the top—Confucius, Sankara, and Aristotle—are where they are
because each, in some important sense, defined what it meant to be Chinese,
Indian, or Western. Confucian ethics, aesthetics, and principles of statecraft
became China’s de facto state religion in –3C and remained so for another
two thousand years. As the man who shaped the Advaita Vedanta school of
Hinduism, Sankara has pervasively shaped Indian thought down to the present day.
In the West, there is more ambiguity. Plato preceded Aristotle, Aristotelian thought owes extensively to Plato, and it was, after all, Plato rather
than Aristotle of whom Alfred North Whitehead famously said that all of
Western philosophy is his footnote. And yet in the end Aristotle has had the
more profound effect on Western culture. Some of Plato’s final conclusions, especially regarding the role of the state, are totalitarian. In contrast,
Aristotle’s understandings of virtue, the nature of a civilized polity, happiness,
and human nature have not only survived but have become so integral a part
of Western culture that to be a European or American and hold mainstream
values on these issues is to be an Aristotelian.
The Arts:“How Can a Human Being Have Done That?”
The greatest figures in the arts play a less defining role. Subtract Confucius,
Sankara, and Aristotle, and each of the three civilizations in which they lived
would be profoundly changed. Subtract Michelangelo, Shakespeare,
Beethoven, Du Fu, Kalidasa, and the other artists in our group of giants, and
the effect might be hard to notice. The great art museums of the world would
still be open for business, all but a handful with exactly the same inventory
that they have now. The world’s libraries would still be filled with great literature. The world’s musicians would still have plenty of great music to play.
The world would be the poorer for not having the works of the giants
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 145
in the arts, but none created a genre that wouldn’t exist otherwise. They stand
at the peaks for a reason that is at once more elemental and more mysterious:
In their best work, the giants transcend the excellent and rise to a level of
achievement that is, to the rest of us, inexplicable. The quality that sets them
apart from the rest can be labeled by the reaction their masterpieces evoke
among experts and laymen alike—“How can a human being have done that?”
Here, for example, is art historian Ernst Gombrich, ordinarily a man of measured words, writing about Michelangelo’s ceiling of the Sistine Chapel:
It is very difficult for any ordinary mortal to imagine how it could be possible for one human being to achieve what Michelangelo achieved in four
years of lonely work on the scaffolding of the papal chapel. The mere physical exertion of painting this huge fresco . . . is fantastic enough. . . . But the
physical performance of one man covering this vast space is as nothing
compared to the intellectual and artistic achievement. The wealth of evernew inventions, the unfailing mastery of execution in every detail, and, above
all, the grandeur of the visions which Michelangelo revealed to those who
came after him, have given mankind a quite new idea of the power of
genius.3
In part, Gombrich is reacting to aspects of Michelangelo’s composition
and technique that are to be judged by classical aesthetic standards for painting. It takes some expertise to understand why the Sistine Chapel is so great
by those standards. On another level, Gombrich joins amateur observers in
recognizing that something otherworldly has been accomplished. What
Michelangelo did with brush and paint and a two-dimensional surface
confounds our sense of what is possible with these tools. It is hard to imagine
how a human being could have done it. And he was a better sculptor than
painter.
In the case of Shakespeare, the world long ago exhausted its superlatives. “The more one reads and ponders the plays of Shakespeare, the more
one realizes that the accurate stance toward them is one of awe,” writes
Harold Bloom. “The plays remain the outward limit of human achievement:
aesthetically, cognitively, in certain ways morally, even spiritually. They abide
beyond the end of the mind’s reach; we cannot catch up to them.”4 But one
does not have to ponder them for years, one does not have to be a scholar—
that’s one of the marvels of Shakespeare. Some readers may have memories
similar to mine: Forced to read Shakespeare as a class assignment in secondary school, I was determined not to be impressed. Then, ineluctably, I could
not help seeing the stuff in those words—the puns and allusions, the layers of
meaning, the way that a few of his lines transformed a stage character into a
146 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
complex human personality. Sooner or later, the question forces itself upon
anyone who reads Shakespeare and pays attention: “How can a human being
have written this?”
Other artists beside Michelangelo and other writers besides Shakespeare can prompt the how-is-that-possible reaction in their best work, but it
is not much disputed that each occupies the pinnacle in his field. As we turn
to classical music, there will be fierce argument about whether Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart or Ludwig van Beethoven is primus inter pares (and a fierce
minority backing Bach). Each has a case to be made in his behalf. There is the
legendary prodigy, Mozart, who started composing when he was six, could
write out one score while he was thinking about another, could turn out a
masterpiece in an afternoon; who left behind an oeuvre huge in quantity, with
matchless works in every musical genre, and, most frustrating to posterity, was
still getting better when he died at thirty-five. Beethoven’s body of work is
smaller than Mozart’s, but he, more than Mozart, burst the bounds of what
had been seen as possible. “There is still no department of music that does not
owe him its very soul,” wrote music historian Paul Lang, who speaks of
Beethoven’s “unique position in the world of music—even in the whole
history of civilization.”5
I will not try to adjudicate technical or aesthetic disputes about who
was the greater of these two giants, but I cannot leave Beethoven without
mentioning his deafness, a touchstone for thinking about the mysteries of
genius. Beethoven began to experience hearing problems in 1796, while still
in his twenties. The affliction progressed slowly and relaxed its hold on him
occasionally, but he had lost most of his hearing by 1806 and by 1817 he was
for practical purposes deaf.[6]
Beethoven was tormented by his growing inability to hear, understandably. But was it a misfortune from our selfish point of view as the beneficiaries of his genius? Certainly his deafness contributed to a single-minded focus
on composing rather than performing (he was a brilliant pianist), encouraging more compositions than we would have had otherwise. It is also
commonly accepted in discussions of Beethoven’s music that his deafness was
a source of creativity—“in some indefinable sense necessary (or at least
useful) to the fulfillment of his creative quest,” as biographer Maynard
Solomon put it.7 Thus the first mystery to dwell upon, the possibility that
only this devastating personal loss to Beethoven the man made it possible for
him to become the Beethoven of the later symphonies, the seminal late string
quartets, and Missa Solemnis.
The second mystery is for us amateurs. Professional musicians, among
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 147
whom the capacity to “hear” by looking at a score is not uncommon, see
nothing strange in Beethoven’s continuing to compose after he could no
longer hear music. Beethoven himself told a pupil never to compose with a
piano in the room, lest he be tempted to use it.8 But knowing these things
only gives us another way of apprehending the gulf that separates Beethoven
from the rest of us. For amateurs, the idea of being able to hear an unfamiliar
melodic line by reading a score is already impressive. Musicians who have the
capacity to hear complex works in their heads—not just the melodic line, but
the chords and the counterpoint and the way the timbre of the different
instruments interact—are already operating on a plane that the rest of us find
hard to comprehend. To be able to compose complex works in one’s head is a
quantum leap beyond that. For Beethoven to have been enclosed in a silent
world for years, and then to have composed the Ninth Symphony....
Most Westerners have difficulty taking works from cultures as alien as
traditional China, Japan, and India, and responding to them as to works from
their own culture. This difficulty is compounded in the case of literature by
the barrier of translation. But critics in other cultures talk about their artistic
giants in the same way we talk about ours: How can a human have done this?
Sometimes the amazement can reach across cultures. Goethe read Kalidasa’s
play Shakuntala and was enraptured, later writing of it in his own poetry,
“Wouldst thou the Earth and Heaven itself in one sole name combine? I
name thee, O Shakuntala! And all at once is said.”9
Awe is a response reserved for those at the very top. Reading the
sources used to make up the indexes, one can find warmly worded critical
praise for the works of artists deep into the lists of significant figures. But critics who wish to be taken seriously choose their words carefully, and the ordinary vocabulary of praise suffices for nearly everyone. It is only for the rarest
artists that ordinary words fail.
The Sciences: System Builders Versus Brick Layers
Great achievement in the sciences differs from great achievement in the arts.
The artist creates something unique. Boccaccio’s Decameron cannot be written twice, and Velazquez’s Las Meninas cannot be painted twice. It makes no
difference how many hundreds of outstanding books and paintings come
afterwards. Boccaccio and Velazquez each created a work of timeless beauty,
and their eminence is secure as long as mankind values great books and paintings. The relative eminence of the great artists may also be said to be reasonably fair, after enough time has elapsed to dampen the swings of fashion. We
148 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
may not yet have a firm grip on who the great artists and composers of the
last fifty years will prove to be (if any), but when considering earlier periods,
we have no reason to think that painters who were as great as Velazquez or
writers as great as Boccaccio are still being ignored.
A scientist’s eminence is more ambiguous. The scientist is engaged in an
intellectual Easter egg hunt. The pretty eggs are hidden about the playing
field in the form of undiscovered truths about how the physical universe
works. Somebody is bound to find any given egg sooner or later, denying any
scientist the joy of accomplishing something that would not have occurred
otherwise. Nobody had to paint Las Meninas. But in a world in which the
scientific method has taken hold, somebody has to discover the chemical
composition of water and somebody eventually has to discover E=mc2. This
state of affairs creates two sorts of unfairness that pervade the assignment of
scientific eminence.
The first is the harsh rule that serves as a powerful engine for scientific
progress: The winner is the one who grabs the egg first, not the one who sees
it first. Almost everyone has heard of Alexander Graham Bell. Almost no one
has heard of Elisha Gray. Bell and Gray independently invented similar
devices for transmitting speech over electric wires, but Elisha Gray submitted
his application for a patent two hours later than did Alexander Graham Bell.
Examples of such unfairness stud the history of science. The case of
Darwin involves one of the central scientific events of all time, the publication of the theory of evolution by natural selection. Darwin had become an
evolutionist in 1837, shortly after returning from his famous voyage in the
Beagle, and formulated the principle of natural selection by the end of 1838.
But although he prepared enough written material in the form of correspondence and notebooks to establish his priority when the necessity arose,
he postponed publication for 20 years. He was finally impelled to action in
1858 when he learned that an obscure naturalist of humble origins named
Alfred Russel Wallace was about to publish his own version of the theory of
evolution. As Darwin wrote to Lyell after seeing Wallace’s paper, “I never saw
a more striking coincidence; if Wallace had my manuscript sketch written
out in 1842, he could not have made a better short abstract! . . . so all my
originality, whatever it may amount to, will be smashed.”10 Darwin wrote to
Wallace explaining the situation. In a classic display of Victorian gentlemanliness, Wallace suggested they present their papers jointly, acknowledged
Darwin’s priority, and never complained.
The magnitude of Darwin’s achievement remains huge. Far more than
simply state the principle of evolution by natural selection, he grappled with
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 149
its complexities in a series of major works. Darwin’s insights have survived
the test of time with less revisionism than the ideas of others who created
similar sensations in their own lifetimes (Freud being the obvious example).
But even had Darwin been run over by a hackney cab upon stepping off the
Beagle in 1837, we have every reason to think that the theory of evolution by
natural selection would have been presented to the world circa 1858—and
Alfred Russel Wallace would be one of the most famous names in the history
of biology.
The second unfairness involves the frequent discrepancy between a
scientific discovery’s importance and the difficulty of discovering it. A great
artistic work involves a considerable degree of effort. Not every artist has to
paint over his head for four years as Michelangelo did under the ceiling of the
Sistine Chapel, and an artist may stumble across a good idea that smacks more
of luck than of genius, but every great artistic work has been accomplished by
the conscious exercise of talent, will, and labor.
In contrast, the effort that goes into scientific discoveries can span the
range from titanic intellectual struggles lasting for years to a lucky accident.
Furthermore, the discovery by luck can be a landmark in the history of the
field. Alexander Fleming owes his fame to his failure to cover the petri dishes
in which he was growing staphylococcus cultures when he left work one day
in 1928. Because they were left uncovered, a spore of mold was able to enter
one of the dishes and begin to grow. Of all the spores that might have grown,
this one was a spore of Penicillium notatum. Fleming deserves credit for noticing the next day that the invading mold was surrounded by a ring of dead and
dying staphylococcus microbes, which led him to isolate the mold and note
that it produces a substance that destroys bacteria. But Fleming’s knowledge
of chemistry wasn’t up to the next step, isolating this mysterious substance. If
we had had to depend on Fleming’s work alone, we still wouldn’t have the
antibiotic known as penicillin.
From an objective standpoint, Fleming was engaged in research of a
kind that has been a staple of chemistry and its offshoots since chemistry was
invented: discover a new substance, determine its properties, and isolate it. If
his work were graded purely as biochemistry practice, Fleming might get an
A for noticing the subtly anomalous phenomenon, a B or C for determining
its properties, and an F for isolating it. It isn’t that Fleming was incompetent—he was trained as a bacteriologist, not a biochemist—but had the mold
been any ordinary substance, Fleming’s discovery would have been seen as an
incomplete piece of work at best. It so happened that Fleming had stumbled
upon the mold that would lead to one of the most important medicines in
150 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
the history of medicine, and so he became Sir Alexander Fleming, Nobel
Laureate.
The differences between great achievement in the arts and in the
sciences lend themselves to a generalization: In the arts, eminence arises from
genius manifested in a body of work. In the sciences, eminence arises from
the importance of the discovery, which may or may not be the result of
genius. The generalization is unfair to the scientists of genius who have
wrested one solution after another from the tangled puzzles they took on.
But it has enough validity to play havoc with the ratings at the top of some
of the specific science inventories. For example, I could easily have produced
an inventory of astronomers that put Copernicus in first place, and another
that put him in thirty-eighth place. Two alternative math indexes could have
put Euclid in first place or thirteenth. Two different biology indexes could
have put Aristotle in first place or twenty-sixth. The difference depends on
how one chooses to value two different kinds of scientific contribution that I
label brick laying and system building.
The case of Copernicus and William Herschel illustrates the general
problem of measuring eminence in the sciences. Copernicus is one of the
most famous names in the history of science. It was Copernicus who in 1543
finally published De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium (he had formulated the
hypothesis decades earlier), leading to general acceptance that the earth
revolves around the sun and not the other way around. With that acceptance
came consequences that transcended astronomy and marked a fundamental
change in the way that Western man saw the world. The single accomplishment of Copernicus was about as big as accomplishments get. On the other
hand, he produced just that one.[11]
William Herschel is not just less famous but positively obscure to
anyone not an astronomer. An oboist by training, he emigrated from
Germany to England in 1757 at the age of 19. After 15 years of making his
living as a music teacher and conductor of a military band, he devoted himself
full time to his avocation, astronomy. What did Herschel accomplish? He
discovered Uranus, the first new planet to be discovered since prehistory. He
discovered four satellites of Saturn and Uranus. He discovered the Martian
ice cap. By determining the proper motion of 13 stars, he discovered that the
sun and solar system are moving through space relative to the stars. He
discovered the existence of binary stars, and eventually cataloged 711 of
them. He discovered planetary nebulae, shells of gas surrounding certain stars.
He prepared the first catalog of clusters and nebulae. His book On the
Construction of the Heavens was the first quantitative analysis of the shape of the
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 151
Milky Way. Herschel was among the first to argue that the Milky Way is only
a small part of the universe. He discovered a heating effect beyond the red
end of the spectrum, later to be known as infrared radiation. Late in his
career, he theorized that stars originate in nebulae.That is a partial list of what
William Herschel, erstwhile oboist, known to few outside his field,
contributed to astronomy.
With a single theory, Copernicus built a system that fundamentally
altered not only astronomy but Western civilization. Herschel laid bricks—
many bricks, soundly made, constituting a major part of the foundation for
modern astronomy. Whom shall we place above whom in a ranking of
astronomers, Herschel or Copernicus? It is an arbitrary choice. All I can do is
be explicit about what choices have been made.
The sources used to build the index consist broadly of two kinds: narrative histories that tend to give more space to the system builders (I include
the biographical dictionaries in this category), and chronologies of events that
tend to give more space to the brick layers. Each type of source is true to its
mission. Even a multi-volume history of science can legitimately sum up
William Herschel’s contributions in a paragraph no longer than the one I
used. A shorter history could get away with a single sentence such as, “In the
late 1700s, British astronomer William Herschel made a series of major astronomical discoveries,” without shirking its responsibility to the reader. That
same history cannot responsibly give less than several paragraphs to the ramifications of the Copernican Revolution. Any index of eminence based on
historical sources will put Copernicus far above William Herschel. In
contrast, a chronology of important events in astronomy can reasonably sum
up Copernicus’s contribution in a single item, whereas it must include several
items for Herschel. An index based on chronologies of events will put
Herschel far above Copernicus.
Since the two types of sources will imply different eminence, how are
they to be reconciled? The solution I have used is the simplest I could think
of: The index scores for the scientific inventories combine the data from both the histories and chronologies so that the two types of data have equal weight. I would like to
tell you that this decision has a theoretical rationale, but it doesn’t, at least no
more than this: Each kind of accomplishment is important. Each kind of
accomplishment can exaggerate a scientist’s contribution in its own way.
Lacking any reason to favor one over the other, I give them equal weight.
To show you how this decision played out in practice, I computed two
separate indexes, one based exclusively on histories and biographical dictionaries, and the other based exclusively on chronologies of events. The figure
152 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
below shows how these scores differed for the three top-ranked people on the
aggregate index.
The people in the light portion of the graph represent those who got
reasonably balanced scores from both types of sources. The farther out into
the shaded area, the more imbalanced the score. The most conspicuous
outliers in the System Builders quadrant are Leonardo da Vinci (technology),
Hippocrates (medicine), and Aristotle (biology), all of whom owed their high
aggregate index scores primarily to their places in the history books. Of these
three, Hippocrates and Aristotle are classic system builders—each had a
profound effect upon his respective discipline for the next millennium and a
Two types of scientific evidence as measured
by two types of sources
Kepler
Herschel
Scheele
Euler
Lyell
Hutton
W. Smith
Lavoisier Berzelius
Darwin
Lamarck
Edison
Rutherford
Einstein
Gauss
Watt
Pasteur
BRICK LAYERS
Koch
Galileo
Newton
Newton
Aristotle
Leonardo
Hippocrates
SYSTEM BUILDERS
Index Score Based on Chronology of Events
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Index Score Based on Historical and Biographical
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
• • •
THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS • 153
half, but neither contributed many bricks that survive in today’s medicine and
biology. Leonardo is sui generis. Histories of technology spend a great deal of
time discussing the ways in which Leonardo anticipated technologies far
ahead of anyone else. But the list of Leonardo’s successful inventions is short,
none of those few was especially important, and so he is barely mentioned in
the chronologies.
The most conspicuous outliers in the Brick Layers quadrant are William
Herschel (astronomy), Carl Scheele and Jöns Jacob Berzelius (chemistry),
William Smith (earth sciences), and Thomas Edison (technology), all of
whom owed their high aggregate index score to their impressive numbers
of important discrete achievements[12] All are archetypal brick layers. None of
them contributed a major theoretical framework.
So the answer to “Why Them?” with regard to the giants of science is
not a simple one. In a few instances (e.g., Aristotle, Hippocrates), individuals
made such immense contributions to system building that they are given
precedence over people who contributed far more of enduring substance to
their field. In a few other instances (e.g., Herschel, Scheele, Berzelius, Smith),
men made such profuse specific contributions to the foundations that they
pushed ahead of others who are more famous in the history books. But the
exceptions should not obscure the rule: Typically, the giants contributed
importantly both to the great theoretical issues of their eras and to laying
bricks on the growing structures of their disciplines.
As people, the giants resist classification. Some fit the caricature of the mad
artist, others were colorless and plodding. Some were good family men and
loyal friends, others self-absorbed egomaniacs. Some were deeply religious,
others atheists; some were stoic, others whiners; some were humorless; a few
could have been stand-up comics. Some were mostly lucky to have been at
the right place at the right time. But far more of them operated at a level that
cannot be comprehended by the rest of us—more poignantly, cannot be
comprehended even by their colleagues. I began the chapter with Brahms
sighing over the looming presence of Beethoven. I close it with the observation of the eminent Polish mathematician, Mark Kac, discussing the Indian
mathematician Ramanujan.
An ordinary genius is a fellow that you and I would be just as good as, if we
were only many times better. There is no mystery as to how his mind works.
154 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Once we understand what he has done, we feel certain that we, too, could
have done it. It is different with the magicians. They are, to use mathematical jargon, in the orthogonal complement of where we are and the working
of their minds is for all intents and purposes incomprehensible. Even after we
understand what they have done, the process by which they have done it is
completely dark.13
As we consider such magicians, hero worship is not required, nor indifference to their personal failings. But it is important to acknowledge their
unique stature. They show us the outer limits of what Homo sapiens can do.
NINE
THE EVENTS
THAT MATTER I:
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
Through the 1950s, an iconic list of the most important human accomplishments was part of American popular culture. The message was
sometimes conveyed by a piece on highbrow literature or longhair music—
“highbrow” and “longhair” being adjectives that have since left the
language—in magazines like Colliers, Look, or Life. The list was also in the air
in more diffuse ways. If Bob Hope had a skit involving a work of art, he was
likely to use the Mona Lisa. If the intellectual character in a movie was reading a book, it was likely to be War and Peace. One way or another, it came to
be widely accepted that the Mona Lisa was the greatest painting, War and Peace
the greatest novel, Venus de Milo the greatest sculpture, Hamlet the greatest
play, and Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony the greatest musical work. Fire, the
wheel, gunpowder, and the printing press were the most important inventions. In the sciences, there were the five revolutions: Copernican, Newtonian, Darwinian, Freudian, and Einsteinian.
Icons did not fare well in the 1960s. In the arts, the concept of greatness was falling out of intellectual fashion. In science, Thomas Kuhn’s The
Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) told us we should substitute paradigm
for truth if we wished to understand how science works. In technology, the
boring old list of Most Important Inventions gave way to more inventive
alternatives. In the same year that The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
appeared, historian Lynn White’s Medieval Technology and Social Change caught
the imagination of many readers by arguing that the really important invention for understanding the course of Western history was nothing as obvious
as gunpowder or the printing press, but the stirrup. Before the stirrup, a rider
who tried to use a lance against an enemy would be knocked off the back of
his own horse by the impact. With his feet planted in stirrups, he could brace
156 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
himself. Thus the couched lance came into being and with it the military
tactic known as shock warfare, which enabled a small force of mounted men
to defeat a large force of foot soldiers. France’s Charles Martel had recognized
this, White wrote, and as a result developed not only shock cavalry but also a
new class of landed vassals, the chevaliers, to be a reliable source of manpower.
Out of this new military elite rose feudalism. “Few inventions have been so
simple as the stirrup, but few have had so catalytic an influence on history,”
White concluded.1
Arguments of the same genre have been made for the pivotal importance of the invention of hay, horseshoes, the horse collar, the machine-made
screw, the cultivation of legumes, the eraser, board games, distillation, reading
glasses, the rudder, the interrogative sentence, aspirin, the mirror, waterworks,
chairs, and stairs.2 Some of these nominations have been tongue in cheek, but
many of them followed the stirrup model, describing a single, seemingly
innocuous change in technology that produced a cascade of momentous
results. The invention of hay, for example, is another idea from Lynn White:
Until hay was invented, horses could not be maintained throughout the
winter, limiting civilization to warm climates. The invention of hay allowed
civilization to develop in Northern Europe.
This approach was taken to its extreme by science writer James Burke
in a series of BBC television documentaries entitled Connections, later
converted to a book.3 Burke liked to link one discovery to another until he
ended in a place no one could have predicted. Thus a chapter that begins with
Arabic astrology in 9C ends with the development of the modern production
line. Another that begins with the development of the Dutch fluytschip in
17C ends with the invention of polyvinyl chloride. This is an entertaining
way to present the history of science, but it is a variety of just-so story—post
hoc, ergo propter hoc. It does not take much reflection to think of ways to
link the development of the Dutch fluytschip with dozens of subsequent
events besides polyvinyl chloride, and to think of ways that the invention of
polyvinyl chloride could be linked with dozens of other antecedent events.
Tracing any one path among the thousands of nodes in this network can
provide an illuminating story, but it cannot easily claim to be a causal story.
Even when the chain of events is short, there is a basic logical limitation:Yes,
hay (or horse collars or machine-made screws) were authentically important,
but they are at best only necessary, not sufficient, conditions for the consequences that followed.
Sometimes the ingenious insight is plain wrong. In the case of the stirrup, a pair of articles published in 1970 in the English Historical Review and
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 157
Studies in Medieval and Renaissance History called into question whether the
battles White discussed had been much affected by mounted shock tactics,
whether the armies had stirrups, and whether the Franks had fought on
horseback at all. White’s book remains a useful discussion of the importance
of technology in understanding medieval institutions, but the stirrup thesis
has fallen on hard times.4
It is easier to make a case for the old standbys. The effects of Gutenberg’s printing press on European civilization were direct and momentous. So
were the effects of the publication of Darwin’s On the Origin of Species. But
beyond these most obvious choices, how are we to decide which are the
events in the arts and sciences that must be part of the human résumé? I classify accomplishments under two headings: significant events, the subject of this
chapter; and meta-inventions, the subject of the next.
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS IN THE
SCIENTIFIC INVENTORIES
The challenge of compiling inventories of important events throughout
history has inspired a number of bulky chronologies. The first was Werner
Stein’s Kulturfahrplan, published in 1946. It included separate rosters of events
for history and politics, literature and theatre, religion and philosophy, the
visual arts, music, science and technology, and daily life. The book has sold
millions of copies in its various editions, including an updated and expanded
English version by Bernard Grun, The Timetables of History (1991).
Other chronologies that focused specifically on science and technology
have produced inventories of events that are both more detailed and more
precise than those in the all-purpose chronologies. Some of these are works
of devoted scholarship that took years to assemble; all are based on wide
coverage of histories of the various scientific disciplines and attempt to be
inclusive, covering not only the most important events but second- and thirdtier events as well. The inventory for Human Accomplishment was created by
combining the events in nine such chronologies, augmented by other
chronologies devoted to a specific discipline, all listed in Appendix 3.
In general, assembling data on events is similar to assembling data on
people. Just as different but overlapping people were represented in the histories and biographical dictionaries (see page 109), the chronologies included
different but overlapping events. For example, 3,399 events from The Timetables of Science (1988) were entered into the science and technology inventory.
158 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Of these, 703 were not mentioned in any of the other sources. Of the 2,474
events entered from Science and Technology Firsts (1997), 642 were unique to
that source, as were 361 of the 2,673 events from The Wilson Chronology of
Science and Technology (1997) and 577 of the 2,162 events from Breakthroughs:
A Chronology of Great Achievements in Science and Mathematics (1986).
The compilers’ different choices of events once again produce a situation in which the number of items that get attention from multiple sources
plunges rapidly, as shown in the figure below.
Extremely small proportions of scientific events are so important that
everyone feels compelled to include them
Percentage of Eligible Events
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
No. of Appearances in Chronologies
Mathematics
Medicine
Science
Technology
The general shape is familiar from the discussion of Lotka curves
(though technically it is not a Lotka curve, for the same reasons discussed in
the box on page 112). In all, the database for scientific events contained 8,759
unique events. Of these, only 1,560—about one out of five—were
mentioned in at least 50 percent of the sources. These 1,560 will be called
significant events.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 159
The Different Uses of Significant Events
and Significant Figures
The labels and definitions for significant figures and significant events are
parallel, but the inventories of people and events have different uses. For
analyzing geographic patterns and trajectories of science over time, the
inventory of people is statistically more useful and will play the lead role in
the quantitative analyses.[5] But for getting a panoramic sense of what
happened, the list of names is useless, because few of the names after the top
fifty or so are ones that a non-specialist has heard of. Consider Joseph-Marie
Jacquard, for example—not a name of intrinsic interest. But Jacquard’s invention, the use of punch cards to enable a loom to create patterns in woven
cloth, represents the first non-alphabetic means of storing information. His
invention represents the same method that would be used for the first generation of electromechanical calculators and still later the first generations of
programmable computers. That accomplishment is of great intrinsic interest.
So are virtually all of the 8,759 events in the scientific inventories.
The Roster of Central Events
The problem is making the long list of events digestible. A narrative summary
is hopeless. It would of necessity focus on the famous landmarks—Gutenberg’s printing press, the Wright brothers’ first flight, and the Curies’ discovery of radium—whereas the virtue of the roster of significant events is that it
puts famous landmarks in the context of events that preceded and followed.
But if a summary doesn’t work, neither does an unadorned listing of even the
1,560 significant events (let alone the 8,759 total events), which would be too
long to ask readers to read. My compromise has been to select a subset of
events that I have labeled central events. Its core is the 369 events that are
mentioned all of the sources—the events that were indispensable to the
story—augmented by selected events that were mentioned in all but one of
the sources and that I judged essential to flesh out the chronology.[6] The
subjective choices this forced were often on the margin. I am prepared to
defend all of my inclusions but am less confident about my exclusion of
others that were near misses.
I have altered the wording of a few events to reflect their broader sense.
For example, the aspect of Lavoisier’s Traité Élémentaire de Chemie mentioned
in every source is that it contained the first statement of the law of conservation of matter. But Traité Élémentaire de Chemie is also, in a broader sense, the
160 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
founding document of quantitative chemistry, and I make note of that.
Conversely, I let some events stand in for others. For example, the best
known and most thorough statement of James Hutton’s uniformitarian
theory of the earth’s evolution is his Theory of the Earth,With Proofs and Illustrations, published in 1795. But the first statement of the theory came ten
years earlier, in an essay entitled “Concerning the System of the Earth,” and
that is the work that was most commonly mentioned in the chronologies.
Since the purpose of the list is to focus on the substance of the events, not
their provenance, I did not bother to add the better known title to the
description of the event. You may also assume that the events associated with
major advances in such large topics as genetics and atomic structure have
important subsidiary events that did not make the list but are included in the
larger inventory.
Even this comparatively short list is long enough that many readers will
reasonably prefer to pick and choose among topics. To that end, I have split
the events into separate lists for astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth sciences,
physics, mathematics, medicine, and technology. Some capsule observations
about the events in the different scientific fields:
In astronomy, important work occurred before the Christian era, but
almost exclusively in classification and enumeration. The ancient astronomers
prepared accurate star catalogs and star maps, timed the solstices, discovered
precession of the equinox, and, by the end of 2C, had prepared a system that
accurately predicted the movements of the planets. In some respects, astronomy progressed farther and faster than biology, chemistry, the earth sciences,
or physics. In another respect, understanding the inner workings of things,
astronomy was the slowest of all those disciplines. It wasn’t until 1918 that
astronomers knew even the size of our own galaxy, not until 1923 that they
knew for certain that the Milky Way was just one galaxy of many, not until
1929 that they knew the universe was expanding, not until 1948 that the Big
Bang theory of the universe’s history was stated, and not until the 1960s that
it became accepted.
Biology, chemistry, and the earth sciences follow a broadly similar
pattern. A handful of key advances occurred in the pre-Christian era, usually
around –4C, followed by little in the next 1,500 years, and then an accelerating rate of change that steepened sharply in 18C. This sudden rise in the
number of central events coincides in all three cases with major breakthroughs in understanding the inner workings of things.
Physics presents another profile. Biology has plants and animals,
astronomy has celestial bodies, chemistry has elements and minerals and
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 161
compounds, geology has landforms, all of which lend themselves to enumeration and classification even in the absence of theory. Physics, by its nature,
must be more centrally theory. While the lack of valid theory did not prevent
the other hard sciences from accumulating substantial bodies of information
early on, physics didn’t really get started until the advent of experimentation
and the mathematization of physical phenomena during the Renaissance.
When physics finally took off, it did so rapidly and with transforming impact.
Newton’s discovery of the laws of gravity and motion had a profound effect
on Europe’s view of the universe and man’s place in it, rivaled only by Copernicus’s overthrow of the geocentric solar system.
The profile of events in mathematics is distinctive on two counts. First,
mathematics made major substantive progress early. The rosters for other
disciplines have a few events involving landmarks in the development of
theory prior to 11C, but they are usually ones that qualify primarily because
they were brave and imaginative forays into the unknown, not because they
were right. Mathematics has a dozen theoretical advances before 11C, and
they represent a solid base of knowledge that still undergirds today’s mathematics. Furthermore, this progress is not confined to classical Greece. What
we call Arabic numerals, along with that crucial conceptual leap called zero,
evolved during the first post-Christian millennium and were fully realized by
the end of 8C. Indian and Arab mathematicians also made substantial progress
in algebra during the last half of the first millennium, at a time when little
progress was being made in the other sciences. Second, and uniquely among
all the scientific inventories, a graph of the raw number of significant events
in mathematics does not continue to rise into 20C. The greatest burst of
mathematical progress occurred in 17C–19C, and was already tailing off by
the latter part of 19C.
In some respects, medicine looks like biology, chemistry, and the earth
sciences, with some progress early on, a long period in which little happened,
and a steep rise in events during 18C. But while medicine made considerable
progress in preventative medicine, public health, and antisepsis before 20C, it
is not clear that a trip to the doctor did much good, on average, until sometime into the 1920s or 1930s. “On average” is the key phrase. For centuries,
physicians had helped some people recover from some ailments and injuries,
but many encounters with physicians were wholly ineffective and a large
number were harmful. The tipping point at which the practice of medicine
became an unambiguous net plus for the patient occurred about the same
time as the great cosmological discoveries in astronomy, with antibiotics
being the decisive breakthrough.
162 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The technology inventory is unique because so much occurred before
the inventories even begin. By –800, a large array of key advances in the
construction of large structures, road building, irrigation, transportation, and
the maintenance of large cities had already been part of the repertoire of
human civilizations, in some cases for thousands of years, and therefore do
not appear in the roster of central events.
This ends the preliminaries. I invite you to explore the rosters on your
own, with strategies tailored to your particular interests. In reading the tables,
note that the country represents the place where the work was done, not
where the person came from. The date often represents only one of several
that might be used (e.g., when an effort began, when the report of the
work was published, etc.). The older the event, the less reliance you can place
on the precise accuracy of the year. Dates for events before 1000 are usually
approximate.
As an aid to scanning the lists, I have put in boldface the events that are
commonly treated as special even among this small set of landmarks. These
usually involve discoveries that represent not merely the uncovering of a new
species or compound, but discoveries that contain an answer to a causal or
structural issue central to the field. In other cases, they represent a turning
point because they had such a decisive effect on subsequent work (e.g.,
Ptolemy’s Almagest). These choices were subjective, and should not be treated
as anything other than a visual aid for organizing an otherwise featureless
plain.
Year Country Event
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 163
CENTRAL EVENTS IN ASTRONOMY
Year Country Event
–500 Greece Pythagoras of Samos discovers that the morning and the evening
star are the same.
–165 China Chinese astronomers describe sunspots.
–134 Alexandria Hipparchus invents a system of magnitude for measuring the
brightness of stars, still the basis of the modern system.
–134 Alexandria Hipparchus prepares the first accurate, systematic star catalog and
sky map.
–130 Alexandria Hipparchus calculates the first reasonably accurate estimate of the
distance to the moon.
140 Alexandria Ptolemy’s Almagest constructs a model of a geocentric
solar system that accurately predicts the movements of the
planets.
1514 Poland Nicolaus Copernicus’s Commentariolus is the first statement
of the heliocentric theory. It culminates in the publication
of De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium in 1543.
1572 Denmark Tycho Brahe records the first European observation of a
supernova, discrediting the Aristotelian system of a fixed
sphere of stars.
1604 Germany Johannes Kepler observes a second nova, confirming Brahe’s
discovery.
1608 Netherlands Hans Lippershey and Zacharias Jansen independently
invent a crude telescope.
1609 Germany Johannes Kepler’s Astronomia Nova contains the first statement of
Kepler’s first two laws of planetary motion.
1609 Italy Galileo conducts the first telescopic observations of the
night sky, transforming the nature of astronomical
investigation.
1609 Italy Galileo constructs the first working telescope, 9× magnification
initially, improved to 30× by the end of the year.
1610 Italy Galileo discovers four moons of Jupiter and infers that the
earth is not the center of all motion. (Simon Marius makes a
disputed claim to the same discovery.)
1611 Italy Galileo, Christoph Scheiner, and Girolamo Fabrici independently
Germany demonstrate that sunspots are part of the sun and revolve with it.
1612 Germany Simon Marius publishes the first systematic description of the
Andromeda Nebula.
1631 France Pierre Gassendi describes the transit of Mercury.
164 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1655 Netherlands Christiaan Huygens discovers the rings of Saturn. He also
discovers the first moon of Saturn, Titan, another in a series of
discoveries of planetary satellites, asteroids, and other celestial
bodies that continues to the present. Several of these discoveries
are cited in all of the sources and are included separately in the full
inventory, but only a few of special significance are included in
this roster.
1668 England Isaac Newton invents the first working reflecting telescope.
1705 England Edmond Halley’s A Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets includes
calculation of the orbits of comets and the first prediction of a
comet’s return.
1718 England Edmond Halley discovers stellar motion (proper movement of
stars).
1755 Germany Immanuel Kant’s Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie Des Himmels
hypothesizes that the solar system is part of a huge, lens-shaped
collection of stars, that other such “island universes” exist, and
proposes a theory of the evolution of the universe in which
particles conglomerated to form heavenly bodies.
1761 Russia Mikhail Lomonosov infers the existence of a Venusian atmosphere.
1781 England William Herschel discovers Uranus.
1782 England John Goodricke is the first to observe an eclipsing variable star.
1785 England William Herschel’s On the Construction of the Heavens is the first
quantitative analysis of the Milky Way’s shape.
1794 Germany Ernst Chladni and Heinrich Olbers defend the extraterrestrial
origin of meteorites and offer a scientific explanation of them.
1802 Germany Heinrich Olbers argues that asteroids are fragments of an exploded
planet.
1803 France Jean-Baptiste Biot discovers empirical verification of meteorites as
extraterrestial objects.
1814 Germany Joseph von Fraunhofer discovers that spectral lines
observed in light reflected from the planets are shared,
while light from stars contains differing lines, leading to
the development of astronomical spectroscopy.
1838 Scotland Thomas Henderson and Friedrich Bessel are the first to
Germany measure a star’s heliocentric parallax, permitting an estimate of
stellar distance.
1843 Germany Samuel Schwabe discovers the sunspot cycle, founding the modern
study of solar physics.
1844 Germany Friedrich Bessel infers an unseen “dark companion” star of Sirius,
the first known binary star.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 165
Year Country Event
1845 Ireland
1846 England
France
Germany
1859 Germany
1905 Denmark
1908 USA
1912 USA
1914 USA
1918 USA
1920 USA
1924 USA
1927 Belgium
1929 USA
1930 France
1930 Germany
1930 USA
1932 USA
1934 Switzerland
USA
William Parsons discovers spiral nebulae.
John Couch and Urbain le Verrier predict the existence
and orbit of Neptune, which is then observed by Johann Galle.
Gustav Kirchhoff and Robert Bunsen conduct the first analysis of
the chemical composition of the stars, the first step in
understanding the evolution of the stars.
Ejnar Hertzsprung defines a scale for color and stellar luminosity,
used to establish stellar magnitudes.
George Hale discovers that sunspots exhibit the Zeeman effect,
implying that they are subject to an electromagnetic field.
Henrietta Leavitt devises a method for determining the luminosity
of a Cepheid variable from its period, thereby enabling a
determination of its distance and measurement of other
extragalactic distances.
Henry Russell’s “Relations Between the Spectra and Other
Characteristics of the Stars” develops a theory of stellar evolution.
Harlow Shapley determines the center of the galaxy,
providing a correct picture of our own galaxy plus the
first accurate estimate of its size.
Albert Michelson calculates the first measurement of stellar
diameter, for the star Betelgeuse.
Edwin Hubble determines that Andromeda is a galaxy,
revolutionizing the understanding of the universe’s size
and structure.
Georges Lemaître introduces the idea of the cosmic egg, the
forerunner of the Big Bang theory.
Edwin Hubble discovers Hubble’s Law, introducing the
concept of an expanding universe.
Bernard Lyot invents the coronagraph, permitting extended
observations of the sun’s coronal atmosphere.
Bernhard Schmidt invents the Schmidt camera and telescope,
permitting wide-angle views with little distortion.
Clyde Tombaugh discovers Pluto based on analysis of the
perturbations in the orbits of the outer planets caused by an
unknown body.
Karl Jansky detects radio waves from space, founding radio
astronomy.
Fred Zwicky and Walter Baade predict the existence of neutron
stars.
166 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1934 Switzerland
USA
1937 USA
1938 Germany
USA
1942 USA
1944 Germany
1948 USA
1949 USA
Fritz Zwicky and Walter Baade discover the difference between
novae and supernovae.
Grote Reber invents the radio telescope.
Hans Bethe and Carl Weizsacker present a detailed case for nuclear
fusion as the source of a star’s energy.
Grote Reber prepares the first radio map of the universe, locating
individual radio sources.
Carl Weizsacker formulates the planetesimal hypothesis to explain
the origin of the solar system.
George Gamow and Ralph Asher develop the Big Bang theory,
employing Hans Bethe’s results from thermonuclear reactions.
Fred Whipple discovers the “dirty snowball” composition of
comets.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 167
CENTRAL EVENTS IN BIOLOGY
Year Country Event
–500 Greece
–350 Greece
–320 Greece
–310 Greece
–280 Alexandria
77 Italy
180 Greece
1543 Italy
1553 Italy
1555 France
1583 Italy
1628 England
1653 Sweden
1658 Netherlands
1660 Italy
1665 England
1669 England
Alcmaeon conducts dissections on animals, and perhaps on a
human cadaver, for scientific purposes.
Aristotle creates a classification system for animals and
plants, founding biological taxonomy.
Theophrastus’s Enquiry into Plants and Causes of Plants founds
botany.
Praxagoras discovers the difference between veins and arteries.
Herophilus’s improvements in dissection and vivisection produce
more detailed knowledge of the functions of internal organs,
nerves, and the brain, founding scientific anatomy.
The 37 volumes of Pliny the Elder’s Historia Naturalis summarizes
the natural world as seen by the ancients.
Galen dissects animals, demonstrating a variety of
physiological processes and founding experimental
physiology.
Andreas Vesalius writes De Humani Corporis Fabrica, a more
scientifically exact anatomy text based on dissection that
supplants Galen.
Early attempts to describe blood circulation culminate in Realdo
Colombo’s discovery that blood passes from the lung into the
pulmonary vein.
Pierre Belon identifies similarities in skeletons across animals
(homologies), specifically birds and humans.
Andrea Cesalpino’s De Plantis, the first scientific textbook on
theoretical botany, introduces a major early system of plant
classification.
William Harvey’s Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et
Sanguinis in Animalibus describes the heart as a pump and
accurately describes the nature of blood circulation.
Olof Rudbeck discovers the lymphatic system, demonstrating its
existence in a dog.
Jan Swammerdam discovers red corpuscles.
Marcello Malpighi discovers capillaries linking the arterial and
venous circulation in the lungs.
Robert Hooke’s Micrographia includes the first description of cells
and coins the term cell.
Richard Lower describes the structure of the heart and its
muscular properties, along with the observation that blood
changes color in the lungs.
168 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1676 Netherlands
1677 Netherlands
1682 England
1683 Netherlands
1686 England
1727 England
1733 England
1735 Sweden
1779 Netherlands
1800 Germany
France
1801 France
1809 France
1818 France
1827 Germany
1828 Germany
1831 Scotland
1837 France
1838 Germany
1858 Germany
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek discovers microorganisms.
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek confirms the existence of sperm and
speculates that they are the source of reproduction.
Nehemiah Grew’s Anatomy of Plants includes the discovery and
description of plant sexuality.
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek discovers bacteria.
John Ray’s Historia Plantarum presents the first modern plant
classification and introduces the idea of species as a unit of
taxonomy.
Stephen Hales’s Vegetable Statics describes the nature of sap flow
and plant nourishment.
Stephen Hales’s Haemastaticks describes the first quantitative
estimate of blood pressure and fundamental characteristics of
blood circulation.
Carolus Linnaeus’s Systema Naturae uses systematic
principles for defining the genera and species of
organisms. A later edition (1749) develops binomial
nomenclature for classifying plants and animals.
Jan Ingenhousz describes photosynthesis.
Karl Burdach, Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck, and Gottfried
Treviranus introduce the term biology.
Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck’s Systême des Animaux sans Vertèbres
founds modern invertebrate zoology.
Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck’s Philosophie Zoologique includes a clear
statement of organic evolution but wrongly theorizes that
acquired traits can be inherited.
Marie Bichat’s Traité des Membranes en General founds histology.
Karl von Baer discovers the mammalian ovum.
Karl von Baer’s Über die Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere founds
modern comparative embryology.
Robert Brown discovers that the cell nucleus is a general feature of
all plant cells.
René Dutrochet demonstrates that photosynthesis requires
chlorophyll.
Theodor Schwann’s Mikroskopische Untersuchungen and
Hubert Schleiden’s Beitroge zur Phytogenesis argue that cells
are the fundamental organic units and develop in the same
basic way, founding modern cell theory.
Rudolph Virchow’s Die Cellularpathologie founds cellular pathology.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 169
Year Country Event
1859 England
1861 France
1865 Germany
1866 Austria
1869 England
1882 Germany
1883 England
1884 Germany
1889 Spain
Italy
1892 Netherlands
Russia
1900 Austria
1900 Germany
Austria
Netherlands
1901 Netherlands
1902 England
1907 USA
1909 Denmark
1910 USA
Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species introduces the
theory of evolution through the mechanism of natural
selection, independently developed by Alfred Wallace.
Pierre-Paul Broca introduces the theory of localization of the
brain’s speech center, with differing hemispheres containing the
center for right- and left-handed individuals.
Julius von Sachs discovers that chlorophyll is the key compound
that turns carbon dioxide and water into starch while releasing
water.
Johann Mendel’s “Experiments in Plant Hybridization,”
founds the study of genetics, though the paper goes
unnoticed for decades.
Francis Galton’s Hereditary Genius applies Darwin’s theory of
evolution to man’s mental inheritance, arguing that individual
talents are genetically transmitted.
Walther Flemming delineates the sequence of nuclear division,
mitosis.
Francis Galton introduces eugenics as a theory and a term.
Hans Gram introduces bacterial staining, later an important tool in
developing anti-bacterial agents.
Camillo Golgi and Santiago Ramon y Cajal describe the cellular
structure of the brain and spinal cord, validating neuron theory.
Martinus Beijerinck and Dmitri Ivanovsky discover that a
filtrable virus is the causative agent of tobacco mosaic infection,
the first identification of a virus.
Karl Landsteiner discovers blood types.
Karl Correns, Erich Tschermak, and Hugo de Vries independently
rediscover patterns of heredity found by Mendel and apply them
to Darwin’s theory of evolution.
Hugo de Vries’s Mutation Theory applies mutations to evolution
(and acknowledges Mendel’s priority).
William Bayliss and Ernest Starling discover secretin, the first
hormone, and its role as a chemical messenger.
Ross Harrison achieves the first tissue culture, demonstrating the
development of nerve fibers from neural tissue.
Wilhelm Johannsen introduces the word gene for the unit of
inheritance and distinguishes between genotype and phenotype,
backed with experimental evidence.
Thomas Morgan discovers sex-linked characteristics.
170 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1911 USA Thomas Morgan and Alfred Sturtevant prepare the first
chromosome map, showing five sex-linked genes in the fruit fly.
1915 England Felix d’Hérelle and Frederick Twort independently discover
France bacteriophages.
1915 USA Thomas Morgan, Alfred Sturtevant, Hermann Muller, and Calvin
Bridges propose that chromosomes contain genes that determine
heredity.
1926 USA Thomas Morgan discovers that mutant characteristics in fruit flies
are connected to paired Mendelian genes, which are joined to
chromosomes.
1927 USA Hermann Muller discovers that X-rays produce mutations.
1929 Germany Johannes Berger invents electroencephalography, measuring brain
waves in humans and opening up the study of neurophysiology.
1935 USA Wendell Stanley crystallizes the tobacco mosaic virus,
demonstrating that crystallization is not a dividing line between
life and non-life.
1937 England Hans Krebs discovers the Krebs Cycle of citric acids and its role in
metabolism.
1944 England Dorothy Hodgkin, Barbara Low, and C. W. Bunn discover the
structure of penicillin.
1944 USA Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty discover that
DNA is the genetic material in cells.
1948 USA John Enders, Frederick Robbins, and Thomas Weller develop a
method to culture viruses.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 171
CENTRAL EVENTS IN CHEMISTRY
Year Country Event
–440 Greece
750 Arab World
900 Arab World
1300 Germany
1597 Germany
1624 Belgium
1661 England
1662 England
1674 Germany
1735 Sweden
1751 Sweden
1755 Scotland
1766 England
1772 France
1772 France
1772 Scotland
England
Sweden
1773 England
Sweden
1774–1925
Democritus and Leucippus hypothesize that matter is composed of
atoms.
Jabir ibn Hayyan prepares acetic acid, the first pure acid.
First production of concentrated alcohol, by distilling wine.
False Geber describes the preparation of sulphuric acid.
Libavius’s Alchemia is the first chemistry textbook, with detailed
descriptions of many chemical methods.
Jan van Helmont recognizes that more than one air-like substance
exists and coins the term gas to describe any compressible fluid.
Robert Boyle’s Skeptical Chymist separates chemistry from
medicine and alchemy; defines elements and chemical
analysis.
Robert Boyle states Boyle’s Law, that the volume occupied
by a fixed mass of gas in a container is inversely
proportional to the pressure it exerts.
Hennig Brand discovers phosphorus, a.n. 15, the first element
known to have been discovered by a specific person, and the first
element not known in any earlier form.
Georg Brandt discovers cobalt, a.n. 27, the first discovery of a
metal not known to the ancients.
Axel Cronstedt discovers nickel, a.n. 28, the first metal since iron
found to be subject to magnetic attraction.
Joseph Black identifies “fixed air” (carbon dioxide), the
first application of quantitative analysis to chemical
reactions.
Henry Cavendish discovers “inflammable air” (hydrogen, a.n. 1).
Antoine Lavoisier discovers that air is absorbed during
combustion.
Antoine Lavoisier discovers that diamond consists of carbon.
Daniel Rutherford, Carl Scheele, Joseph Priestley, and Henry
Cavendish independently discover “mephitic air” (nitrogen,
a.n. 7).
Joseph Priestley and Carl Scheele independently discover
“respirable air” (oxygen, a.n. 8).
The discovery of the rest of naturally occurring elements becomes
a central quest of chemists for the next century and a half. Most of
these discoveries qualify as central events and are included
separately in the full inventory, but only the elements of special
significance are included here.
172 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1775 France Antoine Lavoisier accurately describes combustion,
discrediting phlogiston theory.
1779 France Antoine Lavoisier discovers that the gas identified by Joseph
Priestley and Carl Scheele is responsible for combustion. He
names it oxygen.
1784 England Henry Cavendish discovers the chemical composition of water.
1785 France Claude Berthollet determines the composition of ammonia.
1789 France Antoine Lavoisier’s Traité Élémentaire de Chemie, a founding
document in quantitative chemistry, states the law of
conservation of matter.
1797 France Joseph Proust proposes his law of definite proportions, followed by
experimental evidence obtained in 1799.
1800 England William Nicholson and Anthony Carlisle discover that an electric
current can bring about a chemical reaction (electrolysis),
founding electro-chemistry.
1801 France Rene Haüy’s four-volume Traité de Minéralogie founds
crystallography.
1803 England John Dalton publishes the modern statement of atomic theory and
introduces the concept of atomic weight.
1803 France Claude Berthollet’s Essai de Statique Chemique lays the foundation
for understanding chemical reactions and is a step toward the law
of mass action.
1805 Germany Friedrich Sertürner isolates morphine from laudanum, initiating
France the study of alkaloids.
1806 France Louis Vauquelin isolates asparagine, first of the amino acids.
1811 Italy Amadeo Avogadro hypothesizes that all gases at the same volume,
pressure, and temperature are made up of the same number of
particles.
1813 Sweden Jöns Berzelius develops the foundation of universal chemical
notation.
1814 Germany Joseph von Fraunhofer discovers that the relative positions
of spectral lines is constant, forming the basis for modern
spectroscopy.
1815 France Joseph Gay-Lussac identifies the first organic radical (cyanogen, the
cyano group).
1817 France Joseph Caventou and Pierre Pelletier isolate chlorophyll.
1820 Germany Joseph von Fraunhofer invents the diffraction grating for studying
spectra.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 173
Year Country Event
1823 England Michael Faraday produces the first laboratory temperatures below
0º F., enabling liquefaction of gases, a founding event in
cryogenics.
1825 England Michael Faraday discovers and isolates benzene.
1828 Germany Friedrich Wöhler prepares the organic compound urea
from inorganic compounds, the first synthesis of an
organic substance, founding organic chemistry.
1831 Scotland Thomas Graham discovers Graham’s Law, that the ratio of the
speeds at which two different gases diffuse is inverse to the ratio of
the square roots of the gas densities, a founding event in physical
chemistry.
1836 Germany Theodore Schwann isolates pepsin, the first animal enzyme.
1836 Sweden Jöns Berzelius discovers a common force among catalytic reactions
and introduces the terms catalysis and catalytic force.
1840 Germany Christian Schönbein discovers ozone.
1846 France Louis Pasteur discovers crystal asymmetry.
1852 England Edward Frankland describes the phenomenon that later became
known as valence.
1858 Germany Friedrich Kekulé establishes two major facts of organic
chemistry: carbon has a valence of four and carbon atoms
can chemically combine with one another.
1858 Scotland Archibald Couper and Friedrich Kekulé develop a system for
Germany showing organic molecular structure graphically.
1859 Germany Gustav Kirchhoff and Robert Bunsen discover that each element is
associated with characteristic spectral lines.
1859 Scotland James Maxwell develops the first extensive mathematical kinetic
Austria theory of gases, later augmented in collaboration with Ludwig
Boltzmann.
1860 Italy Stanislao Cannizzaro introduces a reliable method of calculating
atomic weights, leading to acceptance of Avogadro’s Hypothesis
and opening the way to classification of the elements.
1863 England John Newland’s Law of Octaves stimulates work on the table of
elements.
1863 Norway Cato Guldberg and Peter Waage discover the law of mass action,
regarding the relationship of speed, heat, and concentration in
chemical reactions.
1865 Germany Friedrich Kekulé discovers the structure of the benzene ring,
enabling the solution many problems of molecular structure.
174 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1868 England
France
1869 Ireland
1869 Russia
1873 Netherlands
1874 Netherlands
France
1877 France
Switzerland
1879 USA
Germany
1884 Germany
1884 Sweden
1885 Switzerland
1886 France
1895 Scotland
Sweden
1898 Scotland
1901 USA
1904 England
1905 Germany
1906 Russia
1926 USA
1927 England
USA
Pierre Janssen and Joseph Lockyer discover helium, a.n. 2, based
on spectral analysis rather than a physical specimen.
Thomas Andrews identifies the critical temperature for liquifying
gases.
Dimitri Mendeleyev publishes a periodic table of the
elements, including the prediction of undiscovered
elements.
Johannes van der Waals provides a molecular explanation for the
critical temperature above which gas can exist only as a gas.
Jacobus Van’t Hoff and Joseph Le Bel independently discover that
the four bonding directions of the carbon atom point to the four
vertices of a regular tetrahedron, founding stereochemistry.
Louis Cailletet and Raoul Pictet independently liquefy oxygen,
nitrogen, and carbon dioxide, the first liquefaction of gases.
Ira Remsen and Constantin Fahlberg synthesize saccharin.
Emil Fischer discovers purines, which turn out to be an important
part of nucleic acids, which in turn prove to be the key molecules
of living tissues.
Svante Arrhenius introduces the theory of ionic dissociation.
Johann Balmer develops a formula for the wavelengths at which
hydrogen atoms radiate light.
Ferdinand Moissan isolates fluorine, a.n. 9, after 75 years of effort
by others.
William Ramsay and Per Teodor Cleve independently discover
helium on earth.
James Dewar invents a method of producing liquid hydrogen in
quantity.
Jokichi Takamine and John Abel independently isolate adrenaline,
the first pure hormone.
Frederic Kipping discovers silicones.
Richard Willstätter discovers the structure of chlorophyll.
Mikhail Tsvet invents chromatography for studying dyes,
eventually applied to complex chemical mixtures generally.
James Sumner prepares the first crystallized enzyme, urease.
Clinton Davisson and George Thomson independently create large
nickel crystals that exhibit X-ray diffraction, confirming Louis de
Broglie’s theory of matter waves.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 175
Year Country Event
1931 USA
1933 England
Switzerland
1934 France
1937 USA
France
1938 Switzerland
1944 England
1949 England
Harold Urey discovers deuterium, heavy hydrogen.
Walter Haworth and Tadeus Reichstein synthesize vitamin C.
Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie develop the first artificial isotope, a
radioactive form of phosphorus.
Emilio Segrè and Carlo Perrier prepare technetium, a.n. 43, the
first artificial element.
Albert Hofmann and Arthur Stoll synthesize LSD, later (1943)
recognized as a hallucinogen.
Archer Martin and Richard Synge invent paper chromatography, a
faster form of chromatography that requires only a few drops of
the substance being analyzed.
Derek Barton describes the conformation of a steroidal molecule
having several six-membered carbon rings, changing the way
organic chemists view molecules.
Year Country Event
176 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
CENTRAL EVENTS IN THE EARTH SCIENCES
Year Country Event
–520 Greece
–300 Greece
–240 Alexandria
1546 Germany
1544 Germany
England
1568 Belgium
1668 England
1669 Denmark
1669 Denmark
1671 France
1680 England
1725 Italy
1746 France
1752 France
1756 Germany
1760 England
1770 USA
1779 Switzerland
Pythagoras of Samos argues that the earth is spherical.
Pytheas of Massilia describes the ocean tides and their relationship
to the moon.
Eratosthenes calculates values for the circumference and diameter
of the earth accurate to within about 15 percent of the true
values.
Agricola’s De Natura Fossilium classifies minerals, founding
mineralogy.The term fossil is introduced for anything dug
from the ground.
Georg Hartman discovers magnetic “dip,” or inclination,
rediscovered in 1576 by Robert Norman.
Mercator invents the Mercator projection for maps.
Robert Hooke proposes that fossils can be used as a source of
information about the earth’s history.
Nicolaus Steno diagrams six levels of stratification, arguing that
shifts in earth’s strata caused the formation of mountains.
Nicolaus Steno identifies fossils as ancient creatures.
Jean Picard’s Mesure de la Terre gives an estimate of the size of the
earth accurate to within about 90 feet.
Robert Boyle develops the silver nitrate test for sea water,
founding chemical oceanography.
Luigi Marsigli’s Histoire Physique de la Mer is the first treatise on
oceanography, discussing topography, circulation, ocean plants and
animals, along with many measurements.
Jean-Étienne Guettard prepares the first true geological
maps, showing rocks and minerals arranged in bands.
Jean-Étienne Guettard identifies heat as the causative factor of
change in the earth’s landforms.
Johann Lehmann’s Versuch einer Geschichte von Flötz-Gebürgen
describes earth’s crust as a structured sequence of strata.
John Michell writes “Essay on the Causes and Phenomena of
Earthquakes,” beginning the systematic study of seismology.
Benjamin Franklin prepares the first scientific chart of the Gulf
Stream.
Horace Saussure writes Voyage dans les Alpes, describing his
geological, meteorological, and botanical studies, and coining the
term geology.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 177
Year Country Event
1785 Scotland James Hutton’s “Concerning the System of the Earth” is
the first statement of the uniformitarian view of earth’s
development.
1798 England James Hall demonstrates that lavas can be fused into glass,
explaining otherwise puzzling geologic formations and founding
experimental geology.
1799 England William Smith discovers ways in which fossils can be used to
identify correspondences between strata in different regions.
1811 France Georges Cuvier’s and Alexandre Brongniart’s maps of
formations in the Paris region establish the basic
principles of paleontological stratigraphy.
1812 France Georges Cuvier’s Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles systematically
analyzes and classifies extinct forms of life, founding vertebrate
paleontology.
1812 France Georges Cuvier’s Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles introduces
catastrophism as an explanation for extinctions.
1815 England William Smith prepares the first geologic map showing
relationships on a large scale, including England,Wales,
and part of Scotland.
1830 England Charles Lyell’s Principles of Geology argues that geological
formations are created over millions of years, creating a
new time frame for other disciplines as well and founding
modern geology.
1835 France Gaspard de Coriolis discovers the Coriolis effect, the deflection of
a moving body caused by the earth’s rotation.
1837 USA Louis Agassiz’s “Discourse at Neuchâtel” is the first
presentation of the Ice Age theory.
1838 Scotland Roderick Murchison describes the Silurian System, establishing
the sequence of early Paleozoic rocks.
1842 England Richard Owen coins the word dinosaur and describes two new
genera.
1847 USA Matthew Maury publishes the first extensive oceanographic and
weather charts.
1855 USA Matthew Maury writes Physical Geography of the Sea, the first
textbook of oceanography.
1866 France Gabriel Daubrée presents his theory that the earth has a nickeliron core.
1880 England John Milne invents the first precise seismograph, founding modern
seismology.
178 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1883 USA Edward Cope’s The Vertebrata of the Tertiary Formations of the West
reports the discovery of the first complete remains of dinosaurs of
the Cretaceous.
1902 England
USA
Oliver Heaviside and Arthur Kennelly independently predict the
existence of a layer in the atmosphere that permits long-distance
radio transmission, confirmed in 1924 by Edward Appleton.
1902 France Léon Teisserenc de Bort describes the atmosphere as divided into
the troposphere and stratosphere.
1909 Croatia Andrija Mohorovicic discovers the Mohorovicic discontinuity in
the earth’s crust that separates the outermost crust from a more
rigid layer.
1913 France Charles Fabry discovers ozone in the upper atmosphere and
demonstrates that it filters out solar ultraviolet radiation.
1914 USA Beno Gutenberg discovers the Gutenberg Discontinuity in the
earth’s structure, separating a liquid core from a solid mantle.
1915 Germany Alfred Wegener’s Die Entstehung der Kontinente und Ozeane
presents evidence for a primordial continent, Pangaea, and
subsequent continental drift.
1920 Norway Jakob and Vilhelm Bjerknes describe air masses and fronts, and
their use in weather prediction.
1924 England Edward Appleton discovers the ionosphere.
1924 South Africa Raymond Dart discovers Australopithecus and categorizes it as a
hominid, neither human nor ape.
1930 USA Charles Beebe’s first bathysphere reaches a depth of 417 meters,
allowing the first direct access to the ocean depths.
1931 Switzerland Auguste Piccard and Paul Kipfer use a high altitude balloon to
reach the stratosphere.
1935 USA Charles Richter invents the Richter scale for measuring the
magnitude of earthquakes.
Year Country Event
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 179
CENTRAL EVENTS IN PHYSICS
Year Country Event
–260 Greece
–260 Greece
1025 Arabia
1269 France
1583 Italy
1583 Netherlands
1586 Netherlands
1589 Italy
1592 Italy
1600 England
1604 Italy
1609 Netherlands
1621 Netherlands
1638 Italy
1643 Italy
1643 Italy
1645 Germany
1648 France
Archimedes discovers the principle of the lever.
Archimedes discovers the principle of buoyancy, leading to
the concept of specific gravity.
Alhazen’s Opticae Thesaurus discusses the properties of lenses, the
nature of refraction and reflection, and correctly states that the
object seen is the source of light rays.
Peter Peregrinus’s Epistola de Magnete identifies magnetic poles, also
representing an early, unsophisticated use of the experimental
method.
Galileo discovers that a pendulum’s period of oscillation is
independent of its amplitude.
Simon Stevin introduces the theory of static equilibrium, founding
hydrostatics.
Simon Stevin presents evidence that falling bodies fall at the same
rate.
Galileo’s tests of falling bodies represent a landmark use of
experimental data.
Galileo invents the thermometer (precisely, barothermometer).
William Gilbert’s De Magnete, Magnetisque Corporibus, et de
Magno Magnete Tellure describes the magnetic properties of
the earth and founds the scientific study of electricity.
Galileo discovers that a free-falling body increases its
distance as the square of the time, a pioneering
mathematization of a physical phenomenon.
Zacharias Jansen and Hans Lippershey invent the compound
microscope.
Willebrord Snell discovers Snell’s Law for computing the refraction
of light, later discovered independently by Descartes.
Galileo’s Discoursi e Dimostrazioni Matematiche, Intorno à Due
Nuove Scienze founds modern mechanics.
Evangelista Torricelli invents the barometer in the process of
discovering air pressure.
Evangelista Torricelli creates the first (near) vacuum known to
science.
Otto von Guericke discovers that, in a vacuum, sound does not
travel, fire is extinguished, and animals stop breathing.
Blaise Pascal states Pascal’s principle, that pressure on an enclosed
fluid is transmitted without reduction throughout the fluid,
founding hydraulics.
180 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1650 Germany
1665 England
1665 Italy
1669 Denmark
1670 Netherlands
1672 England
1675 France
1687 England
1687 England
1687 England
1701 France
1704 England
1714 Netherlands
1714 Netherlands
1728 England
1733 France
1738 Switzerland
1742 Sweden
Otto Von Guericke demonstrates the force of air pressure, using
teams of horses to try to pull apart metal hemispheres held
together by a partial vacuum.
Robert Hooke’s Micrographia introduces the first major challenge
to the concept of light as a stream of particles, arguing instead that
light is a vibration.
Francesco Grimaldi gives the first major account of light
diffraction and interference.
Erasmus Bartholin describes double refraction, the apparent
doubling of images when seen through a crystal.
Christiaan Huygens develops a wave theory of light, published in
1690.
Isaac Newton describes the light spectrum, and discovers that
white light is made from a mixture of colors.
Ole Rømer deduces that light has a speed and calculates an
approximation of it (put at 141,000 miles per second).
Isaac Newton’s Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
states the law of universal gravitation.
Isaac Newton’s Principia states the laws of motion.
Isaac Newton’s Principia predicts that the shape of the earth is
nonspherical, based on the finding that gravity at Cayenne is less
than that at Paris.
Joseph Sauveur describes the production of tones by the vibration
of strings and coins the word acoustic.
Isaac Newton’s Opticks:A Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions,
Inflections, and Colours of Light discusses optical phenomena,
including the suggestion that light is particulate in nature.
Daniel Fahrenheit invents the Fahrenheit scale.
Daniel Fahrenheit invents the mercury thermometer, the first
accurate thermometer.
James Bradley discovers the aberration of starlight, leading to a
better measure of the speed of light and providing evidence for a
heliocentric solar system.
Charles DuFay discovers that there are two types of static electric
charges and that like charges repel each other while unlike charges
attract, linking electricity to magnetism.
Daniel Bernoulli’s Hydrodynamica states Bernoulli’s
Principle and founds the mathematical study of fluid flow
and the kinetic theory of gases.
Anders Celsius invents the Celsius scale.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 181
Year Country Event
1745 Germany
Netherlands
1748 France
1752 USA
1762 Scotland
1787 France
1798 England
1798 Germany
1800 England
1801 England
1801 Germany
1808 France
1815 France
1818 France
1820 Denmark
1820 Denmark
1820 Germany
1821 England
Ewald von Kleist and Pieter van Musschenbroek independently
invent a practical device for storing an electric charge, the
Leyden jar.
Jean Nollet discovers osmosis, the passage of a solution through a
semi-permeable membrane separating two solutions with different
concentrations.
Benjamin Franklin discovers that lightning is a form of electricity.
Joseph Black develops the concept of latent heat, the quantity of
heat absorbed or released when a substance changes its physical
phase at constant temperature.
Jacques Charles demonstrates that different gases expand by the
same amount for a given rise in temperature, known both as
Charles’s law and Gay-Lussac’s law ( Joseph Gay-Lussac is the first
to publish, in 1802. The relationship was first stated a century
earlier by Guillaume Amontons, then forgotten).
Henry Cavendish and Nevil Maskelyne measure the gravitational
constant, leading to an accurate estimate of the mass of the earth.
Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford) demonstrates that heat is a
form of motion (energy) rather than a substance.
William Herschel discovers infrared radiation, and that invisible
light beyond the red produces the most heat.
Thomas Young uses diffraction and interference patterns to
demonstrate that light has wavelike characteristics.
Johann Ritter discovers ultraviolet light.
Étienne Malus discovers the polarization of light.
Jean Biot discovers that the plane of polarized light is twisted in
different directions by different organic liquids.
Augustin Fresnel’s Mémoire sur la Diffraction de la Lumière
demonstrates the ability of a transverse wave theory of light to
account for a variety of optical phenomena, converting many
scientists to a wave theory.
Hans Ørsted invents the ammeter.
Hans Ørsted demonstrates that electricity and magnetism
are related, jointly (with Ampère) founding the science of
electrodynamics.
Johann Schweigger invents the needle galvanometer, later essential
for the telegraph.
Michael Faraday’s “On Some New Electromagnetic
Motions” reports his discovery that electrical forces can
produce motion and describes the principle of the electric
motor.
182 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1822 France Jean Fourier’s Théorie Analytique de la Chaleur applies Fourier’s
theorem to the study of heat flow, an influential application of
mathematics to physical phenomena.
1822 Germany Thomas Seebeck discovers that two different metals will generate
electricity if their points of juncture are maintained at different
temperatures, the Seebeck effect, and demonstrates
thermoelectricity.
1823 England William Sturgeon invents the electromagnet.
1824 France Nicolas Carnot’s Réflexions sur la Puissance Motrice du Feu is the first
scientific analysis of steam engine efficiency, founding
thermodynamics.
1827 France Andre Ampère publishes Ampere’s Law, a mathematical
expression of Ørsted’s relationship between magnetism
and electricity.
1827 Germany Georg Ohm publishes Ohm’s Law, that an electrical current is
equal to the ratio of the voltage to the resistance, a founding event
in electrical engineering.
1827 Scotland Robert Brown discovers continuous random movement of
microscopic solid particles when suspended in a fluid, later known
as Brownian motion.
1829 Scotland William Nicol invents the Nicol prism for measuring the degree
of twist in a plane of polarized lead, founding polarimetry.
1829 USA Joseph Henry uses insulated wire to create an electromagnet able
to lift a ton of iron.
1831 England Michael Faraday and Joseph Henry independently discover
USA that a changing magnetic force can generate electricity,
the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction.
1832 England Michael Faraday discovers the basic laws of electrolysis that govern
the production of a chemical reaction by passing electric current
through a liquid or solution.
1834 France Jean Peltier discovers the Peltier effect, that a current flowing
across a junction of two dissimilar metals causes heat to be
absorbed or freed, depending on the direction in which the
current is flowing.
1839 France Alexandre Becquerel discovers the photovoltaic effect, whereby
light can be used to induce chemical reactions that produce an
electric current.
1842 Germany Christian Doppler discovers the Doppler effect, that the frequency
of waves emitted by a moving source changes when the source
moves relative to the observer.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 183
Year Country Event
1842 Germany Julius von Mayer and Carl Mohr develop early formulations of the
concept of conservation of energy.
1843 England James Joule discovers Joule’s first law, describing the heat produced
when an electric current flows through resistance for a given time.
1847 Germany Hermann von Helmholtz states the law of conservation of
energy, the first law of thermodynamics: in an isolated
system, the total amount of energy does not change.
1848 Scotland William Thomson (Baron Kelvin) defines absolute zero and
proposes the Kelvin scale.
1849 France Armand-Hippolyte-Louis Fizeau and Jean-Bernard-Léon Foucault
determine the speed of light to within less than one percent error.
1850 England George Stokes discovers the terminal velocity of objects falling
through viscous liquid.
1850 Germany Rudolf Clausius discovers the second law of thermodynamics, that
the disorder of a closed system increases with time.
1851 France Jean-Bernard-Léon Foucault demonstrates the rotation of the earth
with the Foucault pendulum.
1852 England James Joule and William Thomson discover the Joule-Thomson
effect, which later permits liquefaction of some permanent gases.
1855 Germany Johann Geissler invents Geissler tubes, producing a better vacuum.
England As improved by William Crookes, the tubes produce cathode rays,
leading to discovery of the electron.
1865 Scotland James Maxwell’s “A Dynamical Theory of the
Electromagnetic Field” presents Maxwell’s equations
describing the behavior of electric and magnetic fields and
proposes that light is electromagnetic in character,
constituting the first theoretical unification of physical
phenomena.
1873 Scotland James Maxwell’s A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism elaborates the
mathematical model of electromagnetic waves, predicting such
phenomena as radio waves and pressure caused by light rays.
1875 England William Crookes invents the radiometer, thereby providing support
for the kinetic theory of gases.
1876 Germany Eugen Goldstein discovers cathode rays, streams of fluorescence
flowing from the negatively charged electrode in an evacuated tube.
1876 USA Josiah Gibbs publishes the first of a series of papers applying
thermodynamics to chemical change, defining the concepts of free
energy, chemical potential, equilibrium between phases of matter,
and the phase rule, thereby establishing general principles of
physical chemistry.
184 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1879 Austria
1879 USA
1880 France
1883 USA
1886 Germany
1887 USA
1888 Germany
1892 Ireland
1892 Russia
1892 Scotland
1895 Germany
1895 Netherlands
1895 Scotland
1896 France
1896 Netherlands
1897 England
1897 France
1899 England
Josef Stefan discovers Stefan’s Law, that the radiation of a body is
proportional to the fourth power of its absolute temperature.
Edwin Hall discovers the Hall effect, enabling a method of
measuring the strength of strong magnetic fields in small spaces.
Pierre and Jacques Curie discover that ultrasonic vibrations are
produced by piezoelectricity.
Thomas Edison discovers the Edison effect, later a major factor in
the invention of the vacuum tube.
Heinrich Hertz produces radio waves in the laboratory,
confirming Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory and laying
the basis for radio, television, and radar.
Albert Michelson and Edward Morley fail to confirm the
existence of ether and demonstrate that the speed of light
is a constant, raising questions about the adequacy of
classical physics.
Eugen Goldstein discovers canal rays, from cathode rays.
George Fitzgerald hypothesizes the Fitzgerald contraction, that
distance contracts with speed, accounting for the results of the
Michelson-Morley experiment.
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky begins theoretical work on rocket
propulsion and space flight.
James Dewar invents the Dewar flask.
Wilhelm Röntgen discovers X-rays.
Hendrik Antoon Lorentz extends Fitzgerald’s work, hypothesizing
that mass also increases with velocity, leading to the conclusion
that the speed of light is a universal maximum.
Charles Wilson invents the cloud chamber, which later becomes an
indispensable tool in the study of atomic particles.
Antoine Becquerel discovers spontaneous radioactivity.
Pieter Zeeman discovers the splitting of lines in a spectrum when
the spectrum’s source is exposed to a magnetic field, the Zeeman
effect, later used to study the fine details of atomic structure.
J. J.Thomson discovers the first subatomic particle, the
electron.
Marie and Pierre Curie demonstrate that uranium
radiation is an atomic phenomenon, not a molecular
phenomenon, and coin the word radioactivity.
Ernest Rutherford discovers two types of uranium radiation, alpha
rays (massive and positively charged) and beta rays (lighter and
negatively charged).
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 185
Year Country Event
1900 France
1900 Germany
1902 England
1904 England
1905 Switzerland
1905 Switzerland
1905 Switzerland
1905 Switzerland
1906 Germany
1908 England
1908 France
1911 England
1911 Netherlands
1911 USA
1912 Germany
1913 Denmark
Antoine-Henri Becquerel demonstrates that the process of
radioactivity consists partly of particles identical to the electron.
Max Planck discovers Planck’s Law of black body
radiation, introducing Planck’s constant and the concept
that energy is radiated in discrete packets called quanta,
founding quantum physics.
Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy demonstrate that uranium
and thorium break down into a series of radioactive intermediate
elements.
J. J. Thomson proposes the “plum-pudding” model of the atom in
which electrons are embedded in a sphere of positive electricity.
Albert Einstein’s “Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körpen”
introduces the special theory of relativity.
Albert Einstein shows that the assumption that light is quantized
can explain the photoelectric effect.
Albert Einstein deduces as a consequence of the special
theory of relativity that the mass of a body is a measure of
its energy content, expressed as E=mc 2
.
Albert Einstein explains Brownian motion mathematically, the
most convincing evidence to date for the existence of molecules
and atoms, and proposes a method to deduce the size of molecules
and atoms.
Hermann Nernst states the third law of thermodynamics, that all
bodies at absolute zero would have the same entropy, though
absolute zero cannot be perfectly attained.
Ernest Rutherford and Johannes Geiger invent an alpha-particle
counter.
Jean Perrin calculates atomic size from Brownian motion.
Ernest Rutherford, using experimental results from Ernst
Marsden and Johannes Geiger, proposes the concept of the
atomic nucleus, leading to the deduction of the true
nature of the atom.
Heike Kamerlingh-Onnes discovers superconductivity, the
disappearance of electrical resistance in certain substances
as they approach absolute zero.
Victor Hess discovers the phenomenon later called cosmic rays.
Max von Laue develops X-ray diffraction using crystals, founding
X-ray crystallography.
Niels Bohr applies quantum theory to the structure of the atom,
describing electron orbits and electron excitation and deexcitation.
186 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1913 England Frederick Soddy and Kasimir Fajans discover isotopes, leading to
the radioactive displacement law.
1913 USA Robert Millikan completes experiments determining the charge of
an electron, leading to the conclusion that the electron is the
fundamental unit of electricity.
1914 England Henry Moseley introduces the concept of atomic number, the
amount of positive charge on the nucleus, for classifying atoms.
1914 England Ernest Rutherford discovers the proton.
1916 Germany Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity describes
space as a curved field modified locally by the existence of
mass, replacing Newtonian ideas which invoke a force of
gravity, and derives the basic equations for the exchange
of energy between matter and radiation.
1919 England Francis Aston invents the mass spectrograph to measure the mass of
atoms.
1919 England Francis Aston discovers isotopes in non-radioactive elements and
states the whole-number rule.
1919 England Ernest Rutherford uses atomic bombardment to alter atomic
nuclei, transforming one element into another and constituting
the first nuclear reaction.
1923 France Louis de Broglie states that every particle should have an associated
matter wave whose wavelength is inversely related to the particle’s
momentum, providing an explanation for the wave-particle
duality of light.
1923 USA Arthur Compton discovers the Compton effect, whereby the
wavelength of X-rays and gamma rays increases following
collisions with electrons.
1925 Germany Wolfgang Pauli develops the exclusion principle, stating that in a
given atom no two electrons can have the identical set of four
quantum numbers.
1926 Austria Erwin Schrödinger develops the mathematics of wave mechanics,
including the Schrödinger wave equation.
1927 England Paul Dirac’s relativistically invariant form of the wave equation of
the electron unifies aspects of quantum mechanics and relativity
theory.
1927 Germany Werner Heisenberg’s “On the Intuitive Content of Quantum
Kinematics and Mechanics” introduces the uncertainty principle.
1928 Denmark Niels Bohr’s “The Philosophical Foundations of Quantum
Theory” introduces the principle of complementarity, arguing that
different but complementary models may be needed to explain the
full range of atomic and subatomic phenomena.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 187
Year Country Event
1930 England
1930 USA
1931 Switzerland
1932 England
1932 England
1932 USA
1933 Germany
1934 Russia
1934 USA
1935 Japan
1938 Germany
1940 USA
1942 USA
1943 USA
Japan
1945 Russia
USA
1947 England
1948 USA
Paul Dirac predicts the existence of antimatter.
Nils Edlefsen and Ernest Lawrence invent the cyclotron, an
instrument used to produce directed beams of charged particles
that transforms research into fine nuclear structure.
Wolfgang Pauli predicts the existence of the particle later named
the neutrino.
James Chadwick discovers the neutron.
John Cockroft achieves a nuclear reaction by splitting the atomic
nucleus.
Robert Millikan and Carl Anderson discover the positron, the first
antiparticle.
Ernst Ruska and Reinhold Ruedenberg invent an electron
microscope that is more powerful than a conventional light
microscope.
Pavel Cherenkov, Ilya Frank, and Igor Tamm discover and interpret
the Cherenkov effect, the wave of light produced by particles
apparently moving faster than the speed of light in a medium
other than a vacuum.
Enrico Fermi achieves the first nuclear fission reaction.
Hideki Yukawa predicts the existence of mesons as fundamental
carriers of the nuclear force field.
Otto Hahn and Friedrich Strassman split an atomic nucleus into
two parts by bombarding uranium-235 with neutrons.
Martin Kamen discovers carbon-14, the most useful of all the
radioactive tracers.
Enrico Fermi,Walter Zinn, and Herbert Anderson achieve
the first sustained nuclear reaction.
Richard Feynman, Julian Schwinger, and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga
independently work out the equations of quantum
electrodynamics governing the behavior of electrons and
electromagnetic reactions generally.
Edwin McMillan and Vladimir Veksler independently invent the
synchrotron.
Dennis Gabor develops the basic concept of holography, which
must wait on the laser for implementation.
John Bardeen,Walter Brattain, and William Shockley
discover the transistor effect.
Year Country Event
188 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
CENTRAL EVENTS IN MATHEMATICS
Year Country Event
–600 Greece
–520 Greece
–420 Greece
–350 Greece
–300 Alexandria
–260 Greece
–250 Greece
–232 Greece
50 Greece
98 Greece
250 Greece
490 China
500 India
700 India
810 Persia
870 Persia
1100 Persia
1120 England
Thales founds abstract geometry and deductive
mathematics with the “Thales Proposition” (triangles over
the diameter of a circle are right-angled), the oldest
theorem of occidental mathematics.
The Pythagorean theorem appears, allegedly proved by Pythagoras.
Hippias of Elis discovers the quadratix, the first known curve that
cannot be constructed with a straightedge and compass.
Menaechmus makes the first known attempt to investigate the
geometry of the cone.
Euclid’s Elements synthesizes and systematizes knowledge
of geometry.
Archimedes calculates the first known value for /.
Conon of Samos discovers the curve known as the spiral of
Archimedes.
Apollonius of Perga’s Conicorum presents a systematic treatment of
the principles of conics, introducing the terms parabola, ellipse, and
hyperbola.
Hero of Alexandria discovers the formula for expressing the area of
a triangle in terms of its sides.
Menelaus gives the first definition of a spherical triangle and
theorems on congruence of spherical triangles, founding spherical
trigonometry.
Diophantus discovers solutions to certain equations,
known as Diophantine equations, that represent the
beginnings of algebra.
Zu Chongzhi calculates that / lies between 3.1415926 and
3.1415927, by far the most accurate estimate of / to that time.
Aryabhatiya summarizes Indian mathematical knowledge.
Over the course of 8C, a full and consistent use of zero develops.
Al-Khwarizmi’s Hisab al-Jabr W’al-Musqabalah gives
methods for solving all equations of the first and second
degree with positive roots, synthesizes Babylonian with
Greek methods, and is the origin of the word algebra.
Thabit ibn Qurra translates Greek mathematical texts into Arabic.
His translations will become the major source for European
knowledge of Greek mathematics.
Omar Khayyàm is the first to solve some cubic equations.
Adelhard of Bath translates an Arabic version of Euclid’s Elements
into Latin, introducing Euclid to Europe.
Year Country Event
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 189
Year Country Event
1202 Italy
1350 France
1360 France
1464 Germany
1491 Italy
1494 Italy
1525 Austria
1535 Italy
1545 Italy
1551 Germany
1557 Wales
1572 Italy
1580 France
1585 Netherlands
1591 France
1613 Italy
1614 Scotland
1631 England
Leonardo Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci awakens Europe to the advantages
of Arabic numerals and computation.
Nicole Oresme anticipates coordinate geometry with a plot of
time against velocities.
Nicole Oresme introduces fractional exponents.
Regiomontus’s De Triangulis Omnimodus is the first systematic
European work on trigonometry as a subject divorced from
astronomy.
Filippo Calandri publishes an account of the modern method of
long division.
Luca Pacioli’s Summa de Arithmetica presents an overview of
mathematics handed down from the Middle Ages, becoming one
of the most influential mathematics books of its time. It is also the
first book to discuss double-entry bookkeeping.
Christoff Rudolff’s Die Coss introduces the square root symbol
and introduces decimal fractions.
Tartaglia discovers a general method for solving cubic equations.
Girolamo Cardano’s Ars Magna is the first book of modern
mathematics.
Rheticus prepares tables of standard trigonometric functions,
defining trigonometric functions for the first time as ratios of the
sides of a right triangle rather than defining them relative to the
arcs of circles.
Robert Recorde introduces an elongated version of the equal sign
into mathematics, and introduces the plus and minus signs into
English.
Rafael Bombelli introduces the first consistent theory of imaginary
numbers.
François Viète introduces a precise analytic definition of /.
Simon Stevin’s De Thiende presents a systematic account of how to
use decimal fractions.
François Viète introduces the systematic use of algebraic symbols.
Pietro Cataldi develops methods of working with continued
fractions.
John Napier’s Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio
introduces logarithms.
William Oughtred’s Clavis Mathematicae summarizes the status of
arithmetic and algebra, employing extensive mathematical
symbolism.
190 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1635 Italy
1637 France
1637 Netherlands
1637 Netherlands
1638 France
1640 France
1648 France
1654 France
1654 France
1655 England
1657 Netherlands
1662 England
1668 Belgium
1668 Scotland
1669 England
Germany
1670 England
1676 England
1685 England
Francesco Cavalieri’s Geometria Indivisibilibus Continuorum
expounds a method of using “indivisibles” that foreshadows
integral calculus.
Pierre de Fermat states his Last Theorem.
René Descartes’ “La Géométrie,” an appendix to Discours
de la Méthode, founds analytic geometry.
René Descartes’“La Géométrie” introduces exponents and square
root signs.
Pierre de Fermat achieves major progress toward differential
calculus, determining maxima and minima by procedures used
today.
Pierre de Fermat founds number theory through his work
on the properties of whole numbers.
Girard Desargues’s Manière Universelle de Mr. Desargues pour Pratiquer
la Perspective contains Desargues’s theorem, founding projective
geometry.
Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal found probability
theory with methods for judging the likelihood of
outcomes in games of dice.
Blaise Pascal’s “Traite du Triangle Arithmétique” analyzes the
properties of the arithmetical triangle.
John Wallis’s Arithmetica Infinitorium introduces concepts of limit
and negative and fractional exponents, along with the symbol for
infinity.
Christiaan Huygens introduces the concept of mathematical
expectation into probability theory.
John Graunt’s Natural and Political Observations Made upon the Bills
of Mortality is the first significant use of vital statistics.
Nicolus Mercator calculates the area under a curve, using analytical
geometry.
James Gregory introduces a precursor of the fundamental theorem
of calculus, expressed geometrically.
Isaac Newton’s De Analysi per Aequationes Numero
Terminorum Infinitas presents the first systematic account of
the calculus, independently developed by Gottfried
Leibniz.
Isaac Barrow discovers a method of tangents essentially equivalent
to those used in differential calculus.
Isaac Newton formally states the binomial theorem.
John Wallis introduces the first graphical representation of complex
numbers.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 191
Year Country Event
1687 England
1693 England
1704 England
1713 Switzerland
1715 England
1718 England
1720 Scotland
1731 France
1733 Italy
1770 France
1795 Germany
1796 Germany
1797 Norway
1799 France
1799 Germany
1801 Germany
1803 France
1807 France
Isaac Newton’s Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
appears, representing the origin of modern applied
mathematics.
Edmond Halley prepares the first detailed mortality tables.
Isaac Newton’s Enumberatio Linearum Tertii Ordinis describes the
properties of cubic curves.
Jakob Bernoulli’s Ars Conjectandi contains Bernoulli’s theorem, that
any degree of statistical accuracy can be obtained by sufficiently
increasing the observations, thereby also representing the first
application of calculus to probability theory.
Brook Taylor’s Methodus Incrementorum Directa et Inversa introduces
the calculus of finite differences.
Abraham de Moivre’s Doctrine of Chances is the first systematic
treatise on probability theory.
Colin Maclaurin’s Geometrica Organica describes the general
properties of planar curves.
Alexis Clairaut’s Recherches sur les Courbes à Double Courbure is a
pioneering study of the differential geometry of space curves.
Girolamo Saccheri’s Euclides ab Omni Naevo Vindicatus
inadvertently lays the foundation for non-Euclidean geometry.
Johann Lambert demonstrates that both / and /2 are irrational.
Carl Gauss proves the law of quadratic reciprocity.
Carl Gauss discovers a method for constructing a heptadecagon
with compass and straightedge and demonstrates that an
equilateral heptagon could not be constructed the same way,
constituting the only notable advance in classic geometry since
ancient Greece.
Caspar Wessel introduces the first geometric representation of
complex numbers employing the x-axis as the axis of reals and the
y-axis as the axis of imaginaries.
Gaspard Monge introduces advances in projecting threedimensional objects onto two-dimensional planes, founding
descriptive geometry.
Carl Gauss presents a new and rigorous proof of the fundamental
theorem of algebra.
Carl Gauss’s Disquisitiones Arithmeticae expands number
theory to embrace algebra, analysis, and geometry.
Lazare Carnot’s Géométrie de Position revives and extends projective
geometry.
Jean Fourier introduces Fourier’s theorem and the beginnings of
Fourier analysis.
192 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1810 France Joseph Gergonne’s Annales de Mathématiques Pures et Appliqués is
one of the first periodicals devoted to mathematics and becomes
highly influential.
1812 France Pierre Laplace’s Théorie Analytique des Probabilités introduces the
Laplace transform and expands the power of probability theory.
1813 France Siméon Poisson derives the Poisson distribution.
1817 Czechoslovakia Bernardus Bolzano develops calculus using a continuous function,
dispensing with infinitesimals.
1822 France Fourier’s Théorie Analytique de la Chaleur gives a full presentation
of Fourier’s dimensional analysis, using mass, time, and length as
fundamental dimensions that must be expressed in consistent
units.
1822 France Jean Poncelet’s Traité des Propriétés Projectives des Figures serves as a
foundation of modern geometry.
1823 Hungary János Bolyai develops the first consistent system of non-Euclidean
geometry, but publication is delayed until 1832.
1824 Norway Niels Abel proves the impossibility of a general solution for quintic equations.
1825 France Adrien Legendre’s Traité des Fonctions Elliptiques et des Intégrales
Eulériennes presents a systematic account of his theory of elliptic
integrals.
1825 France Jean Poncelet and Joseph Gergonne develop the first clear expression of the principle of duality in geometry.
1825 Norway Niels Abel creates elliptic functions and discovers their double
periodicity.
1829 Russia Nikolai Lobachevsky introduces hyperbolic geometry,
replacing Euclid’s parallel postulate and founding one of
the most important systems of non-Euclidean geometry.
1830 France Évariste Galois develops group theory, critical later for
quantum mechanics.
1843 Ireland William Hamilton introduces quaternions (algebra with hypercomplex numbers).
1844 Germany Hermann Grassmann’s theory of “extended magnitude” generalizes quaternions, creating an algebra of vectors.
1847 England George Boole’s The Mathematical Analysis of Logic introduces
Boolean algebra, systematically applying algebraic operations to logic.
1851 Germany Bernhard Riemann introduces topological considerations into the
study of complex functions and lays the basis for Riemann surfaces.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 193
Year Country Event
1854 Germany Bernhard Riemann’s Über die Hypothesen Welche der Geometrie zu
Grunde Liegen introduces a new non-Euclidean geometry and
accelerates the acceptance and potential utility of non-Euclidean
geometries.
1857 England Arthur Cayley introduces the algebra of matrices.
1872 Germany Felix Klein’s “Erlanger Programm” calls for geometry to be based
on groups of transformations.
1872 Germany Richard Dedekind introduces theory that any rational or irrational number can be defined in terms of rationals.
1873 France August Hermite proves that e is transcendental.
1874 Germany Georg Cantor’s first formal publication on set theory
founds the field.
1881 USA Josiah Gibbs’s Elements of Vector Analysis introduces a system of vectors in three dimensions.
1882 Germany Carl Lindemann proves that / is transcendental.
1883 Germany Georg Cantor introduces transfinite set theory.
1884 Sweden Sonya Kovalevskaya demonstrates that certain kinds of Abelian
integrals can be expressed in terms of simpler elliptic integrals.
1895 France Henri Poincaré’s Analysis Situs effectively founds topology
(although a few theorems of topology had already been proved).
1899 Germany David Hilbert’s Grundlagen der Geometrie establishes the basic
axiomatic-formalist approach to systematizing mathematics, initiated by compactly deriving a formal axiomatic model for Euclid’s
geometry.
1902 France Henri Lebesgue introduces a new theory for integrating discontinuous functions.
1906 France Maurice Fréchet introduces a geometry of abstract spaces and the
concepts of separability and completeness.
1910 England Bertrand Russell’s and Alfred Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica
represents the best, though flawed, attempt to establish mathematics as branch of logic.
1931 Austria Kurt Gödel demonstrates that any formal system strong enough to
include the laws of arithmetic is either incomplete or inconsistent.
1934 Russia Aleksander Gelfond and T. Schneider demonstrate that an irrational power of an algebraic number other than zero or one is
transcendental.
1936 England Alan Turing’s “On Computable Numbers” develops the
hypothetical Turing machine as a method of determining what
kinds of mathematical results can be proved.
Year Country Event
194 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
CENTRAL EVENTS IN MEDICINE
Year Country Event
–400 Greece Hippocrates and his followers develop the empirical study
of disease, distancing medicine from religion.
20 Rome Celsus’s De Medicina is one of earliest medical texts and is used for
centuries.
70 Rome Dioscorides’s De Materia Medica, covering 600 plants and 1,000
drugs, is the first systematic pharmacopoeia.
180 Greece Galen writes medical texts that are treated as authoritative for the
next 13 centuries.
1320 France Henry of Mondeville’s Chirurgia advocates use of sutures, cleansing of wounds, limitation of supperation, and wine dressing for
wounds.
1530 Germany Paracelsus pioneers the application of chemistry to physiology, pathology, and the treatment of disease.
1538 Italy Girolamo Fracastero’s De Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis is the
first explanation of the spread of infectious disease that invokes
analogues of microbes or germs as a cause.
1545 France Ambroise Paré’s Méthode de Traicter les Plaies discourages the practice of cauterizing wounds and introduces ligature for stopping
arterial bleeding.
1665 England Richard Lower attempts the first blood transfusion, between dogs.
1710 France Dominique Anel invents the suction syringe for surgical purposes.
1736 England Claudius Aymand conducts the first successful appendectomy.
1747 Scotland James Lind uses a controlled dietary study to establish that citrus
cures scurvy.
1761 Austria Leopold Auenbrugger introduces the use of percussion for medical diagnosis.
1775 England William Withering discovers digitalis.
1776 England Matthew Dobson proves that the sweetness of diabetics’ urine is
caused by the presence of sugar.
1784 USA Benjamin Franklin invents bifocal lenses.
1796 England Edward Jenner systematizes vaccination for smallpox,
founding immunology.
1800 England Humphrey Davy explores the physiological properties of nitrous
oxide and recommends its use as an anesthetic.
1801 France Philippe Pinel’s Traité Médico-Philosophique sur l’Alienation Mentale
ou la Manie is an early and influential empirical study of mental
illness.
1816 France René Laënnec invents the stethoscope.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 195
Year Country Event
1831 Germany Justis von Liebig, Eugene Soubeiran, and, later, Samuel Guthrie,
France independently prepare chloroform.
USA
1846 USA William Morton popularizes the use of ether through a
demonstration at Massachusetts General Hospital.
1847 Germany Ignaz Semmelweiss and the elder Oliver Wendell Holmes
USA independently argue that puerperal fever is a contagious disease
caused by attending physicians.
1849 England John Snow uses epidemiological data to demonstrate that cholera
is spread by contaminated water.
1849 England Thomas Addison describes the disease of the adrenal glands known
as Addison’s disease.
1851 Germany Hermann Helmholtz invents the ophthalmoscope.
1853 Scotland Alexander Wood and Charles Pravaz invent the hypodermic
France syringe.
1854 England Florence Nightingale founds modern nursing practice.
1856 France Louis Pasteur invents pasteurization.
1862 France Louis Pasteur gains acceptance for the germ theory of
disease, transforming the course of medical research and
practice.
1863 France Casimir Davaine discovers the microorganism that causes anthrax,
the first linkage of a disease with a specific microorganism.
1863 Germany Johann Baeyer discovers barbituric acid, the first barbiturate.
1865 England Joseph Lister introduces phenol as a disinfectant in
surgery, reducing the death rate from 45 to 15 percent.
1865 France Claude Bernard’s Introduction à l’Etude de la Médecine Expérimental is
instrumental in establishing medicine as a science with
observation, hypothesis, and experimentation.
1874 USA Andrew Still discovers that dislocations of the vertebrae are a
source of disease, founding osteopathy.
1876 Germany Robert Koch demonstrates that bacilli are the cause of anthrax.
1881 France Louis Pasteur invents anthrax inoculation, the first effective
treatment of an infectious disease with an antibacterial
vaccine.
1881 Austria Christian Billroth successfully excises a cancerous pylorus,
beginning intestinal surgery; sometimes said to be the beginning
of the modern era of surgery.
1881 Germany Robert Koch introduces steam sterilization.
1881 USA William Halsted conducts the first known human blood
transfusion.
196 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1882 Germany
1884 Austria
1884 England
1884 Germany
1885 France
1887 France
1890 Germany
1891 Germany
Japan
France
1893 USA
1896 Germany
1896 Germany
1896 Italy
1896 Netherlands
1897 England
1899 Sweden
1901 Netherlands
1902 USA
1903 Netherlands
1904 Germany
1905 Germany
1906 England
1909 Germany
Japan
1910 USA
1911 USA
Robert Koch isolates the tubercle bacillus.
Sigmund Freud and Carl Koller use cocaine as a local anesthetic.
Rickman Godlee surgically removes a brain tumor.
Edwin Klebs and Friedrich Löffler isolate the bacterium for
diphtheria and identify it as the causative agent.
Louis Pasteur invents a rabies vaccine.
Augustus Waller records the electrical activity of the heart,
founding electrocardiology.
Emil von Behring develops the first antitoxin, for tetanus.
Emil von Behring, Kitasato Shibasaburo, and Émile Roux develop
an antitoxin for diphtheria.
Daniel Williams conducts the first successful heart surgery on a
human.
Hermann Strauss introduces X-rays for diagnostic purposes.
Ludwig Rehn successfully sutures a wound in a human heart.
Scipione Riva-Rocci invents the mercury sphygmomanometer,
the precursor of modern version.
Christiaan Eijkman discovers that beriberi is caused by a dietary
deficiency.
Ronald Ross discovers the malaria parasite in the anopheles
mosquito.
Tage Sjogren achieves the first proven cure of a patient by X-ray
treatment.
Gerrit Grijns discovers that the cause of beriberi is removal of an
essential nutrient in polished rice.
Alexis Carrel introduces suturing for blood vessels.
Willem Einthoven invents the forerunner of the
electrocardiogram.
Alfred Einhorn invents Novocaine.
Fritz Schaudinn and Erich Hoffmann discover the spirocheta
pallida, the cause of syphilis.
Frederick Hopkins discovers that food contains ingredients
essential to life that are not proteins or carbohydrates,
leading to the discovery of vitamins.
Paul Ehrlich and Sahachiro Hata discover salvarsan, an
effective treatment for syphilis, founding modern
chemotherapy.
Frank Woodbury introduces iodine as a disinfectant for wounds.
Russell Hibbs conducts a successful spinal fusion operation.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 197
Year Country Event
1913 USA Elmer McCollum and Marguerite Davis discover and isolate
vitamin A.
1915 Japan K. Yamagiwa and K. Ichikawa identify the first carcinogen by
exposing rabbits to coal tar.
1916 USA Jay McLean discovers the anti-coagulant heparin.
1920 USA Harvey Cushing and W. T. Bowie introduce cauterization of blood
vessels in surgery.
1921 Canada Frederick Banting, Charles Best, and James Collip invent a method
for isolating insulin and injecting it in patients.
1921 USA Elmer McCollum and Edward Mellanby discover an antiricketic
substance in cod liver oil and name it vitamin D.
1926 USA George Minot and William Murphy successfully treat pernicious
anemia with liver.
1928 England Alexander Fleming discovers penicillin, the first antibiotic.
1928 USA George Papanicolaou invents the pap test for diagnosing uterine
cancer.
1929 USA Philip Drinker, Louis Shaw, and Alexis Carrel invent an artificial
respirator (the iron lung).
1932 Germany Gerhard Domagk discovers that prontosil has antibacterial
properties.
1934 USA John and Mary Gibbon invent a heart-lung machine.
1938 England Philip Wiles conducts a total artificial hip replacement, using
stainless steel.
1939 England Howard Florey and Ernst Chain isolate the antibacterial agent in
penicillin mold.
1939 USA Karl Landsteiner, Philip Levine, and Alexander Weiner discover the
connection between the RH factor and pathology in newborns.
1941 USA André Cournand, Werner Forssmann, and Dickinson Richards
Germany introduce cardiac catheterization.
1943 USA Selman Waksman, William Feldman, and Corwin Hinshaw
discover streptomycin, the first antibiotic effective in treating
tuberculosis.
1943 USA Willem Kolff invents the dialysis machine.
1944 USA Alfred Blalock, Helen Taussig,Vivien Thomas, and Edgar Sanford
conduct the first “blue baby” operation, correcting the blood
supply to the lungs of an infant.
1945 USA John Frisch and Francis Bull initiate the fluoridation of water.
1948 USA Benjamin Duggar and Albert Dornbush discover the tetracycline
group of antibiotics.
1950 USA Richard Lawler conducts a successful kidney transplant between
two live humans.
Year Country Event
198 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
CENTRAL EVENTS IN TECHNOLOGY
Year Country Event
–400 China
Egypt
–270 Greece
–245 Levant
–200 Asia Minor
1 China
100 China
250 China
300 China
984 China
1045 China
1502 Germany
1556 Germany
1589 England
1603 England
1622 England
1642 France
1656 Netherlands
1679 France
1690 France
1693 Germany
1698 England
1699 England
1709 England
First known use of the abacus.
Sostrates builds the first known lighthouse, the Pharos of
Alexandria.
First known glass blowing.
First known use of parchment.
Chinese engineers invent the sternpost rudder, enabling efficient
steering of large vessels.
First known use of paper for writing (earlier versions had been
used for packing and other purposes).
First gunpowder (date uncertain).
First known use of stirrups.
Chinese engineers invent locks for canals.
Bi Sheng invents movable type, reinvented by Gutenberg in
Germany, 1440.
Peter Henlein invents the mainspring in a pocket watch (and
invents the pocket watch itself ).
Georgius Agricola’s De re Metallica is for centuries the best text on
mining.
William Lee invents the stocking frame, the basis for all subsequent
knitting and lace-making machines.
Hugh Platt discovers coke, essential to steel production.
William Oughtred invents the slide rule by repositioning Gunter’s
scales.
Blaise Pascal invents a calculating machine, the Pascaline, that can
handle up to nine-digit numbers.
Christiaan Huygens invents the pendulum escapement and thereby
invents the pendulum clock.
Denis Papin invents the pressure cooker.
Denis Papin invents the atmospheric engine, pioneering many
design principles of the steam engine.
Gottfried von Leibniz invents an improved calculator for
multiplication and division.
Thomas Savery invents the Miner’s Friend, a practical atmospheric
steam engine without a piston.
Jethro Tull invents the modern seed drill.
Abraham Darby successfully uses coke in iron smelting.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 199
Year Country Event
1712 England Thomas Newcomen uses steam to push a piston.
1731 England John Hadley invents the reflecting octant, precursor of the modern
sextant, which follows in 1757.
1733 England John Kay invents flying shuttle, an important step toward
automatic weaving.
1740 England Benjamin Huntsman develops the crucible method for making
homogeneous steel (Sheffield steel), with high tensile strength.
1742 USA Benjamin Franklin invents the Franklin stove, a major
improvement in heating efficiency.
1750 USA Benjamin Franklin invents the lightning rod.
1764 England James Hargreaves invents the spinning jenny, which does the work
of 30 spinning wheels.
1764 Scotland James Watt invents the condenser, employing latent heat to
improve the efficiency of the steam engine, the first of
several improvements that create the modern steam
engine.
1765 England John Harrison completes 40 years of refinement of an
accurate ship’s chronometer, enabling the determination
of longitude and revolutionizing navigational techniques.
1769 England Richard Arkwright invents the water frame, a waterwheeldriven device that powers multiple spinning machines and
a foundation of the modern factory system.
1770 England Richard Arkwright, Samuel Need, and Jedediah Strutt open a
water-driven mill at Cromford, the start of the factory system.
1776 England John Wilkinson invents the first precision boring machine, essential
for the manufacture of cylinders for steam engines.
1779 England Abraham Darby III and John Wilkinson build an all-iron bridge at
Coalbrookdale.
1781 Scotland James Watt invents a governor for a steam engine and uses a sunand-planet gear to use a steam engine to drive a wheel.
1782 Scotland James Watt and Jonathan Hornblower invent a double-acting steam
England engine in which steam is admitted alternatively on both sides of
the piston.
1783 France L. S. Lenormand, Jean Blanchard, and André Gernerin invent the
first parachute capable of carrying a human.
1783 France The Montgolfier brothers conduct the first manned flight of a hot
air balloon.
1785 France Claude Berthollet invents chemical bleach (chlorine and potash).
1785 USA Oliver Evans invents an elevator to move grain, automating the
process and requiring only two workers.
200 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1787 USA John Fitch invents a working steamboat.
1793 USA Eli Whitney invents the cotton gin, revolutionizing the economics
of cotton production.
1795 France Nicolas Appert discovers that food can be preserved by heating,
leading to the invention of canned food.
1796 Bohemia Aloys Senefelder invents lithography.
1800 Italy Alessandro Volta invents the voltaic cell, the first battery.
1804 England Richard Trevithick uses a steam locomotive on rails to pull iron
from an ironworks to the Glamorgan canal.
1805 France Joseph-Marie Jacquard invents punch cards to create patterns with
the Jacquard loom, the first nonalphabetic means of storing
information.
1807 USA Robert Fulton builds the first commercially successful
steamboat.
1814 England George Stephenson invents a practical steam locomotive.
1815 Scotland John McAdam invents the modern paved road.
1820 USA Cyrus McCormick, Obed Hussey, and Patrick Bell invent
Scotland independent versions of the mechanical reaper in the course of the
decade.
1822 France Joseph Niépce creates the first permanent photograph.
1824 England Joseph Aspdin invents Portland cement.
1825 England Stephenson begins the first rail service using a steam locomotive.
1831 England Michael Faraday invents the electric generator.
1831 USA Joseph Henry invents a practical electric motor.
1833 England Charles Babbage designs an “analytic engine,” programmed by
punch cards, that is the conceptual origin of the computer.
1835 USA Samuel Colt invents the Colt revolver.
1836 England John Daniell invents the Daniell cell, the first modern battery.
1830 USA William Cooke, Charles Wheatstone, and Samuel Morse
England independently invent the telegraph in the course of the
decade.
1839 England William Grove invents the fuel cell, producing electricity by
combining hydrogen and oxygen.
1839 France Louis Daguerre invents the camera and plates that make
photography practical.
1839 Scotland Kirkpatrick Macmillan invents the first true bicycle.
1839 USA Charles Goodyear invents vulcanization, revolutionizing the utility
of rubber.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 201
Year Country Event
1841 England William Fox-Talbot invents a photographic negative that permits
unlimited paper positives.
1842 England John Lawes invents the first chemical fertilizer.
1843 England Isambard Brunel builds a propeller-driven, iron, transatlantic liner.
1843 England John Lawes founds the Rothamsted Experimental Station for
improving agricultural production, introducing rigorous
experimental procedures and field trials.
1844 USA Samuel Morse creates the first functioning telegraph line, from
Washington to Baltimore.
1845 Germany Christian Schönbein invents nitrocellulose, or gun cotton.
1846 USA Elias Howe invents a two-thread, lock-stitch sewing machine.
1847 Italy Ascanio Sobrero prepares nitroglycerine.
1851 USA Isaac Singer invents an improved sewing machine with treadle and
lock stitch.
1852 France Henri Giffard conducts the first successful flight of a powered
airship (a steam powered dirigible).
1852 France Jean Foucault invents a gyroscope that can be used as a substitute
for a magnetic compass.
1852 USA Elisha Otis invents the safety elevator.
1853 England Abraham Gesner and James Young invent kerosene.
1853 England George Cayley invents a glider that accomplishes the first
unpowered, manned flight in a heavier-than-air vehicle.
1854 France Robert Bunsen and Henri St.-Claire Deville develop an
Germany electrolytic process for obtaining metallic aluminum from sodium
aluminum chloride.
1856 England Henry Bessemer and William Kelly invent the Bessemer process
USA for manufacturing steel.
1856 England William Perkin invents a synthetic dye (mauve), founding the
synthetic organic chemical industry.
1859 France Gaston Planté invents the rechargeable storage battery.
1859 USA Edwin Drake drills the first successful oil well, in Titusville,
Pennsylvania.
1859 USA George Pullman invents the sleeping car.
1860 France Jean Lenoir invents a practical internal combustion engine.
1861 France Eugene Meyer and Pierre Michaux invent the chain-driven
bicycle.
1865 England Alexander Parkes creates laboratory samples of celluloid.
1865 USA Linus Yale invents the pin-tumbler cylinder lock.
202 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1866 Sweden Alfred Nobel invents dynamite.
1866 USA Cyrus Field lays the first successful transatlantic telegraph cable.
1867 France Georges Leclanché invents the forerunner of an easily manufactured
dry cell battery.
1867 USA Carlos Glidden and Christopher Sholes invent the first commercially
practical typewriter.
1868 USA George Westinghouse invents an automatic air brake for railroad cars.
1869 Belgium Zénobe Gramme and Ernst Siemens develop and manufacture a
DC dynamo.
1869 France Ferdinand de Lesseps supervises the design and construction of the
Suez Canal.
1869 USA John Hyatt invents a commercially successful plastic (celluloid).
1876 Germany Nikolaus Otto invents the four-stroke cycle basic to modern
combustion engines.
1876 USA Alexander Bell and Elisha Gray independently invent the
telephone.
1877 USA Thomas Edison invents the phonograph.
1878 England Thomas Edison and Joseph Swan independently invent the
USA carbon filament incandescent bulb.
1880 USA Herman Hollerith invents the first workable electromechanical
calculator, used to automate tabulation of the 1890 U.S. Census.
1883 France Louis de Chardonnet invents the first synthetic fabric, rayon.
1883 USA Nikola Tesla invents a motor using alternating current.
1884 England Charles Parsons invents a successful steam turbine.
1884 USA Lewis Waterman invents the free-flowing fountain pen.
1884 USA Ottmar Mergenthaler invents the linotype machine.
1885 Germany Carl Benz invents the first true automobile.
1885 USA William Stanley invents a transformer for shifting voltage and amperage.
1886 France Charles Hall and Paul Héroult invent an inexpensive method for
USA extracting aluminum.
1887 Scotland John Dunlop invents the pneumatic rubber tire.
1888 USA George Eastman invents the Kodak camera.
1889 England Frederick Abel and James Dewar invent cordite, leading to
smokeless gunpowder.
1889 USA Thomas Edison invents the motion picture camera.
1891 USA Edward Acheson invents carborundum, the first industrial abrasive.
1892 Germany Rudolf Diesel invents the diesel engine.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 203
Year Country Event
1900 Germany
1901 Italy
1903 USA
1904 USA
1906 USA
1908 Germany
1908 USA
1909 USA
Scotland
1911 Switzerland
1911 USA
Germany
1911 USA
1912 Germany
1914 USA
1917 USA
1918 USA
1921 USA
1923 USA
1926 USA
1926 USA
1927 USA
1929 Germany
1929 USA
1930 England
1930 USA
Ferdinand Zeppelin begins the first airline, using rigid airships.
Guglielmo Marconi broadcasts radio waves from England
to Newfoundland.
The Wright brothers’ airplane achieves the first successful
powered flight by a heavier-than-air machine.
John Fleming invents the rectifier, the first radio tube.
Lee De Forest invents the amplifier vacuum tube.
Fritz Haber invents a process, later perfected by Carl
Bosch, for mass production of nitrates, which in turn
permits mass production of fertilizers (and explosives).
Henry Ford invents the assembly line.
Leo Baekeland and James Swinburne independently invent a
thermosetting plastic.
Jacques Brandenberge invents cellophane.
Elmer Sperry and Hermann Anschutz-Kämpfer independently
invent the gyrocompass.
Charles Kettering invents an electric starter for cars.
Friedrich Bergius invents a process to produce gasoline from coal
hydrogenation.
The Panama Canal is completed.
Clarence Birdseye and Charles Seabrook invent a technique for
quick-freezing foods, founding the frozen food industry.
Edwin Armstrong invents the superheterodyne receiver,
making home radio receivers possible.
Thomas Midgley, Jr., invents tetraethyl lead, an anti-knock
compound for gasoline.
Vladimir Zworykin invents the iconoscope, the precursor
of the television tube.
Robert Goddard invents the liquid-fuel rocket.
Samuel Warner introduces a motion picture system that integrates
sound into the film.
Charles Lindbergh pilots the first nonstop flight from the United
States to continental Europe.
Fritz Pfleumer invents magnetic recording of sound.
Edwin Armstrong invents frequency modulation (FM), a method
of transmitting radio waves without static; perfected in 1933.
Frank Whittle invents the jet engine.
Thomas Midgley, Jr., discovers freon, the refrigerant.
204 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Year Country Event
1930 USA
1931 USA
1932 USA
1935 Scotland
1936 USA
Germany
1938 USA
1938 USA
1939 Germany
1939 Switzerland
1940 USA
1943 France
1943 USA
1945 England
1946 USA
1946 USA
1947 USA
1947 USA
1948 USA
1948 USA
1950 England
Vannevar Bush invents a machine capable of solving differential
equations.
Wallace Carothers invents nylon.
Edwin Land invents a synthetic substance that will polarize light,
leading to the first synthetic light-polarizing film.
Robert Watson-Watt invents a way to display radio wave
information on a cathode ray tube, enabling the development of
radar.
Igor Sikorsky and Heinrich Foch independently invent a
successful helicopter.
Roy Plunkett invents Teflon.
The Biro brothers invent the first workable ballpoint pen.
Hans Ohain designs the first successful jet plane.
Paul Müller discovers the insecticidal properties of DDT.
George Stibitz invents the Complex Number Calculator, the first
machine to service more than one terminal and to be used via a
remote location.
Jacques Cousteau and Émile Gagnan invent the aqualung.
Martin Whitaker and Eugene Wigner lead the construction of the
first operational nuclear reactor.
Arthur Clarke conceptualizes the use of satellites for global
communication.
ENIAC, the first entirely electronic computer, developed
by John Eckert, John Mauchly, Arthur Burks, and John von
Neumann, becomes fully operational.
Arthur Burks, John von Neumann, and Herman
Goldstine’s “Preliminary Discussion of the Logical Design
of an Electronic Computing Instrument” provides the
conceptual foundation for computer development in the
coming decades.
Charles Yeager pilots the first supersonic flight.
Edwin Land, Howard Rogers, and William McCune invent the
Polaroid camera.
John Bardeen,Walter Houser, and William Shockley invent
the transistor.
Peter Goldmark invents the long-playing record.
Alan Turing creates the Turing test, establishing a criterion for
judging artificial intelligence.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 205
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS IN THE ARTS
This is the place where you might reasonably expect to find a list of the 500
or perhaps 5,000 most famous works of art, music, and literature, using the
same methods I employed to identify the most eminent artists, composers,
and authors. But I have no such lists to offer.
The nature of great accomplishment in the arts is fundamentally different from great accomplishment in the sciences. The distinction goes back to
a point I made in the discussion of great people in the arts and sciences (see
page 144): In the arts, eminence arises from genius manifested in a body of
work, whereas eminence in the sciences arises from the importance of the
discovery, which may or may not be the result of genius. The practical result
is that the techniques that work for measuring the eminence of artists do not
work for measuring the importance of specific artistic creations, nor do the
techniques that work for identifying the most important events in the
sciences work for identifying the most important events in the arts.
Suppose, for example, we count the number of times a given work of
art appears as a plate in nine major histories of Western art, taking as our
hypothesis that the pictures that appear the most often will also be the most
important ones. The hypothesis quickly falls apart. We start with the only
three works of art that were shown in all nine art histories: Michelangelo’s
ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, Leonardo’s Last Supper, and Bernini’s sculpture
Ecstasy of St.Theresa.[7] The first two are plausibly among the most important
works of Western art, but it is odd to see Ecstasy of St. Theresa in their
company. A great work, but plausibly in the top three?
Then we come to the works that appear in eight out of the nine art
histories. They were Velazquez’s Las Meninas, one or another of the pages of
the Limbourg brothers’ illuminations for Les Très Riches Heures du Duc de
Berry, Ghiberti’s Gates of Paradise on the north baptistery door of the Florence
cathedral, Edvard Munch’s Scream, and Theodore Gericault’s Raft of the
Medusa. All are important works, and at least two, Las Meninas and Gates of
Paradise, attract extravagant praise in many art histories. The others are among
the finest representatives of a movement or genre—but that’s why they are
shown so often, not because anyone thought they belonged at the very apex
of artistic greatness. Thus the first and obvious difference between a list of art
works and the index of artists: Whatever quibbles one might have with the
precise ordering of a list of great artists in the Western art inventory, all the
people who are near the top belong somewhere near the top. The same
cannot be said of all the works of art that are near the top. The ordering
206 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
of Western artists has high face validity, whereas the ordering of works of
Western art does not.
These results could be improved through a close textual analysis of all
the sources. One could give extra weight to text that had adjectives such as
“pivotal,”“momentous,”or “seminal” attached, for example. But even though
it may well be possible to produce a statistically satisfactory catalog of the
most important works of art, a deeper problem ought to keep us from making
too much of it. The reason goes to this fundamental substantive difference
between artistic and scientific accomplishment, a difference that no amount
of methodological fine tuning can circumvent:
In recounting the history of science, events can rarely be substituted for
one another. The historian of science may choose which events he thinks
merit inclusion, but he cannot choose among three or four different versions
of the same event. Even in the case of simultaneous independent discoveries,
such as the development of the calculus, the stories of Leibniz and Newton
are each about the same step forward. In contrast, the historian of the arts has
many choices, because there are so many more great works than great artists.
For example, Rembrandt is represented by 29 different paintings in the nine
sources used to compile specific works of art, but only one of those paintings,
Night Watch, is shown in even a bare majority of those sources. Twenty-one of
the 29 works are shown in a single source. Rembrandt’s greatness can be
demonstrated by many combinations of works.
The same distinction applies to the portrayal of genres. An art historian
has no choice about whether to give substantial attention to French Impressionism. It is too important to ignore. He does not have the option of
discussing French Impressionism without mentioning Cézanne, Manet,
Monet, Renoir, and van Gogh. But he can use dozens of paintings as exemplars of Impressionism. To be specific, the nine art sources contain 97 different paintings by the five Impressionists I just mentioned, but only four of
those 97 are shown in even a majority of the sources. Neither Cézanne nor
van Gogh has a single painting that is shown in more than four of the nine
sources. Both Cézanne and van Gogh produced paintings regarded as among
the greatest of that era, but they produced so many that any given pair of
histories is unlikely to have chosen the same ones.
A multitude of choices is not the only barrier to measuring the stature
of a given work. Any attempt to compile a catalog also runs into the confusion between great and significant. The Impressionist work with the most
frequent appearance in art histories is Seurat’s Un Dimanche Après-Midi à l’Île
de la Grande Jatte, shown in seven sources. It is widely considered to be
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I: SIGNIFICANT EVENTS • 207
Seurat’s masterpiece, but it stands out in part because it was a big fish in a
small pond—Pointillism was a fashion of brief duration relative to the broader
development of modern art. The less important the genre, the more likely
that a few of the best works will stand out.
Similarly, great literary and musical works can get lost in the crowd. In
a comprehensive history of literature, Shakespeare is a sure bet to be allotted
more space than any other single author, but the amount of attention given
to any one of his plays may have little to do with its stature. If the historian
spends several paragraphs on King Lear, he is less likely to give a detailed
account of Macbeth. All histories of music discuss Beethoven’s contribution to
the symphonic form, but the choices among his nine symphonies vary widely
across histories and are not necessarily based on the symphonies that the
historian thinks are the best. Paul Lang’s Music in Western Civilization spends
many pages on Beethoven and the symphony but comparatively little on
the famous Fifth Symphony. And yet among the brief comments is this one:
“The Fifth Symphony does not require discussion; it will remain the
symphony, the consummate example of symphonic logic.”8 Clearly, it would
be a bad idea to try to rank Beethoven’s symphonies based on the space that
Lang devotes to them.
Finally, there is the question of shifting popularity. Dean Simonton has
used the same dataset to demonstrate both that an underlying consistency of
aesthetic judgment exists and that the popularity of specific works is subject
to shifts in fashion.9 But complementary studies consistently demonstrate that
the reputations of complete bodies of work by creative individuals are stable.10
Simonton offers as a specific case in point Handel, whose operas fell out of
favor for a time. “Yet his oratorios, concerti grossi, orchestral suites, and other
masterpieces kept him from falling from the highest ranks until his operas
”11 enjoyed a substantial revival in the present century.
So while it would be great fun if I could give you lists of the top paintings or novels, I cannot, nor can I give you any other means by which you
can compare War and Peace’s place in the pantheon of novels with that of
Middlemarch, or see exactly how far down the list Pachelbel’s Canon stands
with the experts. The building block of the sciences is the discovery. The
building block of the arts is the artist.
TEN
THE EVENTS
THAT MATTER II:
META-INVENTIONS
In 1884 an Anglican clergyman named Edwin Abbott published Flatland,a
little book that remains in print today, in which his narrator describes a
world consisting of just two dimensions, complete with social classes, religion, and family life. The narrator himself is of the middle class, a Square. The
dramatic climax of the book occurs when a three-dimensional object, a
Sphere, visits Flatland and takes the narrator into the world of Space. “I
looked, and, behold, a new world!” exclaims the Square, able to look down for
first time.1 A dimension that had been inconceivable moments earlier had
become part of his mental repertoire.
This chapter is about rare points in the history of human accomplishment when similar reconceptualizations occurred in the arts and sciences.
Over spans of time ranging from a few decades in some cases to a few
centuries in others, the dimensionality of a domain in the arts and sciences
changed, opening up new realms of potential accomplishment. I call this
handful of accomplishments meta-inventions.
By meta-invention, I mean the introduction of a new cognitive tool for
dealing with the world around us. Cognitive tool, not physical tool. The
essence of a meta-invention resides within the human brain. A cognitive tool
is one that, once known, can be forgotten (recall Chapter 2), but not stolen
or physically lost. It is necessary to know some form of technology to reproduce a physical tool that has been taken away. It is not necessary to know any
technology to retain a cognitive tool—it is necessary only to remember it.
But if a meta-invention is in the mind, everything new that develops in
the mind is not necessarily a meta-invention. Here, explicitly, are the criteria
I have applied:
210 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
• The essence of a meta-invention is an idea, not a thing.
• A meta-invention is literally an invention—a creation that occurred
in one or more human societies but not in all of them.
• A meta-invention does not have a single application, but rather
enables humans to do a class of new things.
• A meta-invention is followed by transforming changes in practice
and achievement.
The printing press does not qualify as a meta-invention, nor the wheel,
nor hay. Each had enormous consequences and each was the product of
human intellect, but none was a cognitive tool. At the other extreme is a set
of cognitive tools that were not inventions in any meaningful sense of that
word. Human language is an example. Language is the cognitive tool sine qua
non, but it occurred in every human tribe at its earliest known level of development. It is better classified as an inevitable outcome of the human brain
than as something humans could invent or fail to invent.2
Diffuse cultural attributes are not meta-inventions. As examples, consider Western individualism and Chinese Daoism. The importance of the
complex of beliefs that we call Western individualism is surely on a par with
any other cultural development in history. Individualism is often argued
to have been a decisive factor in the ascendancy of Western civilization, a
position with which I agree and expound upon in Chapter 19. But individualism is a phenomenon with roots that sprawl across the Greek, Judaic, and
Christian traditions. It manifested itself in different ways across different parts
of the West in the same era and within any given country of the West across
time. Similarly, Daoism, while technically denoting a specific literature identified with Laozi and Zhuangzi, labels a Chinese world view that permitted
traditions of art, poetry, governance, and medicine that could not conceivably
have occurred in the West—but, like Western individualism, it is grounded in
such diffuse sources that to call it an invention stretches the meaning of that
word too far. In searching for meta-inventions I am looking for more
isolated, discrete cognitive tools.
So much for what a meta-invention is not. The archetypal example of
what does qualify as a meta-invention is the invention of written language. It
occurred over centuries, so it cannot be called discrete in terms of time. But
it was definitely an invention, something that a few cultures managed to
devise and the rest did not. Independent inventions of writing are believed to
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 211
have occurred in only four places (or even fewer; controversy continues about
whether the latter three were truly independent): Sumer between –3500 and
–2800, Egypt a little later, China before –1300, and Mexico before –600.[3]
Writing is definitely a cognitive tool, the intellectual insight that it is possible
to encode information not just as pictures or isolated symbols, but in a
systematic fashion that permits an unlimited amount of information to be
preserved. Every one of the alphabets and logograms that have been used to
write the world’s languages amounts to a different manifestation of this one
supremely important cognitive tool.
With that understanding of how I am defining the term, let me propose
14 meta-inventions that occurred after –800. Six are in the arts, three in
philosophy, three in mathematics, and two in the sciences:
• Artistic realism
• Linear perspective
• Artistic abstraction
• Polyphony
• Drama
• The novel
• Meditation
• Logic
• Ethics
• Arabic numerals
• The mathematical proof
• The calibration of uncertainty
• The secular observation of nature
• The scientific method
Are these the meta-inventions since –800, exactly 14 in number? That
claim is too ambitious. The borders of a meta-invention are fuzzy, and drawing boxes around a single meta-invention is sometimes arbitrary—the single
meta-invention called scientific method in my list could easily be broken into
half a dozen separate ones. I will describe the thinking behind my choices as
I go along, noting some borderline cases that barely missed the cut. The note
discusses some others.[4]
212 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
META-INVENTIONS IN THE ARTS
The first candidates for meta-inventions in the arts are the inventions of the
arts themselves—the invention of pictorial and sculpted images, of linked
musical sounds, of the tale. But besides predating our beginning point of
–800, their very universality, like the universality of language, stretches the
concept of invention past the breaking point. Visual art, music, and the story
seem to be part of the human repertoire everywhere.
The next possibility is to treat the invention of new movements and
genres as meta-inventions—the invention of haiku, or the symphony, or the
landscape, for example. The problem here is deciding where to stop. Each of
these examples seems too small. They were important new forms of artistic
expression and involved significant innovations, but none was a landmark
change in what human beings were able to do with words, music, or paint. In
a meta-invention in the arts, I seek the handful of innovations in artistic
vocabulary and syntax that transformed the possibilities.
The Invention of Artistic Realism. Greece, circa –500.[5]
For the first three and a half millennia or so after the beginning of Sumer, the
world’s visual arts in every civilization followed a similar course. Conventions
developed for portraying people and scenes, and the conventions became
rules that each succeeding generation observed rigidly. The conventions did
not have much to do with conveying the visual reality of the thing being
portrayed. An ancient Egyptian artist did not try to show the person that was
before his eyes, but what he knew belonged to that person. The face is in
profile, but the eye looks like an eye seen from the front. The top half of the
body is as seen from the front, showing the chest and both arms, yet the lower
half is seen in profile, showing both legs and feet in the way that it is easiest
to draw.
These conventions for portraying a person were not followed so
unvaryingly because Egyptian artists were not capable of anything else, but
because that’s the way art was done. A good artist’s job was to execute the
conventions in the most craftsmanlike way that he could. A break in that rigid
tradition occurred in –14C, when the pharaoh Akhenaton encouraged innovation of many kinds, including artistic. The famous bust of his queen, Nefertiti, shows a woman who was unmistakably a flesh and blood person. A statue
of Akhenaton himself shows a man with a bit of a pot belly and a dreamy
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 213
expression, also definitely a real person. Some of the paintings surviving from
his reign show people standing in informal poses that were intended to represent the way that people really stand. But the flare of artistic innovation did
not survive Ahkenaton.
A thousand years passed before Greek artists renewed the effort to
reproduce what people saw before their eyes in everyday life. The beginnings
were humble. “It was a tremendous moment in the history of art,” writes
Ernst Gombrich, “when, perhaps a little before 500 b.c., artists dared for the
first time in all history to paint a foot as seen from the front. In all the thousands of Egyptian and Assyrian works which have come down to us, nothing
of that kind had ever happened.”6 Gombrich was referring to the discovery
of foreshortening, ways of distorting the painted image or carved relief so that
the result appears to the viewer as it would in real life. In the case of the foot,
on a vase signed by Euthymedes, the artist shows us the front of the five toes,
which the human eye immediately recognizes as a foot seen from in front.
The revolution occurred in sculpture in the same era. The people portrayed
in statues began to stand in natural ways, with more weight on one foot than
another, the hips no longer in line, the axis of the body no longer a straight
line. Knees began to look like real knees and smiles like real smiles.
The invention of artistic realism is one of the cleanest examples of the
meta-invention as a cognitive tool. The realization of the invention required
more than a century of experiments and mistakes and improvements until
classical Greek sculpture and, we are told, painting, reached the heights of
realism, but the initial invention was simple and wholly in the brain: Pay
attention to what you see in front of you, not what the rules of art tell you to
do, and try to figure out how to translate what you see into your medium in
a fully realistic way.
The Invention of Linear Perspective. Italy, circa 1413.
We do not know how close Greek painters came to the portraying the illusion of three dimensions on a two-dimensional surface. In addition to foreshortening, they developed ways of shading light to correspond to the way in
which the human eye perceived light across distance. Agatharcus of Samos,
writing in –5C, described techniques that suggest some aspects of what we
know today as linear perspective. The Greeks made enough progress to cause
Plato to grumble about the falsity of paintings that showed two men of different size just because they stood at different distances from the painter. Only
214 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
vase paintings and a few frescoes survive, however, and the Roman examples
are not thought to represent the best work.
Since the illusion of depth on a two-dimensional canvas had been
achieved to some degree, it is an exaggeration to call the development of
linear perspective in 15C a completely new invention. But when something
has been as forgotten as perspective had been forgotten, and when the new
version is qualitatively so much better than the old one appears to have been,
and when the new version has momentous consequences, the invention of
linear perspective in 15C qualifies as a meta-invention in its own right.
Some of the technical characteristics of linear perspective were understood in the late medieval era. The ceiling in Giotto’s Confirmation of the Rule
of St. Francis, circa 1325, is based on a point of convergence so close to mathematically correct that it seems unlikely to have been produced just by
Giotto’s artistic judgment.7 Some of the paintings of Duccio and Lorenzetti
dating from 14C indicate a growing facility at handling depth. But the invention of linear perspective as a systematic set of principles took its giant leap
forward at a much more specific date and with a more clearly identified
inventor than most meta-inventions. The man was Filippo Brunelleschi and
the date, less clear, was probably 1412 or 1413.[8]
Brunelleschi is known to history as one of the most influential architects of all time. The famous dome of the cathedral of Florence is his work.
His principles of proportion and design were to shape the appearance of
European cities through 19C. Probably his needs as an architect prompted his
interest in perspective—a realistic three-dimensional rendering of an unbuilt
building is a useful thing for an architect to be able to draw—but we do not
know exactly how he managed to take the vague knowledge of perspective
then circulating and put it to such exact use. Perhaps he extrapolated from
medieval surveying techniques, or he adapted the geometry of the existing
optical science, or he adapted the projective mapping techniques known
since Ptolemy. Competing stories are told.
What we do know is the dramatic way in which Brunelleschi demonstrated his discovery to the world, with a mirror-image painting of the baptistery of the Florence cathedral, a mirror, and a peep-hole device. He invited
his Florentine friends to come to the piazza, sat them at the appropriate
point, and had them look through the peephole first at a reflection of the
painting in the mirror and then at the actual baptistery. According to a
contemporary account, the accuracy of Brunelleschi’s perspective was so
great that the view of the real baptistery could scarcely be distinguished from
the reflection of the painted view shown in the mirror.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 215
If the demonstration in the piazza occurred by 1413, as recently uncovered evidence indicates, it took more than a decade for the discovery of linear
perspective to make its way into the wider world of painting via Masaccio’s
fresco of the Trinity, which may still be seen on a wall of the church of Santa
Maria Novella in Florence. It took another decade for Leon Battista Alberti,
another of the great Renaissance architects, to write Della Pittura (dedicated
to Brunelleschi), laying out both the mathematics of perspective and devices
for artists to use in applying perspective to their own work. Within a few
decades, every major artist was painting in perspective. The theory of
perspective developed as well, along with technical apparatus—artists were
employing screens and grids by the end of 15C, and later began using
the camera obscura, to produce ever more precise representations of threedimensional objects. But these were elaborations on the core invention of
Brunelleschi, a method for creating, in Alberti’s words, “an open window
through which the subject to be painted is seen,” and then reproducing that
subject with a fidelity hitherto unimagined.9
The new stance of the painter toward his subject had consequences that
transcended art and went to the essence of the Renaissance’s new attitude
toward man’s place in the world and the cosmos. It also fundamentally
changed the status of painting itself. Painters were no longer merely craftsmen, but partook of the same acquisition of truth that was the business of
the sciences—or natural philosophy, as science was known in 15C. “The
science of perspective, by making painters into philosophers, had created an
eighth liberal art,” in the words of historian Daniel Boorstin, “and as the
interpreter of the divine order in the visible universe the artist acquired the
dignity of the scientist.”10 But apart from all of these second-order and thirdorder outcomes was the fundamental change in two-dimensional art. It had
acquired a third.
The Invention of Abstraction. France, last half of 19C.
The third meta-invention in the visual arts consisted, in a sense, of discarding
the first two. By mid-19C, all the problems of conveying a precise rendering
of a scene had been solved. Many of the famous still life paintings that have
come down to us from the interim centuries are bravura displays of the artist’s
virtuosity. Thus we have in a famous Willem Kalf still life—expressed in two
dimensions, using nothing but oil paints—simulacra of a rough-woven
figured tablecloth, its fringe, a cooked lobster, bread, lemon peel, the meat of
the lemon, the steel of the knife blade used to peel the lemon, a polished
216 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
hunting horn, silver chasing, polished silver, an engraved crystal goblet half
filled with white wine, a clear crystal goblet half filled with white wine, a
linen napkin, and the stone table—each surface and texture and color
rendered with stunningly lifelike realism.
Then, in the second quarter of 19C, came photography. Probably artists
would have searched out new problems to solve anyway, but the invention of
a technology that promised to capture the literal truth of a scene offered a
clear and present incentive for art to head off in new directions.
I do not use the word abstraction to stand for a particular school that
developed thereafter, but for a generalized change in the way that painters
approached their canvases. Nor do I suggest that the retreat from literalism in
art was new. Deliberate distortions of reality had always been a part of art,
both East and West. Sometimes it was subtle; sometimes, as in the work of El
Greco, dramatically obvious. By the first half of 19C, departures from literalness had spread. A picture such as J. M. W. Turner’s Steamer in a Snowstorm,
painted in 1842, would look at home in a gallery of modern art—and in fact
is displayed at London’s Tate Gallery rather than at the classically oriented
National Gallery. But a step remained, to offer an alternative to the underlying idea of the painting as a window on the world. If one person is to be
singled out as the one who took that step, it should be Édouard Manet
(1832–1883). The painting is not a window on the world, Manet announced.
It consists of patches of color on a two-dimensional surface. You don’t look
through a painting but at it. Manet proclaimed further that “realism” does not
consist of a Kalf-like fidelity to the way things look when they are minutely
inspected. When people observe a scene in real life, they perceive it as a
whole, focusing on some objects and not on others; seeing motion, with all
its blurriness, rather than movement frozen in time; seeing light and shapes
rather than specific clouds and shadows.
In the decades that followed, a succession of schools—Impressionism,
Post-Impression, Fauvism, Expressionism, Cubism, Surrealism—developed
theories as far removed from Manet as Manet had been from Alberti. The idea
of the artist as a Bohemian outsider came out of this revolution, as did the
contempt that artists would develop for the public, an obsession with selfexpression and iconoclasm, and the rejection of classical standards of beauty
as an objective of art. Abstraction is a meta-invention that has much to answer
for. But in its first flush and at its best, it produced works from 1850 to our
cutoff point of 1950 that have so far survived the test of time as judged by
the opinions of experts, prices in the auction room, and popularity in the
museums.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 217
The Invention of Polyphony. Central France, 11C–13C.
When thinking about meta-inventions in music, five candidates come to
mind, each of sweeping importance: musical scales, musical notation, the
diatonic scale, polyphony, and tonal harmony. I judge the first three and the
fifth, to be near misses. The invention of musical scales looks promising, but
music antedated the invention of scales, just as painting antedated the invention of artistic realism, and it is hard to tell to what degree musical forms
actually expanded after the definition of formal scales. The invention of musical notation enabled a musical tradition to build upon the work of the past,
but musical notation is in one sense a specific manifestation of the invention
of writing. Also, as in the case of scales, it is not clear that musical notation is
sufficient unto itself. It is a necessary condition for the expansion and development of musical expression (India’s lack of an adequate system of notation
is a case in point11), but having a system of notation apparently did not lead
to radically changed music in either ancient Greece or China.
The third candidate for a meta-invention is the discovery of the
connection between mathematical ratios and musical intervals attributed to
Pythagoras in the West and later independently discovered by the Chinese.12
These formed the basis for the scales that became the building blocks of the
music of the West. But whether Pythagoras gave us a cognitive tool for thinking about music that is qualitatively different from the cognitive tool represented by other scales is doubtful. There is also the historical fact that the
invention of the diatonic scale did not, as far as we know, in and of itself
enable people to compose music that was markedly different from the music
they had been composing before. Finally, there is the quite specifically physical aspect of notes, vibrating at certain frequencies. All in all, I put the
Pythagorean scale on the borderline but tipping toward the wheel or printing press variety of invention rather than meta-invention.
The fourth candidate for a meta-invention, the invention of polyphony,
is unequivocally the real thing. Just as linear perspective added depth to the
length and breadth of a painting, polyphony added, metaphorically, a vertical
dimension to the horizontal line of melody.
We cannot be sure that polyphony was not developed by the Greeks.
We know from Plato and Aristotle that music was considered to be a force
that shaped character, ethical behavior, and society itself. To have achieved
that role, Greek music must have been considerably more powerful than a few
simple melodies. But as far as can be determined from the evidence, every
previous musical tradition, Greek or otherwise, consisted of horizontal link-
218 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
ages of notes placed one after the other, forming melodies.The melody might
have a rhythmic accompaniment. Many instruments might be involved in
playing the melody. But the music had a single, linear melodic line.
Polyphony was the first expression of the idea that notes could be stacked on
top of one another, creating musical lines that went different directions at the
same time.
Technically, polyphony has a narrow meaning. It is music in which
simultaneous voice or instrumental parts are in two or more melodic lines,
each of which can stand alone. Exactly where and when polyphony began is
uncertain.13The Welsh apparently sang in different parts very early, and so did
the Danes. It may well be that other folk cultures had local musical traditions
that used simultaneous melodic lines. But the main sequence for the development of polyphony came through the Catholic monasteries, especially the
great monastery of St. Martial in Limoges, in central France, via an evolution
of the method of singing prayers called organum. Originally consisting of a
few tones not even resembling a melody, organa grew gradually more
complex. We know that by 11C two-part organa were being sung in Winchester, England. By 12C, organa were being sung in which the lower voice served
as the principal melody while the upper, solo voice sang phrases of varying
length against it. The end of 12C and the beginning of 13C saw the advent
of named composers of polyphonic music, Léonin and Pérotin. The music
grew more complex and sophisticated. Secular versions of polyphony began
to develop, as the troubadours adapted polyphony to their popular melodies.
The motet—a polyphonic, unaccompanied choral composition—began to
flourish, soon adding a third part and sometimes being sung in French rather
than Latin.
The process that had begun with the invention of polyphony would
continue for centuries. If one were looking for the most dazzling immediate
effects of a musical invention, the most promising candidate would not be the
original invention of polyphony, but the development of modern tonal
(major-minor) harmony that began in the Renaissance and reached its full
expression in the Baroque. It is tonal harmony that made possible the music
from the Baroque, Classical, and Romantic eras, and that fills most of today’s
concert programs. But tonal harmony falls in the category of a great invention that builds on a more fundamental expansion of the human cognitive
repertoire—in this instance, the idea that music has a vertical dimension as
well as a horizontal one. Notes can be stacked. Melodies can be stacked.
Once that idea was in the air, all else became possible.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 219
The Invention of Drama. Greece, in the century following –534,
and India, date unknown.
Identifying the source of meta-inventions in literature is difficult because so
many of them have roots in prehistory. Literature itself, in the sense of making
up stories and consciously imposing structure on them, is a meta-invention,
but no one knows when or where it began. We must assume that story-telling
came early, as one of man’s first amusements around the fire at night. The
invention of fiction, meaning stories with characters that are neither historical nor taken from established mythology, is another meta-invention that
almost certainly predates –800.[14] What we do know for certain is that literature as a meta-invention was already in a highly developed form by the time
of the Ramayana and Mahabharata in India and the Iliad and Odyssey in the
West, all of which had appeared in written form by –4C and had been recited
long before that.
The invention of the performer and the audience is also immeasurably
old. Archaeologists have uncovered spaces that seem to have served as theatres
for large audiences in the earliest civilizations of East Asia, Europe, and the
Americas. We do not know exactly how and when these evolved from rituals in which the members of the audience were also participants to performances in which the audience became purely spectators.
The invention of drama is a separate meta-invention, postdating –800,
with a known history. If we trust a rhetorician named Themistius, the crucial
event took place in –534, when a poet named Thespis—the source of the
word thespian—created a character that stood apart from the Greek chorus
which until then had been a unitary voice telling the story. This individual
engaged in a dialogue with the chorus and, stunning departure that it was,
pretended to be someone he was not. He was called the Answerer, which in
ancient Greek was Hypocrites, the source of hypocrite and hypocrisy.
The development of the dramatic role once again added a new dimension to an existing art, putting new obligations on both the performer
and the spectator. The performer must pretend to be another person. The
spectator must ignore all the imperfections of the pretense that, acknowledged, would spoil the effect. If both performer and spectator did their
respective jobs, the resulting collaboration was nothing less than the ability to
observe events outside one’s own life.
Drama went from a standing start to historic peaks within a century.
The chorus was reduced to about a dozen people and its role as narrator was
220 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
slashed, with multiple individual roles carrying the burden of the drama.
Stages evolved, incorporating multiple entrances, painted scenery, and scene
changes. Actors were masked and costumed to fit their parts. And what a
stunning outpouring of plays this infant genre got to work with—the
tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, and the comedies of Aristophanes.
A similar evolution must have taken place in India. It is known that the
tradition of public recitations of epic poetry goes back several centuries
before the Christian era. By the time of the great Indian poet and playwright
Kalidasa, circa 5C, the dramatic form was well established. Beyond that little
can be said about the timing or nature of the Indian invention of drama, or
whether Alexander’s invasion of the western edge of the Indian subcontinent
in –4C conveyed any information about Greek drama to India.
The Invention of the Novel. Europe from 1500,
culminating in England, 1740–1749.
Other genres of literature—the lyric poem, nonfiction essay, historical narrative and analysis, memoir, biography, and philosophical dialogue among
them—have been highly developed for more than 2,000 years. Changes in
technology have played a major role in the way that drama has been staged,
with the invention of the motion picture creating an altogether new form of
drama. But these changes, while they expanded the forms of expression of
poetry and drama respectively, did not radically alter the literary experience.
The exception, and the sole meta-invention in literature since the invention
of drama, is the novel.
If by novel we mean simply a fictional prose narrative of substantial
length, then we have had novels for 2,000 years as well, with Petronius’ Satyricon and Apuleius’ Golden Ass being the most highly regarded examples surviving from ancient Rome. The first great novel is often said to be The Tale of
Genji, written by a lady of the Japanese court, Murasaki Shikibu, circa 1010.
But novel is technically used to name something more than a long fictional
prose narrative, and it is in that more specific sense that I use the word here.
In Lionel Trilling’s words, the novel is “a perpetual quest for reality, the
field of its research being always the social world, the material of its analysis
being always manners as the indication of the direction of man’s soul.”15 The
essential characteristic of the novel in this more specific sense, that it constitutes a simulacrum of real life, sets it apart from the genres that went before.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 221
Human Accomplishment
But when the cutoff date for the
WHY NOT FILM?
The mention of film raises an obvious question: Why not include
motion pictures as a form of drama, and therefore as part of the literature inventory?
In assembling the inventory of authors, I entered data on
screenwriters whenever a source mentioned them. But biographical
dictionaries of literature did not include film directors, who are
typically more truly the artistic creators of films than the screenwriters, and literature histories that have comprehensive coverage of
drama seldom cover film.
That left the option of creating a separate inventory for film,
an attractive solution if were being written
a hundred years from now.
inventories is set at 1950, only 23 years after the first talking picture,
creating a separate inventory for film seemed premature.
Not completely apart—that’s why the Satyricon and Tale of Genji are called
novels by some critics—but substantially so.
Jacques Barzun dates the first novel to 1500 and the appearance of the
anonymous La Vida de Lazarillo de Tormes.
16 Lazarillo’s hero is an orphan who
becomes a servant, not a nobleman. The book depicts society matter-offactly, neither idealizing nor satirizing it. Its characters are just that—characters, with complex strengths and weaknesses, virtues and vices.
Lazarillo was followed a century later by Cervantes’ Don Quixote,
widely seen as the first great Western novel, but still a transitional work, integrating large dollops of allegory, philosophy, and the fantastical alongside its
rich portrayal of character and social scene. Madame de Lafayette’s La
Princesse de Clèves (1678) was another precursor. But it was not until Samuel
Richardson’s Pamela in 1740 and, a decade later, Henry Fielding’s Tom Jones,
that the novel reached the form as we know it today, and opened an outpouring of work in 19C that would transform literature throughout the West.
Nothing quite like the novel developed in China, Japan, or India until
late 19C, when it was adapted from the Western model. China and Japan
(though not India) had produced works that portrayed common people and
gave detailed descriptions of social life. A famous anonymous Chinese work,
222 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Jin Pingmei, not only portrayed the details of everyday life in 16C China but
contained such detailed accounts of sexual practices that early translators felt
compelled to render them in Latin. However, elements of the supernatural
remained woven into Chinese fiction through the end of 19C, and the plots
were more episodic than in the Western form—characteristics that are true
even of the work often labeled the greatest Chinese novel, Cao Zhan’s Dream
of the Red Chamber. In Japan, the Tale of Genji was followed in 17C by a writer
ranked second only to Murasaki Shikibu, Ihara Saikaku, who wrote two
immensely popular books, The Life of an Amorous Man and Five Women Who
Loved Love, that could be called novels in a loose sense. But while Saikaku
sparked a brief flurry of imitators, Japanese literary energy at that time was
directed toward poetry and drama. Perhaps the best evidence that the Western novel never really had a counterpart in China, Japan, and India before
their contact with the West comes from the commentary of Chinese, Japanese, and Indian intellectuals after contact with the West. In each case, it was
recognized that the Western novel was something unlike anything in their
own tradition.
The emergence of the novel is important for many reasons, but the
most salient is the way in which the novel added a new dimension not just for
creating beauty, but for seeking out truths. Writers since Homer had been
trying to get at the truth of the human condition in its psychological dimensions, and the greatest writers succeeded spectacularly well even in ancient
times. But there was hardly anything at all in the fictional literatures of the
world about humans as social creatures. The novel made that inquiry possible,
and in so doing made literature a partner with the social and behavioral
sciences in understanding how humans and human societies work.
META-INVENTIONS IN PHILOSOPHY
The first surviving written records of philosophic thinking postdate the first
civilizations. Sumer and Egypt must have had wise men who were famous for
teachings that today we would call philosophy, but their work is lost. We have
religious texts and ethical homilies from those civilizations, but no systematic
inquiries into the nature of knowledge, human existence, and the cosmos—
the stuff of philosophy.
The last quarter of –6C saw the opening of a two-century burst of
philosophic work across the Eurasian land mass, dating roughly from –520 to
–320, in which human beings thought through some large proportion of all
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 223
the great philosophic issues—not in primitive forms that were later discarded,
but as profound philosophic systems.
Both of India’s dominating traditions were founded at the outset of
this two-century seminal period—Hinduism with the assembly of the
Upanishads sometime in –6C, and Buddhism with Buddha a century later. In
some of the same decades when Buddha was teaching his disciples, so was
Confucius in China. In Greece, the earliest thinkers to take up philosophic
topics, Thales and Anaximander, were at work in the early part of –6C,
followed by Pythagoras at its close.
The period around –350 saw the creation of China’s second important
tradition, Daoism, the founding documents being the brief, elegant Dao-de
Jing, attributed to the shadowy figure of Laozi, and the eponymous work of
Zhuangzi. At about the same time, Mencius elaborated and systematized
Confucianism, laying the foundation for its eventual dominance.
In Greece, the contribution to philosophy during the seminal period is
so compressed in time and place that it constitutes one of the enduring
mysteries of human accomplishment. The time is a single century from –420
to –320. The place is a single city, Athens, so ravaged by the Peloponnesian
War and by plague that the population of free men at Socrates’ death in –399
17
”
18
WHAT IS PHILOSOPHY?
“Philosophy asks the simple question, ‘What is it all about?’” Alfred
North Whitehead once observed, and that is the definition adopted
here. Philosophy is an inquiry into the true nature of things, be it
the true nature of the universe or the human soul or a table. It overlaps with religion but is distinct from it. Philosophy is “something
intermediate between theology and science, in the words of
Bertrand Russell, seeking truths about great metaphysical and
ethical questions as does religion, but, like science, appealing to the
mind instead of faith. This definition permits a number of Western
theologians (e.g., Thomas Aquinas) and Buddhist thinkers (e.g.,
Nagarjuna) to be classified as philosophers. Buddha himself did not
invoke a divine being as part of his teachings, and he too qualifies
here as a philosopher. The teachings of Jesus and Muhammad seem
qualitatively different in this regard, containing philosophical
elements but ones that are subordinate to their religious message,
and they are not part of the philosophy inventory.
224 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
may have fallen as low as 21,000.19 In that time and place, in successive
teacher-student relationships, came Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, each of
whom constitutes one of the great figures of Western intellectual history.
The profusion of great work in China, India, and Greece in those few
centuries shaped their respective civilizations in ways so pervasive that their
role has become invisible. Hardly anyone in the West thinks of himself as an
Aristotelian, for example, even though Western ways of conceptualizing
virtue, happiness, the beautiful, and logic still trace back to Aristotle’s teachings. Comparatively few Chinese still think of themselves as Confucians, even
though the values they act upon in daily life may reflect Confucius’s teachings. The great thinkers of the world from –6C to –4C established the frames
of reference with which we still approach the world we live in. Cutting across
their contributions to metaphysics, epistemology, aesthetics, and ethics were
two new cognitive tools that qualify as my opening nominations for metainventions in philosophy, one from India and another from Greece. They are
also strangely related. In the realm of cognitive tools, they are mirror images,
yin and yang, matter and anti-matter, polar opposites: the inventions of meditation and of logic.
The Invention of Meditation. India, culminating circa –200.
Shortly after Homo sapiens developed consciousness, he must also have
become aware of one of the curious aspects of consciousness, its chaotic
substrate. However lucid the conversation we may be holding, or however
intently we think we are concentrating on the task before us, a little selfexamination quickly shows that, flowing along just below the surface of the
coherent line of thought, is a string of flighty, unpredictable, apparently
uncontrollable other thoughts, irrelevant to what we’re supposed to be thinking about. Try to walk for a hundred yards, for example, while thinking about
nothing but the act of walking. Untrained people can seldom get beyond the
first few steps without finding that their attention has already wandered.
In this simple observation about the nature of human consciousness lies
a challenge that was taken up sometime in the course of Hinduism’s long
development: focus the mind so that the tumble of extraneous thoughts is
slowed, then stilled altogether. The practice that developed, which we know
as meditation, is of unknown antiquity. It was certainly already in use when
the Upanishads were put into writing circa –6C. An archaic form may be
inferred from the Rig Veda, which takes the practice back at least to –1200. If
recent arguments that the Rig Veda dates to the Indus-Sarasvati civilization
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 225
hold up, then we must think in terms of an additional millennium or two
during which some form of meditation was practiced. I have dated the
culmination of the development of meditation to –2C because that is the
most popular dating for the life of Patanjali, the Hindu sage who is seen as
the progenitor of classical Yoga, an advanced system of meditation.
Since its initial development in India, forms of meditation have become
part of most religions and of a wide range of secular schools as well. In the
West, despite the importance of forms of meditation in Catholicism and
some Protestant Christian churches, the word meditation has become identified with some of the flamboyant sects that attracted publicity in the 1960s
and 1970s. In some circles, meditation is seen as part of Asian mysticism, not
a cognitive tool. This is one instance in which Eurocentrism is a genuine
problem. The nature of meditation is coordinate with ways of perceiving the
world that are distinctively Asian. But to say that the cognitive tool called
meditation is peculiarly useful to Asians is like saying that logic—my next
meta-invention—is useful only to Europeans. Meditation and logic found
homes in different parts of the world, but meditation, like logic, is a flexible,
powerful extension of human cognitive capacity.
The Invention of Logic. Athens, –4C.
At about the same time that meditation reached an advanced form in India,
the West was inventing the mode of thought that would be as influential in
shaping and embodying the course of Western history as meditation was in
shaping and embodying the course of Asian history. Parmenides had begun
the process in –5C. Instead of merely stating his vision of epistemology (he
was disputing Heraclitus), he presented an argument on its behalf. He tried
to reason, struggling to understand what was real and what was illusory by
means of abstract ratiocination. Medieval legends to the contrary, Parmenides
did not invent logic, but he was trying to make use of dimly apprehended
principles that would eventually become logic.
Others, notably the Sophists and Zeno of Elea with his famous paradoxes, flirted at the edges of logic, extending the kind of reasoning used by
Parmenides into more sophisticated (note the root of that word) forms. Plato
added structure to their work, distinguishing affirmation from negation and
suggesting that the reasoning of the Socratic dialogue could be a generalizable
method for reaching the truth. But it was left to the Promethean mind of
Aristotle to discover the basic principles of logic and to establish a discipline
that has continued to develop to this day.
226 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Aristotle’s works on logic are known collectively as the Organon, which
translates as tool or instrument, reflecting Aristotle’s awareness that logic represented not a science unto itself, but a resource that could be brought to every
aspect of man’s exploration of the nature of the world around him and the
nature of reality itself. It is from Aristotle that we receive the vocabulary of
logic: the syllogism, the types of logical fallacy, the elements of deductive
reasoning, and a long list of terms for analyzing propositions. Underlying all
the specifics was a radical expansion of the way humans could think about
what was true and not true. Being held to the rules of logic is what ultimately
enables us to move beyond the child’s “’Tis so, ’Tis not” level of dispute.
It forces discipline upon our thinking and, at least sometimes, provides a way
to save ourselves from our prejudices. In the sciences, Aristotle’s invention
of logic turned out to be a mixed blessing. Its power was so great that the
importance of logic overrode empiricism for centuries. But when the
balance was restored, logic once again stood as one of empiricism’s strongest
allies; together, they produced the scientific revolution.
The Invention of Ethics. China, India, and Greece, –520 to –320.
A number of other achievements of philosophy might be nominated as
meta-inventions, starting with the invention of the philosophical outlook
itself. The invention of empiricism is still another obvious candidate,
which I will instead fold into the discussion of meta-inventions in science.
The effects of Judaic monotheism, especially as modified by Christianity,
were so pervasive that it is tempting to treat it as a meta-invention, inappropriate as the word “invention” may be. But I will confine myself to just
one more meta-invention in philosophy: ethics conceived independently
of religion.
It may seem an odd thing to assert that ethics began only a few
centuries before the Christian era. Definitions of right behavior go back as far
as the advent of civilization and in recent times have been found by anthropologists to exist among every known human tribe. Even the most ancient
codes of right behavior could be elaborate, with the books of the Torah offering a readily available example. But, at least as far as anything in the surviving
record tells us, the codes were constructed as expressions of the will of gods
or rulers. This is not to say that they were irrational. The aspects of law that
dealt with justice reveal concepts of fairness and proportionality that we
recognize in our own legal codes, with the Mosaic Law of the Old Testament
again providing a window into early ways of dealing with complex cases. But
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 227
until about –5C, we have nothing that puts the question of right behavior in
the following fashion: Here we are, human beings, living a relatively short span of
years in the company of other human beings.What is the underlying nature of a human
life? How should this underlying nature lead us to comport ourselves, both for our own
private happiness and to create harmonious and happy communities? It was the first
attempt to answer such questions independently of religion that I call the
invention of ethics.
Two issues regarding the invention of ethics need to be separated. One
involves the merits of the different systems, which I will not try to assess. The
practical reality is that people who adhere to the teachings of Confucius’s
Analects, Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, or Buddhism’s Tipitaka will behave in
generous, compassionate, and civil ways that each of those ethical systems
would describe as virtuous. I wish to emphasize another issue: The new
cognitive tool was the idea that right behavior could be thought about, and
must be thought about, by trying to understand the meaning of virtue independently of gods and kings. The consequences would cascade down the
centuries.
Chief among these consequences was the development of political
theory. Before the invention of ethics, kings might be individually good or
bad and just or unjust, but thinkers had no template against which to think
about whether the political system was good or bad. The essence of political
thought about systems requires one to ask of any given set of rules or laws,
Good for what? The proximate answer is that a system must be good for the
human beings who live under that system.
When it comes to specific issues, knowing just the immediate outcomes
of a policy seems to make it easy enough to decide whether a given policy is
good or bad. Does the trash collection policy result in trash being collected
or not? Does transportation policy result in the trains running on time? But
as we generalize from the specifics of collecting trash and running trains to
more general questions of deciding what laws are appropriate, how leaders
should be chosen, and what powers they should be given, we are forced back
to a deeper question: what does it mean for a system to be good for human
beings? What is it that human beings are, in their fundamental nature? What
does it mean to live a fulfilling human life? What are the limits and potentialities of human beings as social creatures? It is the answers to those questions
that ultimately form that missing template against which to assess how a
political system corresponds to the nature of man, and then for assessing the
degree to which a political system is good or bad. It was the invention of the
idea of ethics that enabled this process to begin.
228 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The relationship is most obvious in China, where the dominating topics
of Confucianism were man as a social being and the nature of a rightly
ordered society, but the links between Aristotle’s ethics and subsequent political theory are no less rich. I would argue that the development of liberal
democracy itself is intimately linked with the invention of ethics—and enter
the Federalist Papers as my first exhibit.
META-INVENTIONS IN MATHEMATICS
Number systems themselves might seem to be the prototype of the metainvention in mathematics, but they are almost as universal as language. Egypt,
Sumer, India, China, and, later but independently, the Maya had number
systems. Credit for the first fully developed number system goes to the
Egyptians, circa –3500, who had a system with a base of 10 and separate
pictographs for each power of 10 up to 10 million. A closer approximation
to a meta-invention in the centuries before –800 is the invention of positional
notation, which occurred sometime in the vicinity of –2400 in Sumer.
After –800, an indefinite number of mathematical achievements could
meet the criteria I set out for meta-inventions, because every invention in
mathematics is the invention of a cognitive tool. Take, for example, the invention of non-Euclidean geometries by Bolyai and Lobachevsky in the 1820s.
What could be more clearly a new dimension than the invention of a
wholly new geometric system? But of course the invention of calculus in the
late 1600s by Newton and Leibniz also was a new cognitive tool with
far-reaching applications. And then there was the invention of Boolean
algebra in the 1840s, applying algebra to logic. But if the question is which
developments in mathematics opened up completely new ways of thinking
mathematically, three developments seem to this non-mathematician to be
qualitatively different from the rest.
The Invention of the Mathematical Proof. Greece, circa –585.
The mathematicians of Sumer, Egypt, China, and India achieved great
things by using informal rules and principles. The Chinese and Indians
went the furthest. It appears that the Chinese understood the properties
of the Pythagorean triangle a thousand years before Pythagoras. In about
–300, the Juizhang Suanshu laid out the solutions to more than 200 problems
on engineering, surveying, right triangles, and calculation. In 3C, the
domestication of animals
division of labor
money and credit
paper money
idea of
mass production
law
the idea that
META-INVENTIONS IN GOVERNMENT AND COMMERCE
Mentioning politics may remind you that I omitted government and
commerce from the inventories of human accomplishment. What might the
meta-inventions be for those arenas? I can at least list some likely candidates.
In commerce, the basics occurred prior to –800. Agriculture was
founded through the invention of the cultivated crop, which derives from a
cognitive tool: seeds can be planted, not just harvested. It dates to roughly
–8000. Conceptually, the is quite similar, and can be
treated as a conglomerate meta-invention. The idea of , the
necessary if not sufficient condition for the existence of an economy, could
be even older, dating back to flint-knappers and other specialists within Paleolithic hunter-gatherer tribes. A more recent meta-invention, attributable
primarily to Adam Smith, is the concept that a voluntary, informed exchange
always benefits both parties: commerce is not a zero-sum game.
The inventions of date back to the earliest records from
Sumer. The invention of , conceptually distinct from the invention of money, is more recent, 9C, in China. The idea of accounting—not any
particular method, but the concept of keeping track of inflows and outflows
of money —is a good candidate for a meta-invention in commerce. So is the
managing risk, though it is largely a product of a meta-invention in
mathematics, probability theory. The invention of is even
more recent, dating from the last half of 18C.
In government, what one considers to be a meta-invention depends in
part on what one considers the proper role of government to be. In this, I am
at one end of the spectrum, believing that government has extremely limited
legitimate functions, and so my list of meta-inventions is shorter than others
would devise. A natural first candidate is the invention of , but law in the
simplest sense of rules governing a group may be akin to speech: Something
that arises naturally as part of human groups, however primitive. I will leave
it to someone more qualified to specify the landmark conceptual changes in
the law that fit the meaning of meta-invention. One of those changes in the
concept of law that spills over into meta-inventions in government involves
government is contractual, with provisions that bind both the
governors and the governed. The idea that the purpose of government is to serve
the governed qualifies as a meta-invention, as does the concept that government
derives from the consent of the governed. I would also nominate the concept of
natural rights, identified most closely with John Locke in late 17C, as a metainvention, while others would nominate the ideas that gave rise to the
welfare state. At this point, one person’s meta-invention is another’s metamistake, and I will desist from further nominations.
230 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Chinese developed a method of approximation that foreshadowed what is
known in the West as Horner’s method, named for the Westerner who developed it 1,700 years later. The Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta, written by the Hindu
mathematician Brahmagupta early in 7C—the same book through which the
Arabs became familiar with Arabic numerals—contained discussions of
second-degree indeterminate equations, permutations and combinations, and
cyclic quadrilaterals.
But the unsystematic inventive genius of individuals could take mathematics only so far. Mathematics as we know it today has a unique structure
among the domains of human accomplishment. We may speak metaphorically of Michelangelo’s work resting on a foundation laid by the Greeks, or of
Newton standing on the shoulders of the giants who had gone before. In
mathematics, the structure into which any new contribution fits is more
literal. Any given bit of mathematical knowledge within a given field can be
related to every other bit within that field by means of specific steps. Sometimes the relationship can be discerned only by tracing all the way down the
structure to the axioms of the system, and then heading up on a different
path, but the relationship always exists, and is always completely specifiable.
The raw material of that structure is the mathematical proof: rigorous
logic leading to a valid conclusion from a minimal set of axioms. It seems to
have been a Greek invention—nothing like it has been found in earlier traditions—but assigning more specific credit is hazardous. The earliest specific
proof is attributed to Thales, the man often called the first scientist, and a man
credited with feats that, if all true, would make him as protean in his accomplishments as Aristotle. He came from Miletus, an ancient city in Asia Minor,
and he lived from around –624 to –547. His first mathematical proof—he is
said to have produced five in all—was that the diameter divides a circle into
two equal parts. The result is in itself trivial. The meta-invention it exemplifies is that mathematical relationships have a structure that can be spelled out,
and that the spelling-out can lead to knowledge that can be built upon. If you
know A for certain, then you can rigorously prove that other implications,
such as B, must also be true. You can use B to prove C. By the time you are
proving F and G and H, you are discovering mathematical truths that are not
as perceptible by direct inspection. By the time you reach the Zs, you are in
the realm of mathematical truths that not even the most gifted mathematical
improviser could find.
Thales’s proofs were flawed by the standards of a later age, but were
good enough that they started a line of Greek mathematicians who, by the
time of Euclid, had laid the foundations of geometry. In the process, the
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 231
repertoire of mathematical logic had also expanded. Thales used deduction,
but Euclid’s Elements also contained indirect proofs, or proof by reductio ad
absurdum, establishing the truth of a statement by proving that the contradiction of it is wrong. Other forms of mathematical logic were recognized early,
but were not formally described until later—the first use of the term “inductive proof” did not occur until Augustus de Morgan’s work in 1838.
The nature of the mathematical proof is related to Aristotelian logic, but
mathematical logic predates Aristotelian logic in time and, it may be argued,
transcends it in power. Aristotelian logic must be conjoined with empirical
investigation if it is to be applied to questions of real-world phenomena—a
lesson that took some 1,500 years to learn—but mathematical logic erected
the vast structure of modern mathematics with nothing but its own internal
rigor. Mathematics has been invaluable to investigations of the real world,
though the real world need be of no interest to mathematicians.
The Invention of Arabic Numerals, Including Zero.
India, no later than 8C.
That the number system we call Arabic has been adopted the world over is
testimony to how indispensable it became to mathematics once it was
known. But reaching the full set of ten symbols took a long time and went
through many cultures.
The most crucial of the numbers is zero, and competition for the credit
of inventing it has been intense. The ambiguous reality seems to be that
though the Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks, and Indians all had symbols they
occasionally used to represent zero at dates ranging from thousands to
hundreds of years before Christ, in none of those cases did zero take a full and
consistent place in the number system. This failure is especially mystifying in
the case of the Greeks. Archimedes famously managed to represent a number
greater than the number of grains of sand in a space the size of the universe
with nary a zero. “How could he have missed it?” complained Carl Gauss.20
The next landmark comes in 662, when the bishop Severus Sebokht
in Syria wrote that the Hindus had developed methods of computation
surpassing anything the Greeks had done. But then the bishop says that the
Hindus used nine symbols to achieve this wonder, which suggests that zero
still had not fully come into its own. Seventy years later, during the reign
of the Arabian caliph al-Mansur, the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta was translated
into Arabic and the Arabs took possession of the full ten-numeral set. The
great Arabic mathematician al-Khwarizmi wrote up a full description of the
232 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
system in about 810 in Hisab al-jabr w’al-musqabalah. Thus, within decades of
its debut outside India, zero was used in the same work that gave the world
algebra (and the word itself—sound out the title), the first example of the
transforming effect that Arabic numbers would have on the development of
mathematics.
The Calibration of Uncertainty. Europe, 1565–1657.
An intuitive sense of the notions underlying probability has probably characterized winning gamblers since gambling was invented. The Greeks had a
word for probability, eikos, with the modern meaning of “to be expected
with some degree of certainty,” and Aristotle came close to putting quantities
to it when he wrote in De Caelo that “ . . . to repeat the same throw ten thousand times with the dice would be impossible, whereas to make it once or
twice is comparatively easy.”21 But against this limited qualitative understanding that some things were more probable than others was acute awareness of
chance in the affairs of humans, uncontrollable and unfathomable.
The intuitions of gamblers began to find their way into mathematics in
1494, when a Franciscan monk named Luca Paccioli posed what came to be
known as the “problem of the points,” drawing from a gambling game called
balla. “A and B are playing a fair game of balla,” he stipulated. “They agree to
continue until one has won six rounds. The game actually stops when A has
won five and B three. How should the stakes be divided?”22 The first
approach to answering the question was given about fifty years later by Girolamo Cardano, a Renaissance polymath and a self-confessed chronic gambler,
but was not published until 1663.
The credit for inventing probability theory goes to Blaise Pascal and
Pierre de Fermat, who in the course of a correspondence in the 1650s solved
the problem of the points by means of what has become known as Pascal’s
Triangle, a way of laying out the number of ways in which a particular event
can occur. Armed with Pascal’s Triangle, it is possible to determine the
proportion that any one, or any combination, of those events represents of
the total.
Christiaan Huygens put the capstone on basic probability theory with
“De Ratioiniis in Ludo Aleae” (“Of Reasoning with Random Lots”) in
1657. He presented a sequence of 15 propositions and established the crucial
concept of mathematical expectation, as in his third proposition: If the
number of chances leading to a is p, and the number of chances leading to b
is q, and all chances are equally likely, then the expectation is valued at
.
a b.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 233
PRECURSORS
”
23
Pascal’s Triangle had been foreshadowed 350 years earlier by Chinese
mathematician Zhu Shijie’s “Precious Mirror of the Four Elements,
yet another example of the way the Chinese originated, but did not
follow up, inventions, discoveries, and insights that later became key
elements in the development of Western science and technology.
The credit for the first known quantification of possible
outcomes goes to the Talmud, which denies the right of a man to
divorce his wife without penalty for adultery that occurred before
marriage. The Talmud argues that the authorities face a double
doubt: that the premarital loss of virginity was due to another man
(a yes/no possibility) and that it was voluntary on the bride’s part
(another yes/no possibility). Only one in four of the scenarios leading to the deflowered bride justifies a divorce without penalty, the
Talmud correctly concludes.
pa + qb . p + q
Pascal’s work had gone further than Huygens’s in some respects, but
Huygens’s clear structure for laying out probability theory made his work the
one that was read, cited, and translated in the years that followed.24
The discovery that uncertainty could be calibrated fundamentally
changed human capacity to acquire and manage knowledge. In science, it led
not only to the edifice of statistical analysis that is indispensable in all the hard
sciences, the social sciences, engineering, and industrial processes of all sorts,
but to the unraveling of mysteries that could be understood only in terms of
probabilities—quantum theory is one example . In economics, the ability to
analyze reality not just in terms of yes or no, but as precise numbers in
between, enabled the management of risk that in turn makes possible modern
economies.
META-INVENTIONS IN SCIENCE
I offer just two meta-inventions in science. The first is the invention of the
secular observation of nature. The second is the invention of the scientific
234 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
method—a meta-invention that consists of several components that could as
easily be treated as meta-inventions on their own.
The Invention of the Secular Observation of Nature.
Greece and China, circa –600.
Human beings have always had a practical side that enabled them to put aside
worries about the gods and their whims long enough to deal with the reality
of the world around them. The distances that technology could advance with
this amount of practicality were great. But as far as the record enables historians to judge such things, humans in prehistory and down through the
Egyptian civilization saw nature and its forces as beyond inquiry, inherently
unknowable. The gods disposed.
Sometime around –6C, a new idea began to emerge: Nature and its
forces could be observed and understood. The secular observation of nature is no
more exotic than that—and no less revolutionary. Human beings could look
at sunrises, storms, the flowering of plants, and the death of parents independently of whatever they might believe about gods. They could record
their observations and think about why these phenomena came about.
In the West, the invention of secular observation is attributed to Thales
of Miletus, whose early mathematical proofs I have already mentioned. The
specific accomplishments attributed to Thales, keeping in mind that none of
his actual writings survive, include the first geological observation (the effects
of streams on erosion of land), the first systematic description of magnetism,
and the discovery of triboelectrification. But the overarching accomplishment of Thales, or the group of innovators whose work came to be associated with his name, was to realize that such phenomena were susceptible to
human observation. Thales was soon followed by Leucippus, in the middle of
–5C, who argued that all events have natural causes, and by Hippocrates at the
beginning of –4C, who undertook the first systematic empirical observation
of medical phenomena.
The Chinese independently adopted an empirical approach to nature
early. Bone records indicate that systematic meteorological records of precipitation and winds were being kept as early as –13C, but apparently for
purposes of divination rather than weather forecasting.25 Accurate astronomical observations of planetary movements, sunspots, and eclipses also date
deep into Chinese history, but again primarily for purposes of divination.
Without trying to assign precedence, it may at least be said that by the time
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 235
Thales was at work in Greece, the Chinese had also developed a secular,
observational approach that was used to understand the nature of the world
around them. By –4C, for example, the Chinese had already deduced the
water cycle of rain and evaporation.
The difference between Greece and China was that the development of
secular observation of nature in Europe slowed after a few centuries, was
more or less stagnant (with a few exceptions) during the Roman Empire, and
then retrogressed for centuries, while in China progress continued without a
break. It was not until well into the Renaissance that Europe caught up and
passed China, and the mechanism for doing that was not simple observation,
but the last of the meta-inventions I will nominate, the invention of the
scientific method.
The Invention of the Scientific Method. Europe, 1589–1687.
I have not tried to organize the meta-inventions in order of importance
because they are too obviously incomparable. However, it is hard to avoid the
conclusion that the invention of the scientific method is primus inter pares,
in this sense: in combination with mathematics, the scientific method has
given us the world we live in today. The other meta-inventions enriched
human life, but recall the descriptions of life in Antonine Rome and Song
China in Chapter 3, and all the ways in which, at least for the affluent, daily
life resembled our own. Now think of the ways in which today’s daily life
does not resemble life in Antonine Rome and Song China. Almost all of them
owe their existence to the invention of the scientific method.
A near miss: Chinese experimentalism in the first millennium. The
boundary between the scientific method and any other sort of empirical
investigation blurs as the thoroughness of ordinary empirical investigation
increases. In the case of the Chinese, empirical investigation had become so
sophisticated by the Song Dynasty that it lacked only a few refinements to
qualify as science. For example, a Chinese text written in 340 describes a
practice among orange growers in the southern provinces. At a certain time
of year they would go to the market where they could purchase bags containing a variety of ant that ate the mites that damaged the orange trees.26 This
practice cannot be ascribed to the kind of trial and error that might lead a
primitive tribe to discover useful herbal remedies. It required an understanding of the damage that certain mites did to oranges, an understanding of the
feeding habits of different kinds of ants, and a clear sense of causation. It is
236 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
hard to imagine how that understanding could have developed without some
form of natural experiment being observed as well. In any case, we are seeing
the result of systematic investigation, by persons unknown, that produced
complex, empirically valid understandings of causation in nature.
The capacity to develop causal explanations from observational data
extended as well to scholarly fields. In the year 1070, Chinese scholar Shen
Gua wrote:
Now I myself have noticed that Yendang Shan is different from other mountains. All its lofty peaks are precipitous, abrupt, sharp and strange; its huge
cliffs, 300 meters high, are different from what one finds in other places. . . .
Considering the reasons for these shapes, I think that (for centuries) the
mountain torrents have rushed down, carrying away all sand and earth, thus
leaving the hard rocks standing alone.27
Shen Gua then goes on to describe the process of sedimentation and
infers that “in this way the substance of the whole continent must have been
laid down.” As Joseph Needham, the translator of these passages, dryly
observes, “Thus in the eleventh century Shen Gua fully understood those
conceptions which, when stated by James Hutton in 1802, were to be the
foundation of modern geology.”28 If what Shen Gua was doing was not
science, it was a first cousin.
The Chinese also came close to the scientific stance in their attitude toward the acquisition of knowledge as a cumulative, disinterested
enterprise. Even as the Confucian and Daoist traditions appealed to a lost
Golden Age, Chinese scholars just as consistently argued that old ideas must
give way to new ones when new observations point the way. When Liu Jo
sought authorization for a new geodetic survey of a meridian arc, he wrote to
his emperor:
Thus, the heavens and the earth will not be able to conceal their form, and
the celestial bodies will be obliged to yield up to us their measurements. We
shall excel the glorious sages of old, and resolve our remaining doubts about
the universe. We beg Your Majesty not to give credence to the worn-out
theories of former times and not to use them.29
The contrast with the unquestioning reverence of medieval scholars for Aristotle and Ptolemy could hardly be sharper. As it happened, the then-emperor
did not grant Liu Jo’s request, but a subsequent one did. The meridian arc
survey was 2,500 kilometers long—another evidence of the seriousness with
which the Chinese took the accumulation of knowledge.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 237
The Chinese never completed the scientific project. They brought a
consistently pragmatic curiosity to their inquiries and achieved extraordinary
insight in individual cases, but they never developed the framework that
would enable the accumulation of scientific knowledge.[30]
The real thing: The advent of the scientific method in post-medieval
Europe. The historiography on the scientific method is as large as its
importance warrants, and it should be understood that I am skipping over
a host of complications and nuances.31 For example, I date the invention
of the method within just 98 years, from 1589 (the publication of Galileo’s De
Motu) to 1687 (the publication of Newton’s Principia). I could as easily have
started around 1200, making the total time for the invention of the scientific
method considerably longer than the period from Principia to today.
That the basic ideas were in the air for so long without being developed
suggests how complex and mind-stretching the change was. Indeed, a major
continuing issue in the history of science is the degree to which it is appropriate to talk of a scientific method as a body of principles and practice that
has clear, bright lines distinguishing it from science practiced by other means.
It is not a debate that I am about to adjudicate here. In claiming the scientific
method as a meta-invention, or a collection of synergistic meta-inventions, I
am associating myself with the position that, incremental as the process may
have been, a fundamental change occurred in post-medieval Europe in the
way human beings went about accumulating and verifying knowledge. The
common-sense understanding of the phrase scientific method labels the aggregate of those changes. I use the phrase to embrace the concepts of hypothesis, falsification, and parsimony; the techniques of the experimental method;
the application of mathematics to natural phenomena; and a system of intellectual copyright and dissemination.
Hypothesis and experiment. Roger Bacon (c. 1214–1292) is the most
famous early proponent of experimentation, but he was augmenting the
work of a man who deserves more credit than he usually gets, Robert Grosseteste (c. 1168–1253). Grosseteste is best known to the history of science for
his work in optics, and especially for his innovative, if failed, attempt to determine a quantitative law of refraction. It is less often noted that Grosseteste had
preceded his work on optics with commentaries on the Physics and Posterior
Analytics of Aristotle that anticipated the basics of the scientific method.
Investigations must begin with observed facts, he wrote—a major departure
from medieval Scholasticism’s devotion to deduction as the way to truth—
and then attempt to determine what caused those observed facts. In an even
greater leap of imagination, he argued that the causes should be resolved into
238 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
their component elements and then used to derive a set of expectations that
would enable the investigator to reconstruct the phenomena. In effect, Grosseteste had invented the hypothesis, even though the word itself would not
enter the English language in its scientific usage until 17C. If experience did
not match expectations, then the expectations needed to be rethought, Grosseteste also pointed out—a simple thing to our minds, but in fact the first,
inexact statement of the principle of falsification. The investigator can never
prove beyond doubt that any hypothesis is true (the unobserved exception
could always be lurking just around the corner), but a hypothesis can be
framed so that it is possible to prove that it is not true. As a theoretical issue,
the principle of falsification remains contentious.32 As a practical tool for forcing people to frame their research so that they can be proved wrong, it has
immense value.
Parsimony. Around 1320, almost a century after Grosseteste’s work, an
English Franciscan named William of Ockham, a disputatious man who so
irritated the faculty at Oxford that he was never formally awarded his degree,
expanded on an idea that had recently been expressed by a Dominican monk,
Durandus of Saint-Pourçain.33 “Pluralitas non est ponenda sine necessitate,”
Ockham wrote, usually (though not literally) translated as “Entities are not to
be multiplied beyond necessity.”34 He invoked this principle so vigorously,
and used it to pare away so many opposing theories, that it became known as
Ockham’s Razor. Today it is known more commonly as the principle of
parsimony. Given two theories that explain the known facts, use the simpler
until you find reason not to.
On its face, Ockham’s Razor may not seem attractive. Complicated
explanations are sometimes true. Pick up any social science journal, and you
will come away with the impression that complicated explanations are even
to be preferred. But the hard sciences work to sterner standards than the
social sciences, and Ockham’s Razor has served them well. Given any
complex body of observations, Ockham’s Razor pushes the scientist to find
the simplest explanation—like the principle of falsification, imposing a discipline on the researcher that has acted as a useful prod for getting at the underlying truth of things. Even when complications have forced reevaluations of
simple models—the discovery of subatomic particles is a case in point—the
parsimony principle has served a useful function because simple models are
good for revealing anomalies. Commonly, the simpler of two explanations
has proved to be the right one.
The invention of controlled data. When the scientists of the Renaissance
used the word experiment, they commonly meant “putting something to the
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 239
test” by observing nature. A crucial innovation occurred in 16C with the
recognition that phenomena that occurred “naturally” were not essentially
different from those that occurred under controlled conditions. The natural
philosopher could create controlled situations in which the desired phenomena could be produced and studied at will, and the knowledge he acquired
would transfer to naturally occurring events as well.
Galileo’s account of his tests of falling bodies in De Motu, 1589, is the
generally accepted watershed. Others had written on falling bodies before
him, and others—notably William Gilbert of De Magnete—had used procedures that today we recognize as controlled experimentation. But Galileo
reported his experiments with a level of detail and meticulousness that set a
standard for natural philosophers thereafter. He had not observed naturally
falling bodies, but had constructed situations in which falling bodies could be
observed repeatedly, under consistent conditions.
In De Motu
find out what is 35
DID GALILEO MAKE UP HIS DATA?
, Galileo reported that the lighter body falls faster at the
beginning, then the heavier body catches up and arrives at the
ground slightly before the lighter one. Since this should not be true
of the objects that Galileo used, a wooden sphere and an iron one, if
they are released simultaneously, it has been inferred that Galileo was
either a poor observer or making up his data. But in replications of
Galileo’s procedure, it has been found that when a light wooden
sphere and a heavy iron one are dropped by hand, the lighter
wooden sphere does start out its journey a bit ahead—a natural, if
misleading, consequence of the need to clutch the heavier iron ball
more firmly than the wooden one. This causes the iron ball to be
released slightly after the wooden ball even though the experimenter has the impression that he is opening his hands at the same
time. Then, because of the differential effects of air resistance on
objects of different weight, the iron ball catches up with and passes
the wooden ball, just as Galileo reported. There is a satisfying irony
in this finding. The modern critics of Galileo were making the same
mistake that the ancients made, criticizing results on the basis of
what “must be true” rather than going out and doing the work to
true.
240 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Scientists’ control over their data reached another landmark—and one
recognized as such by contemporaries, not just by historians—when Robert
Boyle invented an effective air pump in 1657. Almost a decade earlier, Blaise
Pascal had inveigled his brother-in-law into carrying an early version of the
barometer to the summit of Mont Puy-de-Dôme, proving that the level of
mercury rises as altitude increases, and verifying a theory of air pressure that
had been evolving for several years. Boyle’s apparatus did not require people
to climb mountains. Boyle could simulate an atmosphere with progressively
thinner air, showing what would have happened if Pascal’s brother-in-law had
carried the barometer to the summit of Mont Blanc or, for that matter, to a
height greater than any mountain on earth.
As time went on, the scientific techniques for structuring the circumstances under which data are observed would add layers of sophistication.
Shortly after Boyle began his experiments with the air pump, Francesco Redi
decided to test whether maggots were, as generally believed, spontaneously
generated by rotting meat. He put one piece of meat on a plate in the open,
another on a plate covered by gauze, and discovered that only the exposed
piece of meat developed maggots. It was powerful evidence against the
theory of spontaneous generation—and also the first known use of a
controlled comparison.
By 20C, the scientist’s apparatus for simulating nature had gone from
Robert Boyle’s air pump to machines costing billions of dollars that reproduce the inner workings of stars. Redi’s primitive comparison of two plates
of meat had evolved into the sophisticated array of techniques for single-blind
and double-blind experiments that are a mainstay of research in fields from
pharmaceuticals to psychology. The simple yes/no conclusions of experiments in 17C have given way to alternative systems of statistical analysis that
deal exclusively in probabilities. But at the origin of it all remains this fundamental cognitive tool: the idea that the observation of natural processes can
be manipulated and controlled .
Primary versus secondary qualities. In 1623, Galileo’s The Assayer laid out
a distinction that is a classic example of the cognitive tool—a purely intellectual construct that affects the mindset that scientists take to their investigations. The Aristotelian dogma held that the matter out of which something
was made (e.g., the marble of a statue) is secondary and the form is primary.
Galileo looked at things the other way around. The smell of a rose or the
sweetness of a peach is its secondary quality, the impression that the rose or
the peach makes upon us. The primary qualities are those elemental aspects of
a thing that create the secondary qualities we experience.
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 241
From one perspective, one may ask, What’s the difference? Historian
Alan Gabbey observes that “previously, opium sent you to sleep because it
had a particular dormitive quality: now it sent you to sleep because it had a
particular corpuscular micro-structure that acted on your physio-logical
structures in such a way that it sent you to sleep.”36 Both views
were circular. Practically speaking, however, the difference in viewpoint
was profound. Aristotle’s perspective confronted the scientist with a massy,
opaque, undifferentiated “dormitive quality” of which little could be said.
Galileo’s perspective tempted the curious onward, promising the chance to
understand what that “particular corpuscular micro-structure” might be.
The mathematical structure of nature. Western thinkers from Pythagoras
onward had seen mathematics as intimately linked with truths about the
universe. Plato himself declared that “the world was God’s epistle written to
mankind” and that “it was written in mathematical letters.”Mathematics were
used successfully for a variety of applications, such as predicting the movements of the planets and measuring the circumference of the earth.
Archimedes proved mathematically the relationship between the force that
needed to be applied to a lever and the distances of the effort and the load
from the fulcrum of the lever. But these and a few other precursors notwithstanding, it was left to Galileo to take the decisive step in demonstrating that
mathematics was the language of nature, and a language that could be deciphered. Realizing that he couldn’t get sufficiently accurate measurements
when he dropped objects from a height, Galileo switched to inclined planes
down which the balls rolled slowly enough to measure their progress. In his
discovery, in 1604, that a systematic relationship exists between the distance
traveled and the square of the time lay the first mathematization of a complex
physical phenomenon.
The rest of 17C saw a continuing dispute among scientists about the
extent to which mathematics should be relied upon, for an underlying
tension beset the new enthusiasm for observation and the search for mathematical laws. To say that a physical phenomenon would always, undeviatingly conform to a precise mathematical expression smacked of the
overweening dicta that had brought Aristotelian physics to a dead end. Even
Boyle, the discoverer of another early mathematization of physical phenomena, adamantly refused to claim that Boyle’s Law was a law, preferring to
stick to the language of probability. It took Isaac Newton, working at the
end of 17C and the beginning of 18C, to silence the doubters. Newton not
only discovered a variety of laws that could be expressed mathematically and
not only demonstrated that these could be used to predict the outcomes of
242 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
new experiments with great precision, but he confidently proclaimed that he
had in fact discovered laws. From Newton onward, the scientific enterprise
was to be not just a search for accurate observation and correct understanding of proximate causes, but a search for the underlying mathematical order
of things, and a trust in mathematical reasoning as a way of proceeding to new
knowledge about the physical world.
Disseminating findings and assigning credit. In nominating the scientific
method as the greatest of all the meta-inventions, I am celebrating the
method, not the men, and do not mean to imply that scientists are by nature
more objective or honest than anyone else. One of the chief merits of the
scientific method is that it gives frail humans a system offering them some
protection from themselves and permitting knowledge, steadily converging
on Truth, to be accumulated from generation to generation. It is appropriate,
then, that the final element in this complex meta-invention is one that caters
specifically to human frailty, the system for disseminating findings and assigning credit.
Girolamo Cardano, the polymath gambler who figured in the story of
probability theory, fortuitously established the first part of the system, the
first-to-publish principle. In 1545, he included in his Ars Magna a method of
solving the cubic equation of the form x3+qx2=r, a problem that had been
vexing mathematicians for centuries. But the method was not his own. It had
been worked out by Niccolò Tartaglia who, following the custom of the time,
had treated his discovery as a great secret and divulged it only after swearing
Cardano to silence. The publication of Ars Magna infuriated Tartaglia, and he
said so without restraint when he published his own version of the method a
year later. But Cardano’s perfidy established a new way of doing scientific
business. The old road to public esteem was to know something no one else
knew and to exploit private knowledge as a sort of franchise. After Cardano,
the road to esteem was to discover something no one else knew and to tell
everyone as soon as possible, so that you got the credit. It was a rule unnecessary for a world of disinterested scholars, but perfect for a world of jealous
and ambitious competitors. It ensured that any new bit of information found
by one competitor was made immediately available for the others to build
upon and encouraged the correction of error by proving the other fellow
wrong.
The second part of the system for disseminating findings was the invention of the scientific report. The problem it solved is exemplified by a famous
story from the early days of science, when a professor from Padua denied that
Jupiter could have moons, and then refused Galileo’s invitation to look
• • •
THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II: META-INVENTIONS • 243
through Galileo’s telescope to see for himself. Today, the story is told as an
example of irrational refusal to confront the truth. At the time, his position
was understandable. Galileo’s telescope was primitive, looking at the night
sky through it required training that the professor from Padua had not
acquired, and seeing could not confidently result in believing. When Galileo
did assemble disinterested fellow scholars to look through his telescope, they
often did not see the moons, and those who saw something could not be sure
what that something was.
Other problems arose even when the phenomenon itself could be more
unequivocally demonstrated. How was Robert Boyle to communicate his
findings about the relationship of the height of a mercury column to the
evacuation of air from his air pump? He could assemble witnesses to his
experiments and encourage others to replicate his experiment by making
public the details of his apparatus. But both methods had their limitations—
the number of witnesses in the former case, and the difficulty of reproducing
the apparatus in the latter. The solution, in Steven Shapin’s phrase, was to
make “virtual witnesses” of the readers of Boyle’s written reports, by providing such a detailed account of everything that was done, including problems
and ambiguities in the results, that the verisimilitude of the account was
apparent. Replication remained an option, but Boyle’s solution engendered a
set of standards—perhaps a culture is a better word—for the write-up of
scientific findings that enabled scientists to read the work of another and trust
the account enough to base their own work upon it, without having to replicate everything. Violation of that trust became the mortal sin of science,
carrying with it professional destruction. So began a scientific tradition that
has evolved into the elaborate system of technical articles and responses, the
journals and proceedings, the letters and research notes that we know today.
So ends my list of 14 cognitive tools created by the mind of man, each of
which transformed a domain of human accomplishment. Perhaps others
belong as well, but these convey the magnitude of the impact that discrete
human accomplishments can have on the world. They also bring us back to
a theme I raised in Chapter 4:These inventions did not have to happen. One
may argue that all of them would eventually have occurred, given the nature
of human intelligence and a long enough period of time. But human intelligence equivalent to our own existed for thousands of years before any of the
14 appeared, and some of them appeared in one civilization without occurring to thinkers in other civilizations.
244 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Pondering these 14 also provokes the question: How many more cognitive tools are still out there, waiting to be discovered? The most recent of the
14 (the invention of abstraction in the visual arts) is only 150 years in the past.
It would be imprudent to assume that none are left to discover, if we have the
imagination to do so.
Finally, it may have been noticed that the list is not especially multicultural. Two of the 14 —meditation and the world’s current number system—
were invented in India. China and India were independent partners with the
Greeks in inventing a third, ethics. China was an independent partner of the
Greeks in inventing a fourth, the secular observation of nature. India got
shared credit for drama, and I pointed out when appropriate—mostly in
discussing the novel and the development of the scientific method—the
contributions of non-Western cultures. But that leaves the West importantly
or wholly responsible for 12 of the 14 meta-inventions—an imbalance that
raises questions about the geography and trajectory of human accomplishment, the topic to which we now turn.
P A R T THREE
PATTERNS AND
TRAJECTORIES
Part 3 provides a wide array of material, much of it technical,
preparatory to talking about why great human accomplishment
arises and why it declines.
The inventories are overwhelmingly European and male, raising questions
of Eurocentrism and sexism. Chapter 11 argues that Europe’s unique
place does not admit of much empirical ambiguity. Chapter 12 makes
the same case for males and incorporates the remarkable story of the
Ashkenazi Jews.
Even within Europe, the level of accomplishment has varied.A few countries, and a few regions within countries, have produced the bulk of the
significant figures. Chapter 13 shows how the significant figures have been
distributed across the landscapes of Europe and the United States during
different eras. Chapter 14 turns to the rate of accomplishment after taking
the size of the population into account, showing how the rate rose and fell
for different inventories across the centuries and across the world.
Chapters 15 and 16 explore some basic potential explanations of the
patterns and trajectories: the roles of peace and prosperity, governance,
demographics, and the ways in which streams of accomplishment are
self-reinforcing. Chapter 17 describes what is still left unexplained.
ELEVEN
COMING TO TERMS
WITH THE ROLE OF
MODERN EUROPE
The purpose of Part 3 is to describe the trajectories and patterns of
human accomplishment as they have played out over the centuries
since –800 and around the world. Yet the material in these chapters keeps
returning to a time and place where the globe’s accomplishment has been
concentrated: Europe during the period from 1400 to 1950.
For some readers, that concentration of accomplishment is a fact requiring no further proof; for others, it is a discredited Western conceit requiring
no further consideration. But for those at neither extreme, let me describe in
some detail the problem that confronts anyone who tries to write about
human accomplishment around the world and across the centuries without
devoting an overwhelming proportion of the analysis to Europe since 1400.
I begin with the simplest aggregation across time and geography.
Combined, the inventories from around the world have a total of 4,002
significant figures. If those 4,002 are divided into three groups consisting of
people from Europe, people from the rest of the West (the Americas and
Antipodes), and people from everywhere else, how are they distributed over
the period from –800 to 1950?[1]
The story line implied by the graph on the following page is that not
much happened from –800 until the middle of 15C, that really intense levels
of accomplishment didn’t begin until a few centuries ago (fully half of all the
significant figures do not make their appearance until 1800 or after), and that
from the middle of 15C to the beginning of 20C, almost everything came
from Europe. As late as the 1890s, 81 percent of the newly entering significant figures were European. The proportion contributed from anywhere but
Europe never rose above 40 percent through the 1940s.
The alternative story line is the Eurocentric hypothesis: When Western-
248 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The distribution of the significant figures across time and place
<800 <400 0 800 1200 1600 2000
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
No. of Significant Figures
Europe Rest of the West Everywhere Else
ers set out to survey history they conveniently find that most of that history was made
by people like themselves. Sometimes their parochialism is fostered by the existence of a
canon, as they rely on standards of what constitutes fine art, music, and literature that
marginalize non-Western traditions. Sometimes their parochialism is a function of
ignorance, as European historians are oblivious to scientific and technological achievements from other parts of the world. In either case, the result is a skewed vision that
looks like the one shown in the preceding graph. It does not reflect European dominance, however, but Eurocentric bias.
The strategies for testing the Eurocentric hypothesis are somewhat
different for the arts inventories and the scientific inventories, and are
presented separately.
TESTING FOR EUROCENTRISM IN THE
ARTS INVENTORIES
The first possibility is that the graphic above would change drastically if it had
been limited to the arts. Lumping all the inventories together gives undue
influence to the sciences, goes this line of argument, which accounts for some
disproportionate amount of the skyrocketing European role in the last five
centuries. This possibility is easily checked by breaking out data for just the
arts inventories and replicating the graph, as shown opposite.[2]
COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE OF MODERN EUROPE • 249
DOES TAKING EMINENCE INTO ACCOUNT
MAKE A DIFFERENCE?
The most obvious objection to the story told by the graph on page
248 is that a head count of significant figures is a wrong-headed way
to think about the distribution of accomplishment. The reason for
studying Greek philosophy is not that 32 significant figures in Western philosophy come from ancient Greece, but that 2 of those 32 are
Plato and Aristotle. European literature of 19C is not important
because it produced 293 significant figures, but because the 293
include writers of the stature of Tolstoy, Hugo, Keats, and Heine.
True enough; but as history has worked out, the ages rich in
giants have also been rich in near-giants and the rest of the significant figures who make up the inventory. This point is demonstrated
on an inventory-by-inventory basis in the graphs of Chapter 14,
which consistently show the close correspondence of measures
based on counts of significant figures and on summed index scores.
Similarly, when the figure above is replicated using summed index
scores instead of a head count, its main theme—the dominance of
the West and of the period after 1400—is unchanged.
The European role is effectively unchanged when the significant figures
are limited to the arts
<400
0
50
100
125
150
175
<800 0 800 1200 1600 2000
25
No. of Significant Figures
Europe Rest of the West Everywhere Else
250 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The contributions of “everywhere else” are indeed concentrated in the
arts, and many of these contributions came in the centuries from 400 to
1200, when Europe was quiescent, but these amount to little in comparison
to the surge of accomplishment in the arts in Europe after 1400. The overwhelming role of Europe and of the last five centuries is not changed when
only the arts inventories are at issue.
The graph on the previous page serves a useful purpose, however,
because it establishes the upper limit of non-European significant figures in
the arts. Recall I compiled separate inventories in the arts for India, China,
Japan, and the Arab world, while compiling a single inventory in each of the
arts for all of the West. My reason was that no source in the arts, however
comprehensive, can be assumed to use the same sieve to filter the material
from every tradition. A worldwide history of art written by a German or
American may include chapters on non-Western art, but if those chapters
amount to 40 pages out of a 500-page book, one may reasonably worry that
equal weight has not been accorded to West and non-West.
By preparing separate inventories, I also ensured that the graph of
significant figures in the arts systematically exaggerates the number of nonWestern figures relative to the West, because the non-Western figures had to
compete for recognition only within their individual countries, whereas
Western figures had to compete with everyone else in the West.
To see how this inflationary effect works, suppose that I had compiled
the inventory of American artists using only histories of American art.
The roster of significant figures would unquestionably have included Charles
Wilson Peale, Grant Wood, Frederic Remington, George Catlin, and Frederic Church. Each almost always gets space—often pages of space and a few
illustrative plates to boot—in American histories of art. And yet not one of
those artists is in the inventory of Western art, which was compiled from
sources that range over the whole body of art coming out of Europe, the
Americas, and the Antipodes.
The inflationary effect of using sources devoted to a single country is
large. Twenty-seven U.S.-born artists survived the 50 percent criterion for
selecting significant figures and entered the Western art inventory. If I had
been preparing an art inventory just for the United States, the number of
significant figures would have been in the region of 90—more than three
times as many as appear in the Western inventory.[3] I did not try to make
additional estimates for other countries or other inventories, but even a quick
scan of the data suggests that the inflationary effect for American artists is
typical. Eighty-two Swedish authors were mentioned by at least one of the
COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE OF MODERN EUROPE • 251
Western literature sources (none of which was written by a Swede), but
only 16 qualified as significant figures. For Hungary, the comparable figures
were 61 total authors and just 5 significant figures. For Poland, 95 and 13.The
smallest of these ratios is over 5:1. If we make the highly plausible assumption
that any Swedish writer mentioned in a general history of Western literature
will be mentioned by at least 50 percent of the histories of Swedish literature,
and likewise for any other country, the implication is that the 3:1 inflationary
effect observed in the test using American art is typical, perhaps on the
conservative side.
So far, I have been talking about what would happen to the estimate of
Western significant figures if we had sources devoted specifically to the
smaller nations. If the same recalculation were applied to Britain, France, and
Germany, hundreds of figures would be added to the arts inventories. For
example, the sources used for the literature inventory contained mentions of
781 British writers, of whom 149 qualified as significant figures; 465 French
writers, of whom 156 qualified as significant figures; and 315 German writers, of whom 105 qualified as significant figures. Even if inventories based on
sources devoted exclusively to each country only doubled the number qualifying as significant figures, a minimal expectation, the Western total would be
increased by half from those three countries alone.
Drawing a more precise estimate is unnecessary for this minimal
conclusion: the dominance of Europe in the arts as shown in the preceding
figure would be greater under any recalculation that applied the rules for
assembling the Arabic, Chinese, Indian, and Japanese inventories to the individual European nations.[4]
TESTING FOR EUROCENTRISM
IN THE SCIENTIFIC INVENTORIES
The graph for the scientific inventories, combining the hard sciences, mathematics, medicine, and technology, is shown on page 252.
The overall dominance of Europe remains, but with three differences.
The category of “everywhere else” virtually disappears, the action is even
more concentrated in the most recent centuries, and the category of “rest of
the West” plays a more important role—but still not equaling Europe’s contribution until the last decade in the graph. The chart on the bottom of page
252 shows the breakdown across continents, using two different measures:
number of significant figures, and number of significant events.
252 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
100
125
No. of Significant Figures
0
25
50
75
<800 <400 0 800 1200 1600 2000
Europe Rest of the West Everywhere Else
Significant figures in the scientific inventories
across time and place
Significant Events Significant Figures
0% 20% 40% 60% 80%
Whether measured in people or events, 97 percent
of accomplishment in the scientific inventories occurred
in Europe and North America
Sub-Saharan Africa
South America
Antipodes
South Asia
East Asia
Arab World
Ancient Western World
North America
Europe
COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE OF MODERN EUROPE • 253
Europe continues to dominate, with an aggregate of 78 percent of the
events and 82 percent of the significant figures. Unlike the arts, however,
somewhere other than Europe (North America) plays a significant role.
Are these Eurocentric numbers? In science as in the arts, I write at a
moment in history when readers come to this text exposed to claims that the
European contribution is overrated. Here is the essence of the new historical
perspective as stated by historian Nathan Sivin:
The historical discoveries of the last generation have left no basis for the old
myths that the ancestry of modern science is exclusively European and that
before modern times no other civilization was able to do science except
under European influence. We have gradually come to understand that scientific traditions differing from the European tradition in fundamental
respects—from techniques, to institutional settings, to views of nature and
man’s relation to it—existed in the Islamic world, India, and China, and in
smaller civilizations as well. It has become clear that these traditions and the
tradition of the Occident, far from being separate streams, have interacted
more or less continuously from their beginnings until they were replaced by
local versions of the modern science that they have all helped to form.5
And here is the essence of the countervailing view as stated by David
Landes in response to the passage from Sivin:
This is the new myth, put forward as a given. Like other myths, it aims to
shape the truth to higher ends, to form opinion in some other cause. In this
instance, the myth is true in pointing out that modern science, in the course
of its development, took up knowledge discovered by other civilizations; and
that it absorbed and combined such knowledge and know-how with European findings. The myth is wrong, however, in implying a continuing
symmetrical interaction among diverse civilizations.
In the beginning, when China and others were ahead, almost all the transmission went one way, from the outside to Europe. That was Europe’s great
virtue: unlike China, Europe was a learner.... Later on, of course, the story
was different: Once Europe had invented modern science, the current flowed
back, though not without resistance. Here too, the myth misleads by implying a kind of equal, undifferentiated contribution to the common treasure.
The vast bulk of modern science was of Europe’s making. . . . Not only did
non-Western science contribute just about nothing (though there was more
there than Europeans knew) but at that point it was incapable of participating, so far had it fallen behind or taken the wrong turning. This was no
common stream.6
254 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Rhetoric Versus Reality
This may seem to be one of those conflicts between experts that a layman
cannot assess independently, but it’s not. On the contrary, it can be easy to
reach an independent judgment about allegations of Eurocentrism if one
borrows a technique from literary criticism and subjects the allegation to
close textual scrutiny. Sivin’s language evokes the image of an exaggerated
European contribution without ever specifying that it is exaggerated. It is standard practice. Let me give you other two examples where we have the opportunity to compare the evocation with the evidence actually presented.
Exhibit A is the publicity copy on the back cover of the softcover edition of
Arnold Pacey’s Technology in World Civilization (1991):
Most general histories of technology are Eurocentrist, focusing on a main
line of Western technology that stretches from the Greeks through the
computer. In this very different book, Arnold Pacey takes a global view . . .
portray[ing] the process as a complex dialectic by which inventions borrowed
from one culture are adopted to suit another.
Exhibit B is the publicity copy on the back cover of the softcover
edition of Science and Technology in World History (1999) by James McClellan
and Harold Dorn:
Without neglecting important figures of Western science such as Newton
and Einstein, the authors demonstrate the great achievements of nonWestern cultures. They remind us that scientific traditions took root in
China, India, and Central and South America, as well as in a series of Near
Eastern empires.
Lest we fail to get the point, the publishers add a blurb from a professor
at Stanford, who tells us that “Professors McClellan and Dorn have written a
survey that does not present the historical development of science simply as a
Western phenomenon but as the result of wide-ranging human curiosity
about nature and attempts to harness its powers in order to serve human
needs.”
Shall we expect that these two books challenge my assertion of a few
pages ago that 97 percent of accomplishment in the scientific inventories
occurred in Europe and North America? No—not if you ignore the tone
of the quotations and instead focus on what they do not say. No one is saying that the books reveal a new distribution of scientific accomplishment. All
that the book jackets claim as a statement of fact (and all that Sivin claimed as
COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE OF MODERN EUROPE • 255
a statement of fact) is that scientific and technological activity has occurred
outside Europe. Which of course it has.
If you then turn to the text between the covers, you will discover that
Pacey’s Technology in World Civilization is a fascinating, wide-ranging account
of the dialogue through which the recipients of new technology do not apply
it passively, but adapt it to their particular situation.7 Gunpowder is the most
famous example, invented in China but inspiring a radically different set of
“responsive inventions” (Pacey’s phrase) when Europe got hold of it. With
this interaction between technology and culture as his topic, Pacey does
indeed spend more time on non-European civilizations than would a historian of who invented what, where, when. For example, he has a chapter on
railroad empires, with 18 pages of material on how railroads developed in
Russia, Japan, China, and India. But who invented the railroad engine?
Tracks? Trains? The infrastructure of complex railroads? All this occurred in
England.
Similarly, McClellan and Dorn’s Science and Technology in World History
presents material on non-European societies. But McClellan and Dorn are
also trying to present the substance of what crucial things happened where,
done by whom. The 10 people with the most index entries are, in order, Aristotle, Newton, Copernicus, Galileo, Darwin, Ptolemy, Kepler, Descartes,
Euclid, and Archimedes—a wholly conventional roster of stars. Of the scientific figures mentioned in McClellan and Dorn’s index, 97 percent come
from Europe and the United States—precisely the same percentage as yielded
by the Human Accomplishment inventory.
There is nothing wrong with McClellan and Dorn’s ordering of the top
10 or with their percentage of European and American scientists, just as there
is nothing wrong with the historiography of either Science and Technology in
World History or of Technology in World Civilization. On the contrary, both
books are consistent with the sources used to compile the inventories for
Human Accomplishment.[8] The contrast between the packaging for the books
and their actual texts is emblematic of our times. The packaging evokes the
way that intellectual fashion says things should be. The facts reflect the way
things really are.
Terra Cognita
The reason that any responsible history of science and technology will end up
with these numbers is that historians of science and technology are all working with the same database, vast as it may be, and the data in it are, for the
256 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
period we are exploring, reasonably complete. Gaps still exist, but none of
them is large enough to do more than tweak the details of the large-scale
portrait of what happened where.
Herein lies a difference between the layman and the specialist. Is the
average European or American often unaware of the technological sophistication reached by non-European cultures? No doubt about it, and in this
sense the charge of Eurocentrism is often appropriate. But what really matters
is whether the people who have been writing accounts of science and technology in the last half-century are aware of the non-European record—and
they are. The works of the great Arabic scholar-scientists of a millennium ago
formed the basis for the take-off of European science (which is why so many
Arab scholars are known by Latinized names). The great works of Indian
mathematics have long since been translated and incorporated into the
history of mathematics, just as the works of Chinese naturalists and
astronomers have been translated and incorporated into the narratives of
those fields.
Over the course of 20C, the body of knowledge about non-Western
science and technology grew exponentially. Thus, while Pacey’s book draws
together a body of material inaccessible to the average reader, almost all of
that material, including treatises on such things as “The geographical extent
of the use of bark fabrics,” “Terrestrial and meteoritic nickel in Indonesian
kris,” and “The plant world of the sixteenth and seventeenth century lowland
Maya,” is in English—fragments of a huge scholarly mosaic.9
In recognizing how thoroughly non-European science and technology
have been explored, let’s also give credit where credit is due: By and large, it
has not been Asian or Arabic scholars, fighting for recognition against European indifference, who are responsible for piecing together the record of
accomplishment by non-European cultures, but Europeans themselves.
Imperialists they may have been, but one of the by-products of that imperialism was a large cadre of Continental, British, and later American scholars,
fascinated by the exotic civilizations of Arabia and East Asia, who set about
uncovering evidence of their accomplishments that inheritors of those civilizations had themselves neglected. Joseph Needham’s seven-volume history
of Chinese science and technology is a case in point.[10] Another is George
Sarton’s Introduction to the History of Science, in five large volumes published
from 1927–1948, all of which is devoted to science before the end of 14C,
with the bulk of it devoted to the period when preeminence in science was
to be found in the Arab world, India, and China.
COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE OF MODERN EUROPE • 257
Triangulation
Another way of thinking about Eurocentrism is to ask whether, within the
sources used to compile the science and technology inventories, we can find
the fingerprints of bias. The strategy uses this logic: Non-European contributions may be no secret, but they are also unevenly included in European
accounts of science. Within the sources used to compile the inventories, some
sources are going to be more inclusive of non-European contributions than
others. If Eurocentrism is a problem, then the better the source, the greater
the inclusion of non-Europeans.
The test of this hypothesis is to compare a source that is unimpeachably
authoritative with the results from the less comprehensive histories and
chronologies. Such a source exists in the form of the Dictionary of Scientific
Biography (DoSB), sponsored by the American Council of Learned Societies,
now up to 17 large volumes plus an eighteenth for the index. It is designed
to be a definitive source in the hard sciences and mathematics (it is not
intended to be definitive for medicine and technology, and I exclude those
categories from this analysis). The DoSB’s editorial staff includes experts in
Arabic, Indian, and East Asian science drawn from universities around the
world. Consistent criteria are applied to the choice of who does and does not
gain admittance.
What makes the DoSB even better for our purposes is that the core
14 volumes first appeared in 1970 and the last two supplemental volumes
were issued in 1990, giving the editors two decades to hear about omissions—decades in which such sources were under intense scrutiny for
omissions of women, non-whites, and non-Europeans. It seems reasonable
to conclude that the DoSB in its present form has been as thoroughly
cleansed of Eurocentric bias as it is possible for a source to be.
Using the DoSB as the yardstick, I prepared two rosters of scientists and
mathematicians. One consists of everyone who appears in the DoSB. The
other roster consists of everyone who would have been part of Human Accomplishment’s database of scientists and mathematicians if the DoSB had not been
one of my sources. The chart on page 258 shows how the geographical distributions of the rosters compiled by these two different methods compare.
The geographic distributions produced by the two rosters are effectively the same. Eighty-one percent of the set in the DoSB comes from
Europe compared to 76 percent in the Human Accomplishment set, numbers
that rise to 94 and 91 percent respectively when the United States and
Canada are included.[11]
258 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
A comparison of the scientists identified
by the Dictionary of Scientific Biography and those identified
by the rest of the sources
Antipodes
South Asia
East Asia
DoSB
DoSB
0% 20% 40% 60% 80%
Sub-Saharan Africa
South America
Arab World
Ancient Western World
North America
Europe
Entries identified independently of the
 Entries
Is this merely evidence that the DoSB is as Eurocentric as any other
source? Perhaps, but at this point the ball is in the other court. On the face of
it, the DoSB has been as carefully assembled as any scholarly endeavor of its
kind ever has been. It is incumbent on those who continue to allege Eurocentrism to specify the names and contributions of the large numbers of
important Asian and Arabic scientists and mathematicians who have been left
out, or to explain why some thousands of the European entries don’t belong.
A CHALLENGE
My contention is that there is no significant body of ignored non-European
accomplishment out there for the historical period represented by –800 to
1950. Let me make this point in the form of a challenge that embraces the
inventories for both the arts and the sciences.
COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE OF MODERN EUROPE • 259
For the sciences, we have a specific target to shoot at, the 97 percent
figure that defines the proportion of scientific accomplishment I assign to
Europe and North America. The challenge is to augment the list of nonEuropean people and events in such a way that it will meaningfully alter the
97 percent figure.
There are two provisos. The first is that the new events must consist of
discoveries, inventions, and other forms of “firsts.” No fair adding the first
Indian suspension bridge to a catalog of Indian technology if suspension
bridges were already in use elsewhere.[12]
The other proviso is that the rules for inclusion of a person or event
must be applied evenly. If you augment the inventory of non-European
accomplishment by going to Joseph Needham’s seven-volume account of
Chinese science and technology, you must also augment the inventory of
European accomplishment by going to comparably detailed histories specifically dealing with German science (for example)—in other words, no fair
using the naked eye to search for European accomplishments and a microscope to search for non-European ones.
If one observes these two constraints, here is what will be found: If the
definition of “significant event” or “significant person” is relaxed to permit a
dozen new non-European entries, hundreds of new entries will qualify for
the European list, and the relative proportions assigned to Europe and nonEurope will not change. They may become even more extreme, because the
reservoir of non-trivial European accomplishment that did not get into the
inventory is so immense.
For the arts, we have no equivalently hard target. Seventy-four percent
of the significant figures in the visual arts and literature come from the West,
and we already know that the methodology used to identify significant
figures in the arts substantially inflates the non-Western numbers. In music,
the lack of a tradition of named composers in non-Western civilizations
means that the Western total of 522 significant figures has no real competition
at all. How might the non-Western numbers be augmented in the arts? What
if we were to discard artists as the unit of analysis, and substitute artistic
works? What if we were to broaden the definition of artistic objects?
If we limit ourselves to attributed works, the substitution of artistic
works in favor of the artist will have no effect, or work in the West’s favor. The
authors, composers, painters, and sculptors of the post-1400 West were, as a
rule, prodigiously productive. Compare the body of work by Shakespeare or
Goethe with that of Li Bo or Murasaki; that of Michelangelo or Picasso with
260 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
that of Sesshu or Zhao Mengfu; and so on down the list from the giants to the
merely excellent. At every level, the average number of major works per artist
is as large for the West as for the non-West.
Shall we consider lost works? Some of the most highly regarded
Chinese artists have no surviving works at all, and the music that Confucius
considered so important to Chinese culture is lost altogether. But as noted in
Chapter 3, the West similarly had painters such as Zeuxis, Polygnotus, and
Apelles, seen by their contemporaries as artistic equals to the sculptor Phidias.
None of their paintings survives, nor does any work of their lesser contemporaries. None of the Western music that Plato and Aristotle considered to be
so important to Greek culture survives. Even in literature, the masterpieces
the West retains from ancient days are probably outnumbered by the ones we
have lost. We know that Sophocles wrote at least 123 plays, of which only 7
survive in their entirety. Aeschylus wrote about 90 plays, of which we have 7.
Euripides wrote at least 92 plays, of which we have have only 19. One of the
greatest of Euripides’s surviving works, The Trojan Women, won only second
prize in a contemporary competition. We know nothing about the play that
came in first. Inserting a correction for lost work will not redress the imbalance between West and non-West.
Adding anonymous works won’t help. In literature, many non-Western
cultures have traditions of authorless folklore—but so does Europe, starting
with the Greek myths and continuing for another two thousand years, adding
Norse sagas, the stories of Camelot, Central European fairy tales, the poetry
of anonymous French troubadours. . . . The list could go on for every European language. In the visual arts, countries such as India and Persia have
important bodies of unattributed painting and sculpture—but so do the
countries of Europe, embracing virtually all the sculpture, painting, and
mosaics from the fall of the Roman Empire through the Middle Ages.
Demonstrating that the non-European role in the arts has been underestimated by the presentation here can be done only by expanding the definition of artistic accomplishment to include other forms of art that exist in
East Asia, South and Southeast Asia, Africa, and pre-Columbian America.
Once again, however, comes the proviso: the rules for including new works
must be applied evenly to Western and non-Western cultures.
Shall we add architecture, a category omitted from the visual arts inventory? There are temples in Asia and Central America that certainly belong in
any list of great architectural accomplishment. But the entire roster of such
architectural landmarks from outside Europe will be exceeded by ones in late
medieval and Renaissance Europe alone, before even getting started on Euro-
COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE OF MODERN EUROPE • 261
pean architectural accomplishment since then. Shall we introduce the decorative arts and crafts into the inventory of art works? Whatever gems of fine
artisanship are introduced from Asia, Africa, and the Americas are going to be
matched in quality and overwhelmed in number by the flood that will enter
the inventory from Europe. Putting aside everything else, consider just the
volume of fine artisanship in stone masonry, stained glass, tapestry, and
painted decoration from European churches and cathedrals.
Shall we treat functional objects—gracefully designed eating utensils,
baskets, warriors’ shields, fabrics—from non-European cultures as works of
arts? We will have to include centuries of European production of beautiful
things, from medieval armor and drinking goblets to Cellini’s golden saltcellar to Parisian haute-couture to Barcelona chairs—an endless variety of categories of beautifully designed practical objects, with distinctive traditions
coming out of every European country.
Shall we add popular music to the definition of accomplishment in
music? Every European country has a rich tradition of popular music, often
comprising separate folk traditions for vocal and instrumental music, and
separate traditions for different regions, separate traditions for different eras.
Hence the proposition: Whatever mechanism one uses to try to
augment the non-European contribution in both the arts and sciences will
backfire if the same selection rules are applied to Europe.
CODICIL: THE MOVING FINGER WRITES
I have gone to considerable lengths to document facts about the geographic
and chronological distributions of human accomplishment that are controversial because of intellectual fashion, not because the facts are ambiguous.
Now is a good time to introduce some cautions when interpreting those
distributions.
The first caution is directed to those of us in the United States. Americans often use West interchangeably with Europe, but one lesson of the data in
this chapter is how presumptuous that is. In his landmark Configurations of
Culture Growth (1944), written during the 1930s, A. L. Kroeber observed in
passing that “it is curious how little science of highest quality America has
produced”—a startling claim to Americans who have become accustomed to
American scientific dominance since 1950.13 But Kroeber was right.
Compared to Europe, the American contribution was still small then. In the
arts, a large dose of American humility is in order. Much as we may love
262 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Twain, Whitman, Whistler, and Copland, they are easily lost in the ocean of
the European oeuvre. What we are pleased to call Western civilization has been
in fact European civilization until the last half century.
The other caution is not to carry the numbers too far. The period prior
to 1400 may have had comparatively few significant figures, but it was rich in
giants. The figure opposite recasts the initial graph, combining all significant
figures across all inventories and all countries, superimposing the names of
some of the top-ranked figures from the indexes that antedate 1400. The
names appear roughly over the date to which they apply.
The names over the low-lying columns from –800 to 1400 are protean
figures in the history of the world’s civilizations—and I have included only a
sampling of the best known of the 690 significant figures who fall between
–800 and 1400. But we may document the point more systematically. For
example, 226 people had index scores of 40 or higher—a mere 6 percent of
the 4,002 significant figures. But of that elite 6 percent, almost half (48
percent) appeared prior to 1400. To some degree, this reflects the use of separate inventories for China, India, and Japan, which guaranteed that a number
of top-scoring figures would appear before the modern era, but the broad
point holds.
Furthermore, much of that genius came from outside Europe. No
Western philosophers have had greater impact on their cultures than Confucius and Buddha had on theirs. Those who are in a position to make such
judgments describe the great poets of China as among the greatest anywhere,
not just the greatest of China. A fine Japanese rock garden or ceremonial tea
bowl reflects an aesthetic sensibility as subtle as humans have ever known.
If we are to consider science and technology, this would be a good time
to go back to the account of Zheng He’s fleet of 317 ships and 27,750 men
in 15C (page 33), to be reminded of just how grand Chinese technological
and administrative capacity could be, or to reread the account of life in
Hangzhou (pages 34–37), to be reminded of the sophistication of Chinese
urban life when Europe was mired in the Dark Ages, or to examine the
account of experimentalism in Chinese science before 1400 (pages 235–37).
A third caution is to remember that we are beginning only at –800.
Return to Chapter 2 and reconsider all that humans had accomplished before
then. Then think of all the civilizations that arose independently of Europe,
before and after –800, and consider how many of them rose to similar technological levels—on different schedules, but ending up with a common
package of tools and techniques that enabled them to build large structures
and road networks, put together the interlocking systems that enable cities to
An antidote to “not much happened before 1400”
Homer
Thales
Sappho Mengzi
Buddha
Laozi
Plato
Hippocrates
Zhao Mengfu Sankara
Du Fu
Kalidasa
Gu Kaizhi
Confucius Su Shi
Guo Xi
Galen
Nagarjuna
Sima Qian
Euclid
Li Bo
Shonagon
Ni Zan
Dante
Zhuxi
Zhuangzi
Sophocles
Giotto
Aquinas
Pythagoras
Boccaccio
Rhazes
Augustine
Horace
Bhasa
Zeuxis
Phidias Fibonacci
Huizong
Alhazen
Geber
Sluter
Chaucer
<400 0 400 800 1200 1600
0
100
150
150
200
<800 2000
250
Archimedes
Virgil
Hipparchus
Aristotle
Vyasa
Ramanuja Bo Juyi
Tao Cian
Ptolemy
Qu Yuan
Han Yu
Wang Wei
Wu Daoxuan
Ouyang Xiu
Shikibu
 Tsurayuki
Yuan Zhen
Huang Gongwang
Democritus
Euripides
Aeschylus
Unkei
Kukai
Herodotus
Asvaghosa
Kumarila
Wang Xizhi
Plutarch
Valmiki
Cimabue
Ma Yuan
Averroës
Wang Meng
Petrarch
Combined Significant Figures
• • •
264 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
exist, develop complex agricultural practices and distribution mechanisms,
and conduct commerce. The technology inventory encourages misinterpretation insofar as it lists each of these accomplishments just once, assigning it
to the place where it first occurred. The potential for misinterpretation is
augmented because many of the inventions involved in this basic package of
technology antedate –800 and therefore do not enter the analysis at all.
Evidence scattered from Angkor Wat to Machu Picchu attests to the ability of
human beings throughout the globe, not confined to the leading civilizations,
to achieve amazing technological feats.
And yet, and yet. . . . Modern Europe has overwhelmingly dominated
accomplishment in both the arts and sciences. The estimates of the European
contribution are robust. They cannot, in any way I have been able to devise,
be attenuated more than fractionally.
As I write, it appears that Europe’s run is over. In another few hundred
years, books will probably be exploring the reasons why some completely
different part of the world became the locus of great human accomplishment.
Now is a good time to stand back in admiration. What the human species is
today it owes in astonishing degree to what was accomplished in just half a
dozen centuries by the peoples of one small portion of the northwestern
Eurasian land mass.
TWE L VE
. . . AND OF DEAD
WHITE MALES
Not only does Europe dominate the narrative of human accomplishment, so does the minority that has become known in recent years
as dead white males. In this chapter, as for the European role in the preceding chapter, I document the reasons for concluding that the inventories fairly represent the role played by people who were not males and not white.
The evidence for that conclusion is simplified because the inventories
stop in 1950, when women and ethnic minorities residing in Western countries had yet to acquire full access to the institutions of the arts and sciences.
The story that stands out does not involve women, Asians, or Africans, but
another minority that had suffered centuries of legal and social discrimination: the Ashkenazi Jews. The rapid pace at which they entered the inventories as soon as the barriers were even partially lifted is astonishing.
Why women have played so disproportionately small a role and Jews
have played so disproportionately large a role in the arts and sciences have
both been the subject of intense and acrimonious debates over the last few
decades, ones that I am not about to resolve. An overview of the competing
explanations concludes the chapter.
WOMEN
On the wall of Columbia University’s mathematics library hang four large
portraits of famous mathematicians: Carl Gauss, Henri Poincaré, Emmy
Noether, and Sonya Kovalevskaya.1 They are of somewhat different stature.
In the mathematics inventory for this book, Gauss ranks fourth and Poincaré
266 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
26th. Noether ranks 94th and Kovalevskaya 113th. The 2:2 split between the
sexes is also at odds with the split in the mathematics inventory, which is
187:4.
The motives behind Columbia’s choice of portraits are understandable,
but it is important not to conflate aspirations with history. Just as only two
percent of the mathematics significant figures were women, two percent of
all the significant figures were women—88 out of the 4,002 persons in the
inventories. They are split among the inventories as shown in the table below.
WOMEN AMONG THE SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
No. Percentage of
of total significant
Inventory women figures
The Sciences 24 1.7
Astronomy 5 4.0
Biology 4 2.1
Chemistry 1 0.5
Earth Sciences 0* 0
Physics 6 3.1
Mathematics 4 2.5
Medicine 4 1.8
Technology 0 0
Chinese Philosophy 0 0
Indian Philosophy 0 0
Western Philosophy 0 0
Arabic Literature 1 1.2
Chinese Literature 3 3.6
Indian Literature 2 4.7
Japanese Literature 7 8.2
Western Literature 37 4.4
Chinese Art 1 0.9
Japanese Art 0 0
Western Art 12 2.5
Western Music 1 0.2
Total 88 2.2
*The earth sciences inventory did not include anthropology,
which was classified instead as a social science and therefore
was not among the inventories for analysis. Among the 130
anthropologists identified in any of the science sources, four
were women, or 3.0 percent.
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 267
The earliest woman to appear in the inventories is the Greek poet,
Sappho of Lesbos, in –6C. A thousand years later comes the next woman,
the natural philosopher Hypatia of Alexandria, who lived from about 370 to
415. Another 13 women appear between Hypatia and 1600, but all of them
are confined to just one domain, literature. The first woman to qualify as a
significant figure in the visual arts is Wen Shu (1595–1634) of Ming China.
The first woman to qualify in any of the scientific inventories after Hypatia
is astronomer Caroline Herschel (1750–1848), sister and colleague of
William Herschel. The first and only woman in the music inventory is
French composer Germaine Tailleferre (1892–1983). No woman qualified as
a significant figure in any of the philosophy inventories.
The dearth of women in the inventories until 19C and 20C reflects
near-total exclusion, by law and social pressure, from the possibility of
participating. But the legal emancipation of women, which began in 19C
at about the same time as Jewish emancipation, took even longer to complete. In some European countries, women did not get the legal right to
engage in certain professions until early 20C. The figure on page 268
shows the percentage of significant figures who were women for each
half-century from 1800 to 1950, limiting the figures for the arts to the
Western inventories.
The most conspicuous increase over the three half-centuries is found
in the scientific inventories, where the number of women went from 1 to 2
to 19. Clearly, something happened to increase the access of women to scientific professions in the first half of 20C. Literature also saw an increase in
female significant figures in raw numbers, but no increase as a percentage.
During the most recent half century we are examining, 1900–1950, women
still constituted only 5 percent of significant figures in the hard sciences, 3
percent in mathematics, 7 percent in medicine, and none in technology. In
the combined arts inventories, women constituted 5 percent of the significant figures—a figure that was virtually identical if the numbers are split into
the Western versus non-Western arts inventories.
Women have even smaller representation among the highest index
scores. The figure on page 269 shows this visually by superimposing the
placement of the index scores of all the top-ranked women on a Lotka curve
based on a composite of all the index scores in all the inventories.
Murasaki Shikibu, the author of Tale of Genji, with the third-highest
index score in Japanese literature, is the lone woman at the far right-hand
side of the Lotka curve. Marie Curie, who won Nobel Prizes in both chemistry and physics, is the only other woman who has an index score higher
268 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The varied record of female significant figures from 1800 to 1950
1800–1850 1850–1900 1900–1950
0%
2%
4%
6%
Scientific Music
Percentage of Women
Year They Turned 40
Art Literature
than 18. The likelihood that a woman significant figure will have an index
score higher than 60 is less than half (47 percent) of the probability for significant figures as a whole. A woman significant figure’s likelihood of reaching the 20–60-point range is only about a third (36 percent) of the probability for significant figures as a whole. In short, inventories in the arts and
sciences, based on multiple sources, almost all of them written in the last few
decades, producing highly reliable indexes, tell us that women constitute only
a little more than 2 percent of all the significant figures, fewer than 5 percent
of the significant figures in the first half of 20C, and that even the top-ranked
women are, with the rarest exceptions, well back in the pack of the distributions in their fields. Are these fair characterizations of the role of women
in human accomplishment in the arts and sciences through 1950?
The Dictionary of Scientific Biography as a Benchmark in the Sciences
In the sciences, the Dictionary of Scientific Biography (DoSB) once again offers
a useful benchmark (the same reasons that make the DoSB an exemplary
source for non-Europeans also makes it an exemplary source for women),
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 269
The Location of the Top-Ranked Woman in Each Inventory
on the Lotka Curve
Noether (Mathematics)
0
Curie (Physics)
Levi-Montalcini (Biology)
Li Qingzhao (Chinese Literature)
Kollwitz (Western Art)
Leavitt (Astronomy)
Wen Shu (Chinese Art)
Tailleferre (Music)
Mira Bai (Indian Literature)
Woolf (Western Literature)
Davis (Medicine)
al-Khansa (Arabic Literature)
Index Score
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
 Shikibu
(Japanese Literature)
and we are again able to set up a test of this logic: Sources differ in their coverage of women’s contribution to the sciences. The definition of significant
figures is based on consensus (being mentioned in at least half of the sources).
What if we ignore consensus among sources of varying comprehensiveness,
and focus on one superior source in which we have special confidence? If
significant figures in the hard sciences and mathematics had been defined as
everyone included in the DoSB, would we find a different story than the one
told by the dozen-plus sources actually used to compile each inventory?
270 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
In such a case, the proportion of women significant figures in the sciences would have dropped by more than half. Relying exclusively on the
DoSB would have led to the conclusion that 0.7 percent of all the significant
figures in mathematics and the hard sciences were women, instead of the 1.9
percent actually designated.[2]
Is there a way that the roster of women significant figures could be augmented by another way of thinking about the use of the DoSB? For example, if the DoSB is as good I have claimed, let us assume that every woman
in the DoSB should be considered a significant figure—otherwise, she
wouldn’t have survived the DoSB’s selection process—and we will include
her in the inventory even if she is not mentioned in half of the other sources.
But this strategy fails. To see why, consider the concrete example of
Helen Dean King, an American biologist who lived from 1869 to 1955. She
developed the King colony, part of the Wister stock of white rats widely used
for research, and made important contributions in understanding the effects
of inbreeding and the mechanism of sex selection. In other words, she had a
substantial, distinguished career in genetics. The DoSB not only included her
but also spent 6.4 columns on her biography, well over twice as much as the
average length of 2.5 columns—and yet Helen Dean King is not among the
significant figures in the biology inventory, having failed to meet the criterion of mentions in 50 percent of the qualifying sources.
On the merits of her career, there’s no reason why she shouldn’t be a
significant figure. Many men in the biology inventory have narratives that
appear to be less impressive, or no more impressive, than King’s. We therefore add her to the roster of significant figures in biology.
But then we ask: What about the male biologists in the DoSB who had
biographies as long as or longer than King’s but who, like King, did not qualify as significant figures? It turns out that there were sixty of them. These
sixty had biographies averaging 8.7 columns. Six of them had biographies
greater than 12 columns long. One had a biography of 19 columns. When
one reads through those biographies, it becomes clear that they made scientific contributions at least as distinguished as King’s. Fair’s fair. If the rule for
significant figures says that King belongs, then so should at least those sixty
other biologists who hadn’t made the cut under the original criterion. It is
the same problem I discussed when trying to augment the non-European
contribution (see page 259): If the selection rules used to augment the number of women are applied to men as well, the proportion of women will
remain effectively unchanged, even drop, because the pool of mistakenly
omitted men is at least as large as the pool of mistakenly omitted women. As
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 271
it stands, Human Accomplishment’s inventory of biologists has 4 women and
189 men, or 2.1 percent women. If we were to take DoSB as the sole source,
the roster of biologists would consist of 12 women and 1,218 men, or 1.0
percent women, half the proportion in the actual inventory. If we stick with
Human Accomplishment’s inventory but go back to DoSB and add its women
to it but also add all the men with equal or higher scores who were also excluded from
the significant figures, the percentage in the inventory would drop to 2.0 percent. There is no way to drive up the percentage of women in these inventories without positing that every source, including the DoSB, is massively
biased against women.
The Women Who Were Left Out
Despite the material in the preceding discussion, an everyday reason exists
for continuing to think that such a massive bias exists: One may go into any
large bookstore and find an entire section devoted to women’s studies,
including compendia of women scientists, artists, composers, and authors.
Any one of these volumes will have far more women in its field of specialty
than in the corresponding inventory for Human Accomplishment. The continuing problem applies here: The selection rules for a book on women scientists (or Irish-American scientists, Jewish scientists, black scientists, or any
group selected on the basis of their group membership) are different than the
selection rules based on their importance to the history of science. But I can
be more specific about the nature of the populations in such books. If you
go to such a section of a major bookstore, pick up one of the books about
women in science, and start scanning the entries, here is an example of what
you will find:
1. Women with significant scientific accomplishments but whose work
postdates 1950.
2. Educators who taught science (e.g., Abella, Laura Bassi, Dorotea
Bocchi, Margaret Bryan).
3. Pioneers, the first women to get a degree in a given field, go into a
given profession, etc. (e.g., Florence Bascom, Rachel Bodley).
4. Translators and popularizers of scientific works (e.g., Maria
Ardinghelli, Florence Bailey, Aphra Behn, Ada Byron).
5. Women, usually amateurs, who collected data that were used by scientists (e.g., Isabella Bishop).
272 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
6. Activists in women’s rights and social reform whose profession was in
medicine or the sciences (e.g., Elizabeth Anderson, Elizabeth
Blackwell).
7. Wives, sisters, and children of famous male scientists (e.g., Elizabeth
Agassiz, Sarah Banks, Giuseppa Barbapiccola, Sophia Brahe, Mary
Buckland) who had some involvement in the work of the famous
males.
8. Women with accomplishments ancillary to science though not
involving scientific discoveries (e.g., Agamede, Agnodike, Aglaonike,
Arete of Cyrene, Aspasia, Axiothea of Phlius, Juliana Barnes, Marie
Biheron, Marie Boivin).
9. Women who were directly engaged in scientific professions and conducted substantial original research (e.g. Mary Anning, Herthe
Ayrton, Mary Blagg, Alice Boring, Mary Brandegee, Elizabeth
Britton, Elizabeth Brown) but are not included in Human
Accomplishment’s roster of significant figures.
10. Scientists who qualified as significant figures (e.g., Maria Agnesi).
The specific names are drawn from Marilyn Ogilvie’s Women in Science:
Antiquity through the Nineteenth Century (1988). The names represent all of
Ogilvie’s entries under the letters A and B. Among them, we have 1 woman
who qualified as a significant figure (category 10), 7 women whose careers
would at least make them eligible for consideration (category 9), and 27
women in the other 8 categories who had interesting and important careers,
but not ones that would ordinarily lead them to be part of a history of science or mathematics. In the case of the 7 women in category 9 who were
potentially eligible, we face a diluted example of the Helen King example.
None achieved anything comparable in importance to King’s accomplishments in genetics. One of them, Herthe Ayrton, is included in DoSB, and
trying to add her to the inventory poses the same problem as posed in the
King case: Ayrton was a physicist. Among physicists included in the DoSB,
120 people who also did not qualify as significant figures have biographies as
long as or longer than Ayrton’s. Of those 120, 119 are men.
Generalizing from the Case of the Sciences
Similar procedures could be applied to the arts inventories, but none of the
sources used for the inventories have as much face validity as a comprehen-
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 273
sive source as the DoSB. The exercises already conducted for the sciences
point to a few large realities. One is that the representation of women is so
small that even fairly large errors in under-representation wouldn’t make
much difference. Let us say for the sake of argument that the sources used for
the inventories were so biased against women that they left out half of the
women who should have been included. In that case, the inventories should
consist of 95.6 percent men instead of 97.8 percent men—a distinction without a difference. The broad historical patterns in these data are not going to
be changed even by implausible errors, let alone plausible ones.
Since 1950
With all the changes that have taken place in the standing of women over the
course of 20C, how much increase in the proportion of women could we
expect from a roster of significant figures that covered all of 20C? Based on
the most obvious indicator of distinguished achievement, the Nobel Prizes,
little seems to have changed. The table below shows the number of Nobel
Prizes awarded to women from 1901 to 1950 expressed as a percentage of all
prizes awarded, compared to those awarded from 1951 to 2000.
PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN NOBEL PRIZE
WINNERS IN LITERATURE AND THE
SCIENCES DURING THE TWO HALVES OF 20C
Prize 1901–1950 1951–2000
Sciences total 2% 2%
Chemistry 4% 1%
Medicine 2% 4%
Physics 2% 1%
Literature 11% 8%
Total 4% 3%
Note: The prizes for economics (awarded only since 1969)
and peace are in fields not included in the inventories.
Women won 3 and 7 peace prizes in the two halves of the
century respectively. No woman had won a prize in economics through 2002.
Source: Nobel Prize web site
In the first and second halves of the century respectively, women won
four and seven prizes in the sciences, and five and four prizes in literature. In
percentage terms, their proportion decreased marginally.
274 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The record for the Nobels may be augmented with raw data used to
compile the inventories for Human Accomplishment. Although the inventories
for full-scale analysis were cut off at 1950, entry into the raw databases often
was not. The specifics are given in the note.[3] The augmented database consists of a list of all persons mentioned in any source, including those who
turned 40 after 1950. These data cannot be used to infer much about changes
in the importance of women to accomplishment (though presumably a correlation exists), but they at least give us a fix on the change in participation of
women in various fields. The figure below uses these raw entries for Western
art, literature, and music, and for the combined scientific fields.[4] The timeline runs in two-decade periods, from 1870–1890 to 1970–1990, based on
the year in which the people in the inventories turned 40.
The trendlines for raw mentions of women from 1870 to 1990 Percentage of Women
30%
20%
10%
0%
1870–1890 1890–1910 1910–1930 1930–1950 1950–1970 1970–1990
Year They Turned 40
Scientific Art Literature Music
In the field where women historically have been most prominent, literature, the last half of 20C saw a steady and substantial increase in participation, with women amounting to more than 30 percent of all entries in a
recent encyclopedic source. For the visual arts and music, participation by
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 275
women was effectively flat from 1870 until 1970, with an uptick in the
1970–1990 period. No upward trend is found for the combined scientific
inventories.
THE JEWS
Jews make their first appearance in the annals of the arts and sciences during
the centuries when the Middle East and Moorish Spain were at their cultural
peak. When science historian George Sarton set out to enumerate the top
scientists across the world, including East Asia, South Asia, the Arab world,
and Christian Europe, from 1150 to 1300, he came up with 626 names, of
whom 95 were Jews—15 percent of the total, produced by a group that at
the time represented about half of 1 percent of the world’s population that
was in a position to produce scientists.5 But few of those 626 are important
enough in the broader sweep of scientific history to warrant a mention in
histories that are less tightly focused. Of the 10 Jews who qualified as
significant figures in the inventories prior to 19C, only 2 are still familiar
to the general public, Montaigne and Spinoza, and neither of them was a
typical Jew of his time. Montaigne’s mother came from a wealthy Spanish/
Portuguese Jewish family, but Montaigne himself was a lifelong Catholic.
Spinoza was excommunicated by his Dutch Jewish community for his
unorthodox views.
Five of the 8 other Jews who appear in the inventories before 1800
were also part of the philosophy inventory. They were Philo Judaeus
from ancient Roman Alexandria, Solomon ibn Gabirol (Avicebron) and
Maimonides from Moorish Spain, and Moses Mendelssohn and Johann
Herder from 18C Germany. In all of those 26 centuries, the roster of
Western significant figures includes not one Jewish artist, scientist, physician,
or inventor, and just one writer (Fernando Rojas), one composer (Salamone
Rossi), and one mathematician (Paul Guldin).
This sparse representation in European arts and sciences through the
beginning of 19C reflects Jews’ near-total exclusion from the arts and sciences. Jews were not merely discouraged from entering universities and the
professions, they were often forbidden by law from doing so. Socially, they
were despised. “Underlying everything,” writes historian David Vital, “was
the central fact that under the old regime no Jew was, or could be, a member of civil society. No matter how learned or wealthy or contingently influ-
276 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
ential he might be within or without Jewry itself, a Jew was held to belong
to a moral and, of course, theological category inferior to that of the meanest peasant.”6 I will not try to establish a hierarchy of victimhood among
Jews, women, and other minorities, but an uncomplicated point needs
emphasis: Until the end of 18C throughout Europe, and well into 19C in
most parts of Europe, Jews lived under a regime of legally restricted rights
and socially sanctioned discrimination as severe as that borne by any population not held in chattel slavery.
In a practical sense, legal equality for Jews first occurred in the newly
formed United States, where Jews were given full rights under federal law,
though full protection at the state level had to wait upon the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868.7 France and the
Netherlands emancipated their Jewish populations in the 1790s. Throughout
the first half of 19C, the rest of Western and Central Europe evolved
toward more tolerant policies without actually granting full legal equality. In
England, Jews faced comparatively few legal restrictions after mid-18C,
though it was not until the Promissory Oaths Act of 1871 that the last remnants of discriminatory law were revoked. The revolutions of 1848 saw civil
rights granted (though not necessarily enforced) in most of Austro-Hungary
and Germany. Bismarck completed the emancipation of Prussian Jews in
1869. Emancipation of Italian Jews began in the Piedmont in 1848 and
ended in 1870 in Rome. Switzerland granted emancipation in 1866.
In Russia, which in 19C also meant Poland, events moved the other
way. The assassination of Alexander II in 1881 intensified long-standing
Russian anti-Semitism. What had before been occasional acts of violence
became the pogroms. The Russian state reinforced popular hostility toward
Jews with the supposedly temporary May Laws of 1882—laws that were
unofficially said to have the goal of forcing one-third of Russian Jews to emigrate, one-third to convert, and one-third to starve. They succeeded in the
first of these aims, prompting a great exodus of Russian and Polish Jews
heading mostly to the United States.
This history provides us with a nice example of what social scientists
call an interrupted time series. Until nearly 1800, Jews are excluded. Then,
over about 70 years, the legal exclusions are lifted and the social exclusion
eases. What happens? “The suddenness with which Jews began to appear . . .
is nothing short of astounding,” writes historian Raphael Patai. “It seemed as
if a huge reservoir of Jewish talent, hitherto dammed up behind the wall of
Talmudic learning, were suddenly released to spill over into all fields of
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 277
Gentile cultural activity.”8 During the four decades from 1830 to 1870, when
the first Jews to live in emancipation (or at least to live under less rigorously
enforced suppression) reach their forties, 16 Jewish significant figures appear.
In the next four decades, from 1870 to 1910, when all non-Russian Jews are
living in societies that offer equal legal protections if not social equality, that
number jumps to 40. During the next four decades until 1950—including
the years of the Third Reich and the Holocaust—the number of Jewish significant figures almost triples, to 114. The figure below shows how these
numbers work out as percentages of all significant figures for the three halfcenturies from 1800 to 1950.
The sudden emergence of Jewish significant figures,
1800–1950
0%
10%
20%
30%
Scientific Music
1800–1850 1850–1900 1900–1950
Percentage of Jewish Figures
Art Literature
I do not show the results for philosophy because the Jewish proportion
becomes so high in 1900–1950, when Jews represented 6 out of the 18 significant figures in philosophy (33 percent), that it distorts the other trendlines. The results shown in the graph above are already impressive enough
without philosophy, as Jewish representation rises steeply in all the inventories but music, where it had begun at a high rate even in 1800–1850.
278 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The Magnitude of Disproportional Jewish Representation in the Inventories
These numbers quantify a familiar observation about Jewish achievement.
Here is Lord Ashley, the future seventh Earl of Shaftesbury, speaking in the
House of Commons in December 1847, as Her Majesty’s government debated whether to amend the oath required of members of the Commons so that
non-Christians could honorably swear to it:
The Jews were a people of very powerful intellect [the minutes record Ashley
as saying], of cultivated minds. . . . [Lord Ashley] was speaking not of the old
Jews in their palmy days, but of the Jews oppressed and despised in their days
of dispersion. Even thus, their literature embraced every subject of science
and learning, of secular and religious knowledge.... The Jews presented
. . . in our day, in proportion to their numbers, a far larger list of men of
genius and learning than could be exhibited by any Gentile country. Music,
poetry, medicine, astronomy, occupied their attention, and in all they were
more than a match for their competitors.9
Lord Ashley’s comments were made in 1847, when Jews had barely
begun to reappear on the world stage as leading figures within the arts and
sciences. Within another few decades, scholars were undertaking statistical
analysis to estimate the degree of disproportional Jewish representation in the
arts and sciences, the issue to which I now turn.10
To get a sense of the density of accomplishment these numbers represent, I will focus on 1870 onward, after legal emancipation had been
achieved throughout Central and Western Europe. Only from this latter period can we draw a roughly accurate sense of the magnitude and patterns of
Jewish accomplishment—“roughly,” because Jews were still subject to pervasive social and educational discrimination even after 1870.
The next step is to compare the number of significant figures that
would be expected on the basis of Jewish representation in the population.
As of 1900, the best estimate is that the Jewish population of Europe and the
United States (where all of the Jewish significant figures were born or
worked) represented about 2.1 percent of the population. As of 1940, the
best estimate is 2.2 percent.[11] I will take 2.2 percent as my working figure
for the period throughout 1870 to 1950. It is important to note that if I had
added in the population for the rest of the Americas, where Jews had immigrated in far lower numbers, this percentage would have been much smaller.
The following are conservative estimates of disproportional Jewish representation in the inventories.
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 279
The simplest approach to estimating the Jewish contribution is to take
the entire number of significant figures from Europe and the United States
in the Western inventories of 1870–1950, ask what number of these we
would expect to be Jewish given their 2.2 percent representation in the population, and compare the two numbers. The table below shows the results.
Disproportional Representation
of Jews by Inventory, 1870–1950
Ratio of actual
Expected Actual to expected
significant significant significant
Inventory figures* figures figures
Combined scientific
inventories 14.5 94 6:1
Astronomy 1.0 1 1:1
Biology 2.3 18 8:1
Chemistry 2.4 13 6:1
Earth Sciences 0.8 2 3:1
Physics 3.0 26 9:1
Mathematics 1.1 13 12:1
Medicine 1.8 14 8:1
Technology 2.1 7 3:1
Visual Arts 3.1 16 5:1
Literature 6.8 26 4:1
Music 3.1 14 5:1
Philosophy 0.6 8 14:1
*Total number of significant figures times .022.
In every case except astronomy, Jews are disproportionately represented. The period 1870–1950 saw the addition of 1,277 significant figures
to the Western inventories. If the Jews had produced significant figures strictly in accordance with their representation in the population, about 28 of
those 1,277 should have been Jewish. The actual number was at least 158
(data on ethnicity were not available for many of the less prominent significant figures, and some Jews have doubtless been missed).[12] The disproportional representation since 1870 has been most pronounced in philosophy,
where Jews have outperformed their expected contribution by 14:1, followed by mathematics (12:1) and physics (9:1).[13]
280 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Jewish Disproportional Representation Within Countries
A possible artifact comes to mind: Jews were either growing up in or immigrating to countries such as France, Germany, Britain, and the United States,
all of which were producing disproportionate numbers of significant figures
during the period 1870–1950 even without counting the Jewish contribution. The apparent disproportional representation of Jews merely reflects
their participation in these active countries.
This hypothesis may be tested by breaking down the figures according
to the country where significant figures achieved the bulk of their careers
and comparing the number of significant figures produced by Jews and
Gentiles. The period is still 1870–1950. The computation of significant figures per million is based on an average of the populations in 1900 and 1940,
once again having the effect of skewing the figures to minimize the Jewish
contribution, for reasons explained in the note.[14] The table below shows
the results for the six countries with the most significant figures for
1870–1950.
Disproportional Representation of Jews
by Country, 1870–1950
Ratio of Jewish
to Gentile
Total Total significant
Jewish Gentile figures after
significant significant controlling for
Work country* figures figures population†
Austro-Hungary 21 50 7:1
Britain 8 170 8:1
France 18 185 19:1
Germany 40 155 22:1
Russia 9 63 4:1
USA 48 261 5:1
*Work country refers to the nation where a significant figure
spent the most important part of his career.
† The numerator is Jewish significant figures per million Jewish
population. The denominator is Gentile significant figures
per million Gentile population.
In each instance, the hypothesis that Jewish accomplishment is
explained by the activity in the countries where they worked fails. France’s
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 281
and Germany’s high ratios of 19:1 and 22:1 respectively, much higher than
in Britain and the United States, are intriguing. Immigration of people who
had made their reputation in Russia and then emigrated to Germany or
France in mid-career is not a factor—the work country for such persons is
classified as Russia. Immigration of children from Eastern Europe is not a
factor. Germany lost more to Jewish emigration than it gained from immigration (it had a net loss of 7 significant figures from 1870–1950), while
France had a net gain of just 5. The United States was the big winner from
immigration, with a net gain of 26 during that period.
The parsimonious explanation for the high ratios in France and
Germany is that those countries provided favorable environments in which
Jews could rise. This is hard to believe of Germany when one thinks of Hitler
and the Third Reich. But throughout 19C and through World War I,
Germany was a success story of growing Jewish opportunity and assimilation
into German high culture.15
Another intriguing aspect of the table is the story for Russia. Russia
drove out a large portion of its Jewish population. It persecuted the ones
who remained, through legal restrictions and virulent anti-Semitism. After
the Revolution, Stalin killed substantial numbers of the most able elements
of the remaining Jewish population. Socially, anti-Semitism remained a fact
of Soviet life as it had been a fact of Czarist life. And despite all that, Jews
are disproportionately represented among Russian significant figures from
1870–1950 by a ratio of 4:1.
In closing, a caution: Jewish disproportional representation should not
be confused with Jewish domination. Even in Germany, Jews amounted
to only 40 out of 195 significant figures who appeared from 1870–1950,
21 percent of the total. The point of this exercise is to document the
extreme density of the Jewish contribution relative to the size of the Jewish
population.
Since 1950
As in the case of women, it seems inarguable that education and occupations
were more open to Jews in the last half of 20C than they had been in the
first half of 20C (even without considering the Third Reich). The expectation is that Jewish accomplishment would continue to increase—and so,
judging from one readily available indicator, it has. The table on page 282
replicates the story for Nobel Prizes shown earlier for women.
In raw numbers, Jews won 29 prizes in the sciences and literature in
282 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Percentage of Jewish Nobel Prize Winners in Literature
and the Sciences During the Two Halves of 20C[16]
Prize 1901–1950 1951–2000
Sciences total 17% 29%
Chemistry 12% 22%
Medicine 22% 32%
Physics 15% 32%
Literature 4% 15%
Total 14% 29%
Note: The prizes for economics (awarded only since 1969) and
peace are in fields not included in the inventories. Jews won 2
and 7 peace prizes in the two halves of the century, and won 18
of the 46 economics prizes (39 percent) through 2000.
Sources: See note 16.
the first half of the century, 14 percent of the total awarded, and 96 in the
second half, 29 percent of the total awarded—more than a tripling of
numbers and almost a doubling of the percentage.[17] As one would expect,
this was accompanied by greatly increased ratios, but trying to estimate those
ratios produces ludicrous results. During the second half of 20C, the Nobel
Committee explicitly tried to expand its frame of reference to include the
entire world, awarding prizes to people from several Asian, African, and
Latin American countries. But Jews as of the last quarter of 20C represented less than half of one percent of the world’s population. If one expresses the Jewish population as a proportion of the developed world’s population,
using 1 percent as the estimate, then the ratios for 1951–2000 range from
a minimum of 15:1 to a maximum of 35:1. Instead, the table opposite
shows the ratios if we continue to use 2.2 percent as the basis for the calculation. This no longer produces merely conservative estimates, but radically
understated ones.
In the sciences and literature, Jews were disproportionately represented
during 1901–1950 by a ratio of 6:1. During 1951–2000, that ratio doubled,
to 12:1, rising substantially in every prize category, even when calculated by
a method that understates the per capita Jewish contribution by several-fold.
This trend is consistent with the hypothesis that Jewish accomplishment up
to 1950 was still being held back relative to its potential.[18]
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 283
Ratio of Actual to Expected Jewish Nobel Prize Winners in
Literature and the Sciences During the Two Halves of 20C
Prize 1901–1950 1951–2000
Sciences total 8:1 13:1
Chemistry 5:1 10:1
Medicine 10:1 14:1
Physics 7:1 14:1
Literature 2:1 7:1
Total 6:1 12:1
Note: Expected winners are estimated by multiplying the total
number of winners times .022. The ratio represents actual winners divided by expected winners.
Sources: See note 16.
RECENT TRENDS FOR NON-WHITES, MALE
AND OTHERWISE
The story for non-whites living in their native countries was described in
Chapter 11 when I compared the contributions from Europe, the rest of the
West, and everywhere else. But that discussion did not look at recent trends,
nor did it take into account the contributions of ethnically non-white significant figures who did their work in Europe or the United States. The
question arises: If we focus on ethnicity instead of nationality, how does the
picture change?
When we restrict the inquiry to significant figures and the cutoff date
of 1950, hardly anything changes. Four ethnically African writers and one
African composer appear in the roster of significant figures, but otherwise all
the significant figures in literature, music, and the visual arts from nonEuropean backgrounds were already treated in Chapter 11.[19] Some changes
may be observed when we turn to the evidence that includes people who
were active after 1950. As before, I begin with the Nobel Prizes.
As the figure at the top of page 284 shows, the trend is definitely up in
both prize categories, but the proportions remain small even in the second
half of 20C.
Again following the example used for women and Jews, I now turn to
the complete roster of people mentioned even once in any source, including
those after 1950 (see the figure at the bottom of page 284). We are limited
to people in the scientific inventories, because the arts inventories were prepared separately for some non-European nations.
284 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
PERCENTAGE OF ETHNICALLY NON-EUROPEAN
NOBEL PRIZE WINNERS DURING THE FIRST
AND SECOND HALVES OF 20C
Science Prizes* Literature Prize
Ethnicity 1901–1950 1951–2000 1901–1950 1951–2000
African —
Arabic —
Chinese —
Indian 1%
Japanese 1%
— — 4%
1% — 2%
2% — 2%
1% 2% —
2% — 4%
Total 2% 6% 2% 12%
*Chemistry, Medicine, Physics.
The Japanese have been on an upward trend. The Chinese increased in
the second half of 20C. Africans and Indians have remained at a lower
level.[20] Only two Arabic persons are mentioned. In interpreting these numbers, recall that living persons were not included in the DoSB, which means
The trendlines in the combined scientific inventories
for raw mentions of ethnically non-European persons
from 1830 to post-1950
Percentage of All Persons Involved 3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
1870–1889 1890–1909 1910–1929 1930–1949 1950–1970 1970–1990
Year They Turned 40
African Chinese Indian Japanese
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 285
that some eminent scientists from these ethnic groups whose contributions
came in the last half of 20C were omitted.
To summarize: recent trends suggest that the proportional contributions of non-whites are likely to increase in the years to come, even if adding
ethnicity to the analysis does not change the picture prior to 1950.
DO WE HAVE ANY IDEA WHY?
Explanations of the disproportionately high representation of Jews and low
representation of women in the inventories can be biological or environmental. We are not required to choose from just one bin. Biological and
environmental explanations can both play a role, separately or interacting in
such complex ways that the line between the roles of biology and environment blurs.
As I set out to discuss the possibilities, a peculiarity of this historical
moment should be kept in mind: Almost all of the current evidence regarding the causes of group differences is circumstantial and inconclusive. The
debate will not have to depend on circumstantial evidence much longer,
however. Within a few decades, we will know a great deal about the genetic differences among groups. Not all of the controversy will go away, but the
room for argument will narrow substantially. It therefore seems pointless to
use historical patterns of accomplishment to try to anticipate what these
genetic findings will be. I am reminded of a colleague who received his
Ph.D. in the late 1950s for a factor analysis that had taken him more than a
year to complete with his protractor and hand calculator. In the same week
that he submitted the thesis, he reproduced all that painstaking effort on the
university’s brand-new computer in the course of an afternoon. In retrospect, he would have been much better off choosing another topic. So too
with any attempt to defend a particular causal theory underlying gender and
ethnic differences in human accomplishment as of the opening of 21C. Here,
I confine myself to a synopsis of current thinking about causes, without trying to be exhaustive or conclusive.
Women
Why, despite the removal of the legal obstacles, do women continue to show
up in such small numbers in rosters of accomplishment? The account of
Jewish accomplishment adds an implicit stinger to this question: If the Jews
286 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
could rise to the top so rapidly once legal obstacles were removed, why
couldn’t women?
Environmental causes. Part of the answer is that the nature of the obstacles facing Jews and women differed. Winning the legal battle could not have
nearly the liberating effect for women that it had for Jewish males. A Jewish
male trying to take advantage of his newly won legal rights was acting as
males had always been expected to act, but in new venues. A woman trying
to take advantage of her newly won legal rights by entering a profession had
to be prepared to make three new sacrifices. First, she had to accept being
an oddball, which, depending on her situation, could mean being the object
of curiosity, ridicule, scorn, or sometimes hatred, and not just from strangers
(as was the case with anti-Semitism) but from her own community and
even family. Second, she had to confront the reality that to pursue a career
would automatically reduce the likelihood of marriage (the number
of men willing to marry a career woman was then limited) and would
increase the likelihood that any marriage she did enter would be strained if
she continued her career. Third, even if she found herself in a good marriage,
she had to confront another reality: Pursuing a career at full throttle, as firstrank accomplishment demands, is at odds with being a full-time mother. In
practice, pursuing a career at full throttle often meant forgoing motherhood
altogether.
These sacrifices did not go away when the legal battle was won.
Professors in scientific and engineering faculties continued to tell young
women that they shouldn’t be taking up men’s places in their classes.
Employers continued to prefer men over women, pay them more, and promote them higher. Men as a group continued to feel threatened by intelligence and independence in the women they might be considering for wives.
Husbands continued to discourage wives from pursuing careers that would
compete with their own. It is hard to measure trendlines for such behaviors,
but anecdotal evidence indicates they were not much less prevalent in 1950
than they had been earlier. The conflict between career and motherhood had
not even lessened.
On these grounds alone, it is not surprising to see that legal emancipation failed to produce the same profusion of significant figures among
women that it produced among Jewish males, and not surprising to see that
progress even after 1950 has been slow. The only causes that need to be
invoked are environmental ones that no one doubts have been real. The
remaining question is whether they are underwritten by other more basic
differences between men and women. I will offer two scenarios, one focus-
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 287
21
useless.
HOMOSEXUALITY AND HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Thinking about the possible biological correlates of human accomplishment raises the question of homosexuality. In our own era, the
disproportionate representation of homosexuals in the arts is taken for
granted, though specific magnitudes are hard to come by. For the
period –800 to 1950, the significant figures claimed as homosexuals in
a recent book, The Gay 100, include Socrates, St. Augustine, Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, William Shakespeare, Piotr Tchaikovsky, Lord
Byron, and Francis Bacon, in addition to significant figures of more
recent years, such as Oscar Wilde and Walt Whitman, whose homosexuality is indisputable.
The relationship of homosexuality to accomplishment in the arts
and its possible biological roots are fascinating topics, but ones that I
will leave for others. The difficulties in identifying homosexuality in
significant figures are too great. Many of the claims now being made
about homosexuals of the past, such as Shakespeare, are dubious. On
the other side, it must be assumed that some significant figures were so
effectively closeted that they are not part of even the most inclusive
lists. I conclude that any historiometric estimates of the representation
of homosexuals among the significant figures are so uncertain as to be
ing on the role of motherhood and the other drawing more broadly from the
socio-biological perspective.
Women and Motherhood. Exceptions exist, but, as a rule, the experience
of pregnancy and birth appears to be a more profoundly life-altering experience for women than becoming a father is for men. So closely is giving
birth linked to the fundamental human goal of giving meaning to one’s life
that it has been argued that, ultimately, it is not so much that motherhood
keeps women from doing great things outside the home as it is men’s inability to give birth that forces them to look for substitutes.
Motherhood affects women’s achievement through several mechanisms. The central importance of motherhood means that many women
do not want to jeopardize the opportunity to become a mother. Singleminded devotion to a profession involves such a risk. Recall that the mean
age at which peak accomplishments occur, following years of preparation, has
288 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
been about 40. The years crucial to realizing great achievements have been
precisely those years during which women are sexually most attractive, best
able to find mates, and best able to bear children.
Among women who have already become mothers, the possibilities for
accomplishment in the arts and sciences shrink. The problem here is not one
that can be changed with better child-care arrangements. Rather, it is
argued, the emotional distractions of parenthood are far greater for most
mothers than for most fathers. However equally the physical burdens of child
care are divided, the woman is likely to spend much more of the rest of her
time thinking about the child’s needs than the man does.
We could still be talking about environmental causes—the generalizations I have just offered are true about the world in which we live, it may be
said, but only because males and females are socialized differently. But the
empirical record casts this explanation into doubt. I will not try to review
that literature here, but instead give you an encyclopedic source in the note
and make this assertion about the pattern of findings it reveals: Don’t count
on socialization being the answer.22 The state of knowledge already suggests
that, as groups, men and women have fundamentally different relationships
to parenthood that are parsimoniously explained by genetics.
Even if the differences are inborn, this counter argument can be posed:
Yes, motherhood may be more consuming for women than for men, but as
opportunities open up for women in the arts and sciences, those who are
most able to make great contributions are also the most likely to forgo
motherhood. Thus the disparity between men and women will narrow
anyway.
Time will tell what the relative numbers of such singly focused women
might be. The point to remember here is that we are not talking merely
about motherhood versus career or about juggling jobs and children. When
we discuss accomplishments at the level of the people in the inventories, we
are commonly talking about perfectionist, monomaniacal devotion to a calling. That calls for a much more ruthless tradeoff than the ones ordinarily
required by a job and children. We should not be surprised or dismayed to
find that motherhood tempers the all-consuming obsession that great
accomplishment in the arts and sciences often requires.
The Raw Materials for Great Accomplishment. The most ambitious and
controversial explanation for the disparity between accomplishment among
men and women is based on biological differences in the types of human
capital that go into great accomplishment.
The empirical observation at the core of this view is that in human
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 289
societies around the world, men have without exception routinely held the
top positions in hierarchies and dominated the high-status roles. Without
exception is a strong statement, but the documentation for this aspect of the
argument is persuasive. In 1970, sociologist Steven Goldberg published The
Inevitability of Patriarchy, in which he asserted that these characteristics were
universal. His book was met with a barrage of claims to the contrary, citing
examples of societies and tribes in which men did not dominate the hierarchies and the high-status roles. In 1993, Goldberg published a new statement
of his theory entitled Why Men Rule, in which he examined every supposed
exception that had been cited in response to his first book. To my knowledge, no one is still trying to make a data-based case (although rhetorical
claims continue) that Goldberg’s claim of universality is wrong.
Using social construction to explain why human societies have been
universally constructed according to these sex differences in role and attainment requires complicated arguments. Using biology to explain them
requires simple ones. Parsimony suggests that at least part of the explanation
must involve biological differences that give males an advantage in attaining
those roles. Many of these differences are argued to cluster around malefemale differences in aggressiveness, broadly defined. It could well be that the
Sistine Chapel and the invention of the blitzkrieg both really come from the
same cause: It is men who go to the extremes, compete ruthlessly, and, in
whatever field they take up, are going to achieve the best and the worst. The
word testosterone comes to mind as a causal factor.
One aspect of this male tendency toward extremes seems to apply to
cognitive ability. Although the mean IQ of men and women is apparently the
same, the variability of male IQ is higher—meaning that more men than
women are to be found at both the high and low extremes of IQ. Conjoined
with this is evidence that men’s and women’s cognitive repertoires are somewhat different.23 Women tend to do better, for example, in a variety of verbal skills; men in a variety of mathematical and visual-spatial skills. The latter
may explain a conundrum: Brain size is reliably correlated with IQ; men and
women have different mean brain sizes; but men and women have similar
overall IQ.24 Some large portion of those extra brain cells in men may be
devoted to three-dimensional processing, the largest and most consistently
identified male cognitive advantage.
In any case, the male advantage in these areas, which has plausible
evolutionary origins (see the following box), fits neatly with the observed
patterns of human accomplishment in the inventories, whereby the male
advantage corresponds to degree of abstraction involved in an art (literature
290 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Homo sapiens
point A to B
EVOLUTIONARY EXPLANATIONS
Cognitive tests consistently find that women are better at remembering the relative location of things within a known array of
objects whereas men are better able to generate accurate representations of novel environments. Or to put it in terms of stereotypes
that seem to have merit: Wives remember where the car keys are;
guys read maps better than girls do. Why should this be?
The evolutionary psychologists point out that when
was evolving, the ability to mentally visualize how to get from
and back again had major survival value, and so did the
ability to identify food plants from within complex arrays of vegetation. Men did the hunting (fostered by other physical advantages
of males) while women did the gathering. Their mental repertoires
diverged corresponding to the skills that evolutionary pressure
rewarded. Explaining the male advantage in rotating threedimensional images in contemporary laboratory settings is even
more direct: Being able to process the trajectory of objects in three
dimensions is a terrific survival advantage if the rabbit is over there,
you’re over here, and you’ve got a rock in your hand.
being the least abstract and musical composition being the most abstract,
with the visual arts in the middle). Women have been represented among the
great writers since Sappho, whereas to this day there have been no women
composers of the first rank and only a few second-rank ones, while the
record of women in the visual arts is in between.
Within the sciences, the ordering from more to less abstract is not so
clear cut—some tasks in astronomy, for example, are pure observation, cataloging, and description, while others call on the highest reaches of mathematical abstraction. But in scanning the roster of female significant figures
in the sciences, the overwhelming majority made their reputations on
achievements that were concrete rather than abstract, with the most famous
of all women scientists, two-time Nobel winner Marie Curie, being an apt
example.
In citing specific cases I risk confusing an exercise intended to illustrate
with one intended to prove, and so I will desist. The existing circumstantial
evidence is already strong enough to have persuaded me that disparities in
accomplishment between the sexes are significantly grounded in biological
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 291
differences, but nothing in this brief rehearsal of the arguments need sway
readers who are confident that science will prove me wrong. I close the discussion of sex differences with the point that I made at the outset: All we
need is a few decades’ patience and we won’t have to argue anymore.
The Jews
What explains the extraordinary level of accomplishment among the
Ashkenazi Jews who came out of Central and Eastern Europe? Explanations
of the causal dynamics vary, but they all start from one indisputable, consistent fact about traditional Jewish life: the extraordinarily high value attached
to learning. Here is a senior official of Russian-controlled Poland writing of
Polish Jews in 1818:
Almost every one of their families hires a tutor to teach its children. . . . We
[Gentiles] do not have more than 868 schools in towns and villages and
27,985 pupils in all. They probably have the same number of pupils because
their entire population studies. Girls too can read, even the girls of the poorest families. Every family, be it in the most modest circumstances, buys
books, because there will be at least ten books in every household. Most of
those inhabiting the huts in [Gentile] villages have only recently heard of an
alphabet book. . . .25
Devotion to learning has been a constant in Jewish life from time out
of mind, and it is not surprising to see it associated with a high degree of
realized intellectual ability. In the modern era, this intellectual ability has
been measured with mental tests of various sorts, including IQ tests. Reports
of the mean IQ of Ashkenazi Jews vary, but it is likely to be at least 107 on
tests that are normed to have a mean of 100.26 Note the specification of
Ashkenazi Jews, the group that dominates Northern European and American
Jewish populations, though I drop the specification in the rest of the discussion. The data for Oriental Jews do not show consistently elevated IQ
means.27
IQs.
Jews also have much larger proportions of people with extremely high
[28] The famous Terman study of high-IQ children in the early 1920s
found that 10.5 percent of California children with IQs of 135 or higher
were Jewish. This percentage was found even with a definition that did not
define any child as Jewish if he had even one non-Jewish grandparent, in an
era when many Jewish families hid their ethnic identity, and in an era when
many of those who did identify themselves as Jewish used Yiddish as the pri-
292 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
mary spoken language at home (the children were tested in English). Terman
himself believed that the 10.5 percent estimate was a substantial underestimate of Jewish representation. In 1954, a psychologist took advantage of
New York City’s universal IQ-testing to identify all 28 children with measured IQs of 170 or higher. Twenty-four of them were Jews.29
These findings about IQ leave us with the chicken and egg problem
still unresolved. Do Jews have high IQs because their culture encourages it,
or does their culture value learning so highly because Jews are unusually
good at learning? With admonishments to remember that we still do not
know the answer, it is at least plausible that selection pressures have led to a
higher Jewish IQ with some genetic basis. One cause of genetic difference
could be the Diaspora and subsequent centuries of anti-Semitism, requiring
the Jews to survive in alien and often hostile cultures. Those who survived
and left behind offspring were statistically likely to be more resourceful than
those who did not.30 Another line of argument for a genetic basis is that status within traditional Jewish communities was closely linked with learning.
The young rabbi was one of the most desirable marriage partners for young
women, and also, given the intellectual demands of Talmudic study, probably
had a high IQ. Others who were not rabbis but known to be learned were
also desirable marriage partners. A culture in which the males with the highest IQs have the pick of the women is, over centuries, likely to become a
population with a high mean IQ.
Any effects of cultural traits tending to select for high IQ would have
been intensified in the case of the Ashkenazim by a genetic bottleneck that
occurred about 500 years ago. As many as 1,500 Ashkenazi families may have
lived in Europe as of 14C, but geneticists at Jerusalem’s Hebrew University
examining the DNA from large samples of Ashkenazi Jews conclude that
many of these family lines subsequently died out and that far fewer, probably about 500, account for all of today’s Ashkenazi Jews. They further believe
that this subset was selected for better nutrition and lower infant mortality
rates—which in turn suggests both greater wealth and greater ability than
among the families who disappeared.31
IQ is by no means the only advantage that might explain the exceptional record of Jewish accomplishment. Jewish family units were strong
through 1950, with few children growing up in broken homes and with
close networks of grandparents, aunts, and uncles to step in when a parent
died. The high expectations placed on Jewish children are the stuff of
cultural cliché, as are the sacrifices that American immigrant Jewish parents
. . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES • 293
made to ensure that their children received advanced educations. Once
again, however, the chicken and egg problem remains to be resolved.
Cultural values can certainly be fostered or undermined by environmental conditions. They also can be fostered or undermined by genetically
grounded personality traits. The nature of the mix in the case of Ashkenazi
Jews is still as unknown as it is in the case of sex differences, and as likely to
become better understood within a few decades.
THI R TEEN
CONCENTRATIONS
OF EUROPEAN
AND AMERICAN
ACCOMPLISHMENT
The main purpose of this and the following chapter is to provide some
food for thought now and a great deal of raw material to which you
can return later. In subsequent chapters, I make statements about trends and
patterns of accomplishment as they relate to hypothesized causes. Some of
those statements (Chapters 15 and 16) are founded on multivariate analyses;
others, on qualitative interpretations of trends in European history. In preparing these narratives, I constantly returned to basic layouts of the raw data that
helped me understand why the computer program was coming up with the
coefficients it did, or whether my reading of history corresponded with
where the significant figures came from and when. The plots in this chapter
and the next give you the chance to do the same thing.
Both chapters have brief narratives describing a few key findings. I
suggest you read the narrative, scan the graphics for whatever topics interest
you, and then return to them when subsequent chapters raise questions that
the graphics might answer.
THE EUROPEAN CORE
Despite its small size, common Christian heritage, and common racial
heritage, a few places within Europe have been home to far more intense
levels of human accomplishment than other places. This chapter describes
what those places are for the different inventories at different points in
Europe’s history.
296 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The concentration of European accomplishment from 1400–1950 is
easy enough to sum up if you don’t worry about complications: the numbers
of significant figures from Britain, France, and Germany dwarf those from
everywhere else except Italy. The chart below shows the distribution.
The big four, and everybody else
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
Iceland
Finland
Balkans
Denmark
Switzerland
Spain
Netherlands
Russia
Italy
France
Percentage of All Persons Mentioned
Slovakia
Portugal
Norway
Poland
Sweden
Belgium
Austro-Hungary
Germany
Britain
The big four alone account for 72 percent of all the significant figures
from 1400–1950. Add in Russia and the Netherlands, and 80 percent of all
significant figures are accounted for. But countries are bulky and their
borders change. Saying that a certain number of significant figures came from
Italy obscures the reality that most of them came from specific parts of Italy
surrounding Florence and Venice. For that matter, Italy did not even exist as
a unified nation-state until 19C. Neither did Germany. Britain encompasses
four distinctive linguistic and cultural entities. During the period when
Russia accumulated its significant figures, it included within its borders parts
or all of eight different countries on today’s map. Even the French, who share
a common language and have lived in a well-defined nation for several
centuries, sprawl over a large and diverse geographic area. So let us put aside
nations for a moment and consider how the map looks when more specific
places of origin replace them. By origin I refer to the place where a significant
figure spent the bulk of his childhood—usually, though not always, his place
of birth.
To prepare the breakdowns that follow, I broke the map of Europe into
134 regions and 121 cities. Appendix 4 gives the details. Using those regions
and cities rather than countries, let us reconsider the statement that Britain,
France, Germany, Italy, Russia, and the Netherlands accounted for 80 percent
of the European significant figures. If we ignore national borders and instead
create the most compact polygon (in terms of land area) that encloses 80
percent of the places where the significant figures grew up, it forms the shape
in the figure below, with borders defined by Naples, Marseilles, the western
border of Dorset County in England, a point a few miles above Glasgow, the
northern tip of Denmark, and a point a few miles east of the city that used to
be Breslau in German Silesia (now Wroclaw in Poland).
The European Core
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN ACCOMPLISHMENT • 297
This new way of looking at the distribution of significant figures across
Europe does not wholly contradict the dominating role of the big four shown
in the chapter’s initial chart, but it changes the emphases. All of the Netherlands is still in the new way of looking at Europe. Parts of Britain, France,
Germany, and Italy are still in. Russia is out. Or you can think of it another
way: 80 percent of all the European significant figures can be enclosed in an
area that does not include Russia, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Spain, Portugal,
the Balkans, Poland, Hungary, East and West Prussia, Ireland, Wales, most of
Scotland, the lower quarter of Italy, and about a third of France.
The next graphic zooms in the focus, demonstrating how much a few
regions dominate even within the European core.
Concentrations within the European Core
The colored regions in the European core (light and dark blue
together) account for the origins—not where they went to work when they
grew up, but where they were born and raised—of fully 50 percent of the
total European significant figures. Just the five regions colored in dark blue—
Île de France, Southeast England, Tuscany, Belgium, and the Netherlands—
account for 26 percent of the European total. The other 24 percent come
from (in order of their contribution) Bavaria, Venetia, Southwest England,
Switzerland, Lowland Scotland, Lower Saxony, Saxony, Baden-Württemberg, Northeast Austria, the Italian Papal States, and Brandenburg.
298 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN ACCOMPLISHMENT • 299
The figures above represent summaries. Now we turn to the distributions, significant figure by significant figure, that lead to them.
SCATTER PLOTS FOR THE EUROPEAN
SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
The tides of history have raised and lowered the importance of the regions.
Tuscany’s appearance in the preceding figure is based almost entirely on
significant figures who appeared prior to 1700, for example. We also know
that the distribution of accomplishment over time consists of a steep, curving,
upward trend in the last few centuries (page 248), which causes a problem in
interpreting the concentrations in regions where most of the activity
occurred late. It was much easier for a country to have 50 great scientists in
19C than it was in 14C. Somehow that nonlinear increase from 15C onward
has to be taken into account.
For purposes of visual display I have divided modern European history
into three segments: 1400–1600, 1600–1800, and 1800–1950. You may
rightly doubt that such round numbers precisely denote the beginning of
different eras, but the divisions have enough correspondence with the flow of
accomplishment across history to make them interpretable.
The first period opens as Europe is recovering from the devastation of
the Black Death in mid-14C and Italy is entering the Renaissance. In just a
few years, Brunelleschi will discover the laws of linear perspective and European art will begin its historic explosion of creativity. By the mid-1400s, all
of the arts and sciences are taking off, a process that is transformed by the
contemporaneous introduction of the printing press. The remaining 150
years in this first era take us through the peak of the Renaissance and into its
denouement after the Reformation begins in 1517.
At the beginning of the second era, 1600, the scientific method has
evolved into a set of principles that are broadly understood and accepted—
Galileo’s De Motu, with its pioneering use of experimental data, had appeared
just 11 years earlier, and Francis Bacon’s Advancement of Learning, advocating
the experimentation and observation he will bring to full expression in
Novum Organum, is published in 1605. In the arts, the first years after 1600
witness the debut of Shakespeare’s greatest works on the London stage.
Carracci and Caravaggio have broken with Mannerism by 1600, opening the
way to the Baroque in the visual arts. Monteverdi is about to write the operas
that usher in the Baroque in music. In philosophy, the two centuries of 17C
300 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
and 18C embrace the most productive period since classical Athens, opening
with Hobbes and Descartes and ending in the aftermath of the Enlightenment. Science comes of age during these 200 years, with a succession of
giants of whom Newton looms largest. By 1800, the technological framework for the Industrial Revolution is in place.
The third era, 1800–1950, the shortest of the three in time, is the most
riotously active, taking us through the multiple scientific and technological
leaps of 19C and the first half of 20C. All of the arts reach peaks of different
sorts, and all evolve new genres that by the end of the period have separated
them from their earlier foundations.
The sets of maps on the next three pages show the results for each of
the eras. I have left a faint outline of borders to help organize the maps. They
represent the contemporary boundaries of European countries with the
exception of Germany and Poland. Germany’s borders are shown as they
existed at the outset of World War I, with formerly Prussian regions extending along the south coast of the Baltic, and the former Silesia forming a slice
along the northern border of today’s Czech Republic and Slovakia.1 Prior to
World War II, these areas produced many significant figures, all of whom were
ethnically German.
Each dot represents the origin of an individual significant figure. How
close are the dots located to the place of origin? About half of them are either
on top of the specific city or town where the significant figure grew up (or as
close as possible, in the case of a city such as London or Paris with too many
dots for too little space). The other half of the dots are accurate to within the
region of origin, and often accurate to within a portion of the region.2
To give you a way of comparing the density of concentration across the
different eras and inventories, I have enclosed the smallest geographic area
that can contain 25 percent of the significant figures, colored in the darker
blue, and then enclosed the smallest additional areas that can contain the next
25 percent, colored in the lighter blue. In a few instances, the space containing the second 25 percent could have been chosen in more than one way, and
readers who think they see an alternative that would be just as geographically
compact may be right.
ORIGINS OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES, 1400–1600
Art Literature
Music Science
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN ACCOMPLISHMENT • 301
ORIGINS OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES, 1600–1800
Art Literature
Music Science
302 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
ORIGINS OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES, 1800–1950
Art Literature
Music Science
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN ACCOMPLISHMENT • 303
304 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
SCATTER PLOTS FOR U.S. SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
The geographic distribution of significant figures from the United States
reflects the rapidly changing settlement of the country. The East Coast dominates, inevitably, because hardly anyone lived anywhere else for much of the
nation’s history. If I could show you a map with America’s significant figures
in the last half century, it presumably would look much different from the first
half of 20C, just because the population shifted so radically westward
throughout 20C. With that in mind, the figure below is offered as a summary
of the story from the founding to 1950.
Concentrations of Significant Figures in the United States
The states that are colored represent the origins of 90 percent of the
American significant figures. The small dark blue slice running in an arc from
Portland, Maine, to the southern tip of New Jersey encompasses the origins
of about 50 percent of them. The light blue wedge encompasses another 25
percent, and the gray fills out the remaining 15 percent. Even after factoring
in the history of American expansion, the primary concentration along the
northeastern coast of the United States and the secondary concentration in
the belt stretching to the Mississippi is striking.
An even more striking aspect of the map is the white space covering the
American South. Although more lightly populated than the North, the
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN ACCOMPLISHMENT • 305
American South had a substantial population throughout American history.
In 1850, for example, the white population in the South was 5.6 million,
compared to 8.5 million in the Northeast. In 1900, the comparison was 12.1
million to 20.6 million. By 1950, the gap had almost closed—36.9 million
compared to 37.4 million.3 While it is understandable that the South did not
have as many significant figures as the North, the magnitude of the difference
goes far beyond population. The northeastern states of New England plus
New York, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey had produced 184 significant
figures by 1950, while the states that made up the Confederacy during the
Civil War had produced 24, a ratio of more than 7:1.
The scatter plots on the following page show the way in which the
American significant figures break down over the three half centuries from
1800–1950.
A POSTSCRIPT ON IMMIGRATION
Throughout this chapter, I have used the place of origin as the basis for the
discussion. If instead I were to use the workplace of adult significant figures,
how much would immigration change the picture?
The most visible change in the scatter plots would result from internal
migration, not from movement between countries. Paris was the origin of
189 significant figures, already a large figure, but small compared to the 486
for which Paris was the workplace. For London, the comparable numbers are
113 and 295; for Berlin, they are 36 and 91. If the scatter plots had been based
on the workplace, the concentration of dots around the great cities of Europe
would have nearly denuded the rest of the map.
Migration from one country to another was by no means rare among
the significant figures, however. They were a remarkably mobile lot. Twelve
percent of them worked mainly in a country other than the one in which
they were raised. This is not a recent phenomenon. The highest proportion
of migration across countries, involving 14 percent of the significant figures,
occurred from 1400–1600. Even 14 percent greatly underestimates the
degree of “international” mobility, because it does not count movement
from, for example, Milan to Florence or Cologne to Leipzig—in the Renaissance, tantamount to moving between countries.
Until 1800, this high level of international mobility had little effect on
the net number of significant figures in a given country. All the countries
in the European core gained about as many as they lost. In the third era,
ORIGINS OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES FROM THE UNITED STATES
1800–1850 1850–1900
1900–1950
306 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Arts
Sciences
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN ACCOMPLISHMENT • 307
1800–1950, a clear pattern did emerge. Europeans who would become
significant figures moved north and west to realize their potential. Part of
the movement from the east was caused by persecution. Seven Polish and
Russian Jews who became significant figures emigrated westward during the
long period of persecution in late 19C, and another two dozen fled central
Europe after the Nazi rise to power.[4] But even after extracting this part of
the story, the period from 1800–1950 saw the Balkan countries lose a net of
nine. Germany lost a net of 15 (8 moved into Germany but 23 moved out,
not counting the Nazi period), while Spain, Russia, Poland, and Italy each
had a net loss of 5 and what is now the Czech Republic had a net loss of 4.[5]
Nearly all of the people who moved out of these countries on the
periphery moved to just three places: Britain, northern France, and the
United States. Britain did not end up with much of a net gain, because while
21 significant-figures-to-be moved into Britain, 16 Britons left for the New
World. Only France and the United States had a substantial net gain: 31 for
France and 37 for the United States.
France’s net gain amounts to 8 percent of the significant figures who
worked in France from 1800–1950, while America’s amounted to 10 percent.
If this seems small for the United States, where immigration has played such
a large role in shaping the national character, remember how the number was
calculated: It is restricted to people who grew up in a foreign country and
then moved to the United States to conduct their most important work. Thus
it excludes all the children of first-generation immigrants, all the immigrants
who came here as infants or toddlers, and all the significant figures who came
to the United States after their reputations were already established, as did
many German and Austrian scientists and artists fleeing the Nazis. If we
include all of those categories, then about 22 percent of all the American
significant figures from 1800–1950 were either immigrants or the children of
immigrants.
FOU R TEEN
TAKING POPULATION
INTO ACCOUNT: THE
ACCOMPLISHMENT RATE
It is no surprise that Britain has more significant figures than Belgium, or
that France has more than Switzerland. They’ve got more people. The
same explanation could apply to the steep, sweeping rise in human accomplishment that opened the presentation of patterns and trajectories in Chapter 11 (page 248). When we superimpose a line for the world’s population
this is the result:
Accomplishment and population both rose
nonlinearly after 1400
–800 –400 0 800 1200 1600 2000
0
500
1000
1500
0
200
300
400 2000
100
World Population in Millions
No. of Significant Figures
World population Significant figures
310 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
It is time to broach a topic that will be with us for the rest of the book,
for it is central to understanding the intensity of human accomplishment
within a given society:What happens when we take population into account?
The short answer is that taking population into account transforms the
picture. Like the preceding chapter, this one sticks narrowly to presenting the
evidence for what is and defers the discussion of why to later chapters.
THE GLOBAL NON-RELATIONSHIP OF POPULATION
TO ACCOMPLISHMENT
Everything that follows about the relationship of population to accomplishment applies only to Europe and the United States. Elsewhere, the relationship is approximately zero. Take, for example, that tight relationship between
population and the number of significant figures in the opening graphic. The
correlation was almost perfect: +.98, to be exact. But it exists only because of
the European surge of accomplishment since 1400, which coincided with the
growth in world population. Suppose instead that I had calculated it for one
slice in time—1900, let’s say—entering the population and the number of
scientific significant figures for each country in the world. That correlation
works out to a trivial +.12.[1] For any moment in history, knowing how large
the populations are within given geographic areas tells you little about
whether you will find important work going on in the arts and sciences.
Great human accomplishment has not come about just because the world
accumulated enough people.
MEASURING THE RATE OF ACCOMPLISHMENT
Population can be “taken into account” in two ways. One is to enter population as a variable in a regression equation, a method that will be used subsequently. But the simpler and more familiar way is to calculate a ratio, using
population as the denominator. The crime rate, unemployment rate, birth
rate, and per capita earnings are familiar examples of such ratios. They are just
one form of the widespread, everyday use of rates—miles per hour, calories
per serving, bushels per acre, batting average, and interest rate.
Using the same method, I now give you the unweighted accomplishment
rate, consisting of the number of significant figures per 10 million population.
For example, France in the period 1850–1870 saw the appearance of 54
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 311
significant figures among a population that at the beginning of that period
stood at about 35.7 million. The accomplishment rate is therefore 15.1.[2]
To get a sense of how the rate has varied over time, it is also useful to
create a weighted accomplishment rate that incorporates information conveyed
by the index scores. Instead of computing the rate by counting each significant figure equally, I add up the index scores and use them as the numerator.
To continue with the example of France in 1850–70, the index scores of the
54 significant figures add up to 697. This use of summed index scores
produces a weighted accomplishment rate of 195.2.
For the arts and philosophy inventories, these two measures of the
accomplishment rate are the basis for tracking rises and declines across the
centuries. The scientific inventories have counts of events as well as people,
giving a third perspective: the number of significant events per 10 million.
France from 1850–70 numbered 40 events in the scientific inventories
combined, yielding an event rate of 11.2.
The pages that follow show timelines for each of the inventories.[3]The
lines represent a moving average over three decades, meaning that each significant figure is counted for the decade in which he turned 40 plus the decade
on either side.
Because I want to show how the alternative measures of the rate track
with each other, I converted all the rates into what are known as standard
scores. The computation and uses of standard scores are discussed in Appendix
1.To recapitulate, standard scores always have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. Except when noted, the scale in the timelines that follow runs
from +3 to –3 standard deviations. Three standard deviations above or below
a mean represents the top tenth of the top centile in a normal distribution.
Because it is the shape of the moving average that conveys the important
information, not the specific values (the specific values, like the mean, are
sensitive to the choice of time span),[4] I have labeled the top and bottom of
the scale simply “Very high” and “Very low.”
THE SCIENTIFIC AND WESTERN INVENTORIES
I begin with the accomplishment rates for the Western inventories in art,
literature, music, and philosophy, plus the inventories for scientific accomplishments. The timeline for the hard sciences combines astronomy, biology,
chemistry, the earth sciences, and physics. Otherwise, a separate timeline is
presented for each inventory.
312 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
De Magnete
2
3
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800
1 2 3
1900
THE HARD SCIENCES, 1400 TO 1950
(Astronomy, Biology, Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Physics)
The first times that the production of significant figures in the hard sciences
crept above the baseline are the two bumps around 1610 and 1680, and
even then only for the summed index scores. Those small bumps represent
periods that saw the publication of William Gilbert’s , the prime
of Galileo’s career, the invention of the telescope and microscope, and the
introduction of Newtonian physics, among other accomplishments.
The last half of 18C and the first few decades of 19C were phenomenally
productive, despite the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars. Each
of the hard sciences experienced fundamental breakthroughs. In raw terms,
the number of significant figures soared from 57 in the preceding hundred
years to 220 in 1750 –1850.
From the early 1800s onward, the summed index scores declined while the
number of significant figures remained high. This could be seen as simply a
reflection of a changing way of doing science, with teams replacing the
lone hero, except that the number of significant events also declined during
this period.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores No. of significant events
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 313
1
and the calculus.
2
1 2
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
MATHEMATICS, 1400 TO 1950
The golden age of mathematics occurred earlier than for any other scientific inventory, over the late 1500s to the end of the 1600s. A short list of
the names explains why: Pascal, Fermat, Cavalieri, Descartes, Wallis,
Huygens, Barrow, Leibniz, the first Bernoullis, and Newton, who discovered, among much else, logarithms, analytic geometry, probability theory,
A lesser but notable period of achievement in mathematics came in the
early 1800s, led by Gauss but with a distinguished body of other mathematicians that included Abel, Cauchy, Galois, Lobachevsky, and Hamilton.
After mid-19C, all the measures of accomplishment in mathematics,
including those based on events, trailed off through the 1950 cutoff.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores No. of significant events
Very low
Very high
314 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
Die Kleine Chirurgia,
De Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis
,
text based on dissection.
1
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
MEDICINE, 1400 TO 1950
If we ignore the spike in the mid-1500s, the medicine inventory provides
the most orderly of the trendlines: generally up, with only a few anomalies,
from 1600 to the end of the observations. But there is that spike to consider.
It consists of a flurry of activity led by Fracastoro, Paracelsus, Paré, and
Vesalius that opened up lines of inquiry that would take a few more
centuries to show their full potential for understanding and curing disease.
The signal events were the publication of Paracelsus’s
viewing the body as a chemical system subject to specific ailments;
Fracastoro’s , invoking microbes or
germs as the cause of infectious disease; Paré’s Méthode de Traicter les Plaies
introducing major advances in treatment of traumatic injuries; and
Vesalius’s De Humani Corporis Fabrica, the first scientifically exact anatomy
No. of significant figures Summed index scores No. of significant events
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 315
1
1
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
TECHNOLOGY, 1400 TO 1950
The story of technology is quiescence until the mid-1600s (that bump in
the summed index scores in 1500 is Leonardo da Vinci), then a general
increase to a high level in the late 1700s that for practical purposes continued into the second half of the 1800s. That period from about 1760 to
1880 ended before some key inventions like radio and the airplane, but
consider how much it encompassed: the practical steam engine that enabled
the industrial revolution, interchangeable parts, the technology of the
modern factory system, steel, the technology for creating large structures
made of iron, a host of key advances in industrial chemistry (including the
invention of the petroleum industry), the technology for modern agricultural production, the railroad, steamship, electric batteries, systems of artificial heating, artificial lighting (gas, then electric), the technology of
preserved foods, photography, the textile and garment industry, the telegraph (including transcontinental traffic), electric motors, electric transformers, electric generators, refrigeration, vulcanization (revolutionizing the
uses of rubber), the invention of plastics, the internal combustion engine,
dynamite—and these are just the really important accomplishments. Much
may have changed because of technological advances since the late 1800s,
but what was done in the preceding century, from a much smaller base of
population and wealth, was vast.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores No. of significant events
Very low
Very high
316 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
2
2
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
1
WESTERN PHILOSOPHY, 1400 TO 1950
By starting at 1400, the graph misses the great age of classical philosophy,
but there was no point in starting earlier. The spike in –4C is so dominant
that everything after 1400 is flat—and no wonder. Take Socrates, Plato, and
Aristotle, add major figures such as Heraclitus, Parmenides, Anaxagoras,
Protagoras, Democritus, and Epicurus, then add the lesser but still significant figures, bunch most of them into a century and a half during –5C and
–4C in a Europe that had a population somewhere around 20 million, and
you have an accomplishment rate in European philosophy that will dwarf
anything that comes after.
The last half of the 1600s provided the philosophical underpinnings of the
Enlightenment. Descartes and Bacon had been precursors in the first half of
the century. Then, clustered into a few decades, came Hobbes, Pascal, Leibniz, Spinoza, and Locke.
The last two-thirds of the 1700s saw the culmination of the Enlightenment
in Montesquieu, Helvetius, Hume, Rousseau, Diderot, and Voltaire and—so
close in time that they form one spike in the graph—the philosophers who
would set the stage for 19C, Moses Mendelssohn, Condorcet, Herder,
Fichte, Bentham, and, towering over all, Kant.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 317
1
2
tion.
3
2
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
1 3
WESTERN ART, 1400 TO 1950
The mountain at the left of the plot is the Renaissance in graphic form.
Occurring in 15C and the first decades of 16C when the European population was still low by later standards, it swamps everything that comes
thereafter. But it would be a mistake to attach too much importance to the
small population base. The raw number of significant figures and giants
alike was high.
The next period in which both measures of accomplishment outstrip
population is the first half of 17C. The Low Countries were the center of
activity, with Rubens, Rembrandt, Hals, van Dyck, and (at the tail end)
Vermeer as leading figures, but these decades also saw all or part of the
careers of Caravaggio, Ribera, La Tour, Poussin, Bernini, Zurbaran, Lorrain,
and Velazquez. As in the case of the Renaissance, the production of great art
in this period was high in quantity as well as dense relative to the populaI inserted this marker, toward the end of a monotonously belowbaseline two centuries, because it sits directly beneath the flowering
of Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, and the rest of the new genres that
produced so many masterpieces in France and the rest of the Continent in
the late 1800s. France as an individual country saw a noticeable bump
during this period, but the graph here shows the West as a whole.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
318 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
2
among them.
2
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
1
WESTERN LITERATURE, 1400 TO 1950
Dante was among the first to write in the vernacular, a century before the
timeline opens in 1400, opening a long increase on both measures of the
rate of accomplishment in literature. With a dip in the mid-1500s, this
upward trend continued to the end of the 1500s and the age of Shakespeare, Cervantes, Spenser, Marlowe, Gongora y Argote, Lope de Vega, and
Ben Jonson. After a dip in major figures came Corneille and Milton in the
mid-1600s, marking the end of the first wave of literary accomplishment.
The second burst in the 1800s largely reflects the birth of the novel in the
preceding century. Limiting the list to just the elite with index scores of 20
or higher who published from 1800 –1880: Goethe, Hugo, Tolstoy,
Dostoyevsky, Dickens, Flaubert, Stendhal, Turgenev, Scott, Gogol, Zola,
Ibsen, and Balzac. Along with the novelists came a phalanx of important
poets: Schiller (his last years), Byron, Poe, Pushkin, Baudelaire, Mallarmé,
Whitman, Heine, Shelley, Keats,Verlaine, Hölderlin, and Wordsworth
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 319
1
2
père and fils,
3
2
1400
Mean
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
1 3
WESTERN MUSIC, 1400 TO 1950
For music, alone among all the inventories, the weighted and unweighted
measures of accomplishment don’t track. Disproportionately large numbers
of significant figures appear from mid-16C through the first quarter of
17C, but the eminence of that large number lags substantially behind.
Monteverdi is one of the few composers from that period whose name is
still remembered and whose music is still part of the repertory. These were
centuries when the groundwork for the forms and harmonic systems was
being laid, but the mastery of them came later.
The number of still-familiar names begins to pick up at the end of the
1600s, but it is in the 1700s that Europe begins producing the giants who
still figure so largely in the performed repertory. The conspicuous spike in
18C does not come where you might expect, at the end, but in the first
third of the century when the leading figures were Scarlatti
Couperin,Vivaldi, Telemann, Rameau, and Handel. The three bumps that
came later, representing Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven (who didn’t turn
40 until 1810), were comparatively lonely figures in their respective times.
For most of 19C, the pattern set in the ages of Haydn, Mozart, and
Beethoven continued, with above-average production of the most eminent
composers and below-average production of run-of-the-mill significant
figures. At the end of 19C the trendline for the most eminent composers
fell as well.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
320 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
THE NON-EUROPEAN INVENTORIES
When looking at the graphs on the following pages, keep in mind that the
plots for the non-European inventories are based on much smaller numbers
of significant figures than the plots for the Western inventories. For example,
the Western visual arts inventory has 479 significant figures compared to 111
for China and 81 for Japan. The smaller the number of figures, the greater the
influence of small numbers. This creates a problem for the smallest inventories, especially Indian literature (43), Indian philosophy (45), and Chinese
philosophy (39). Large swings can be produced by a few significant figures, as
I will note again when discussing individual cases. The non-European inventories also encompass longer periods than the six and a half centuries used for
the scientific inventories and Western arts inventories, another factor to be
taken into account in interpreting the timelines.
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 321
1
qasida
2
Arabic poet.
3
2
500 700 900 1100 1300
Mean
1 3
ARABIC LITERATURE, 500 TO 1300
The graph portrays only literature written in Arabic, since index
scores were not assigned to writers in other languages prevalent in the
Arab world—none of the Persian writers are represented here, for
example.
The first group represents the pre-Islamic writers in Arabic, led by
Imru’ al-Qays, inventor of the classic ode form , who was
considered by the Prophet Muhammad, among others, to be the
greatest poet of pre-Islamic times.
This spike is dominated by a trio in early Islamic literature: al-Farazdaq, Jarir, and al-Akhtal, ranked ninth, eleventh, and fourteenth
respectively in the Arabic literature inventory. All were poets and
wrote in similar styles, with Jarir and al-Farazdaq carrying on a 40-
year battle of poems. al-Akhtal has the distinction of being a Christian
The golden age of classic Arabic literature coincided with the golden
age of Arabic culture in general. In literature, the peaks were reached
in the century from 950 to 1050, which saw the first-ranked (by far)
Arabic poet al-Mutanabbi and additional major writers al-Ma’arri, alHariri (a scholarly writer as well as poet), and al-Hamadhani, ranked
third, sixth, and seventh respectively.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
322 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
2 The Song dynasty (960
[5]
Mean
1 2
600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
CHINESE PAINTING, 600 TO 1800
Chinese painting began centuries before the graph begins, but the surviving
evidence is so fragmentary that the inventory cannot accurately reflect the
number and eminence of those early painters.
The first great age of Chinese painting occurred during the Tang Dynasty,
specifically during the hundred years that began with the reign of Emperor
Minghuang in 712. It saw the careers of painters Wu Daozi, Zhang Xuan,
and Han Gan (among others) and of Wang Wei, a poet, painter, musician,
and scholar of near-mythic reputation.
–1279) has three peaks corresponding roughly to the
beginning, middle, and end (and the decades just after the end) of the
dynasty. But because comparatively few people are involved in producing
each peak, the period is better seen as a whole, as indeed it is seen in
Chinese history, with the Song generally acknowledged to represent the
apex of Chinese culture as a whole.
A striking feature of the accomplishment rate over the whole period is the
way that the successive peaks diminish in elevation, shown by the gray
broken line. It represents the best-fitting line for the peaks that occurred in
720, 950, 1080, 1290, 1500, and 1670. I will leave it to specialists to argue
about whether this visual metaphor corresponds to a diminishing vitality of
Chinese art over these centuries.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 323
1
600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Mean
1
CHINESE LITERATURE, 600 TO 1800
The Chinese golden age of literature coincided with its golden age in art,
but with a much higher peak. Nothing thereafter came close. The same
Tang century that saw so many fine painters was also the one in which the
top two poets in all of Chinese history, Du Fu and Li Bo, made their
appearance—not only as contemporaries but as drinking and traveling
companions. They were far from the only great poets of that era. The highest peak of all, off the chart at 3.6 standard deviations in 800, does not
include Du Fu and Li Bo (they are represented in the preceding peak), but
a set of six poets who were ranked third, fifth, tenth, and thirteenth. In
terms of raw numbers, the West has many periods in which it had more
major literary figures, but it has nothing to compare with this extraordinarily dense cluster of so many of a culture’s most revered poets.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
324 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
2
–369).
3
2
–600 –400 –200 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Mean
1 3
CHINESE PHILOSOPHY, –600 TO 1200
As in the West and India, great philosophy came very early. This peak,
which stretches slightly off the scale (the score was +3.2 standard
deviations) is owed to just two men, Confucius and Laozi. The date for
Laozi is only an estimate, but the philosophic traditions associated with
Confucius and Laozi both got their start within a narrow period of time.
While the original Confucian and Daoist texts go back to –6C, the
consolidation of both traditions awaited their great initial exegetes,
Mencius and Zhuangzi respectively, born within a few years of each other
(circa –372 and
The most important subsequent cluster of philosophic figures occurred
in the latter part of the Song Dynasty, when several important neoConfucianists appeared. They are spread out over a century and a half,
beginning in the last half of 11C, when the population of China was
about triple that of Confucius’s China, so the rate jumped only modestly
when the first set appeared and barely crept above the mean when Zhu
Xi arrived at the end of 12C.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 325
1
and .
2
–500 –300 –100 100 300 500 700
Mean
1 2
INDIAN LITERATURE, –500 TO 800
India’s literature was produced in so many languages and so much of it
developed anonymously—or has become anonymous over the course of
centuries—that the inventory of significant figures does not capture nearly
all of its bulk. On the other hand, if the issue is works that are still live
elements of the Indian canon, then the graphic above, focusing on Sanskrit
literature during its classical period, includes all the stars. For reasons noted
elsewhere (page 135), index scores were not assigned to the major Indian
novelists that emerged from mid-19C onward.
The two spikes represent the approximate dates of the two great epics of
Sanskrit literature, the Ramayana Mahabharata
Don’t pay much attention to the exact shape of the two spikes in 500 and
600; the birth and death dates of the constellation of important writers
during this period are usually approximate. The giant here is Kalidasa,
conventionally dated to about 500. The era also saw most notably the
famous philologist Bhartrhari, the romancier Dandin, and Banabhatta,
chronicler of the emperor Harsa.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
326 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
2
MahabBuddhism.
3
2
–600 –400 –200 0 200 400 600 800
Mean
1 3
INDIAN PHILOSOPHY, –600 TO 800
The number of significant figures in Indian philosophy is so small (45) that
the spikes represent one major figure plus a few others. The first spike is
based on Buddha, who was active around –500.
The bump in 1C clusters around Patanjali, the putative author of the Yogasutras, the four-volume systematization of Yogic thought, and of the
hasya, a classic commentary on the thought of Panini. Patanjali is variously
dated somewhere between –2C and +5C;
I chose a middling date for him. The bump in 2C designates primarily
Nagarjuna, the founder of the Madhvamika, the “Middle Path” school of
Sankara, the top-ranked philosopher in the Indian inventory, whose exposition of Advaita Vedanta school of Hinduism is still the source for much in
contemporary Indian thought, is assigned his traditional dates of 788–820,
though recent scholarship suggests that he may have been active 50 years
earlier. It is best to think of the period 600–800, which saw a dozen other
significant figures, as a generally fecund period for Indian philosophy.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 327
1
2
3
4
culminating in Sotatsu (second).
5
Mean
1 5
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
2 43
JAPANESE ART, 1000 TO 1950
Japan’s population was still so small in 1000 that the bump in mid-11C
is created by just two men, only one of whom, the sculptor Jocho, is a
major figure.
The spike beginning in the late 1200s features the father-son pair of Kokei
and Unkei, the latter considered to be one of Japan’s greatest sculptors.
Their realistic sculptures revived an earlier style that they carried to a new
standard that dominated Japanese sculpture for centuries to come.
15C was a century of great painters in the monochrome ink style, beginning with Josetsu and culminating in the first-ranked Japanese figure in the
visual arts inventory, Sesshu.
Another spike reflecting painting rather than sculpture, this one represents
the Kano school, which employed both the monochrome ink style and
bright, opaque colors. The leading figures during this period were Tohaku
and Eitoku, tied for fourth in the inventory, followed by Koetsu (sixth) and
Unaffected by the kind of hiatus in cultural production that affected China
and India, Japan saw a proliferation of important new styles in the 1700s.
One stream, still working primarily in monochrome and light color, was
led by Ikeno Taiga and Yosa Buson. Another, led by Maruyama Okyo,
incorporated aspects of Western realism into Japanese themes.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
328 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1
the Kokinshu
Kokinshu
2
3
Mean
1 2 3
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
JAPANESE LITERATURE, 800 TO 1950
The first peak represents the work of the poets of the Man’yoshu, an anthology completed in the early 800s and then obscured for centuries, partly
because of the prestige of Chinese literature and partly because its system of
transcription became indecipherable. The second peak refers to the poets of
, another anthology, with Ki no Tsurayuki serving as compiler
and one of its leading poets. The ’s durable authority shaped Japanese poetry for centuries, even though the Man’yoshu is now widely considered to be the superior collection.
The spike at about 1000 reflects the work of a number of poets, but is
primarily owed to the eminence of two women, the diarist Sei Shonagon
and Murasaki Shikibu, author of Tale of Genji, sometimes argued to be the
first novel and by consensus one of the masterpieces of world literature.
Japanese literature never had a prolonged quiescent period. Important writers dot the centuries between Murasaki and 20C, but none except possibly
Fujiwara Teika (1162–1241) had the influence on subsequent writers that
the early poets retained. The next great surge in Japanese literature occurred
at the end of 19C, when Japanese literature, far from being disrupted by
Westernization, was instead rejuvenated, producing major new novelists,
poets, and literary critics.
No. of significant figures Summed index scores
Very low
Very high
TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT • 329
POSTSCRIPT
The graphs have features of interest that I have tried to highlight through the
text blocks accompanying each graph. Apart from the specifics, two broad
themes emerge from these trajectories from such varied fields and places.
One is the unsurprising finding that the accomplishment rate does indeed
change drastically over time, including long falls from high peaks, and it is
worth our while to try to understand why. The other concerns the Western
inventories. That rise in accomplishment we see when a raw count of significant figures or events is used, as in the opening graphic for this chapter,
disappears when we calculate a rate that has taken population into account.
The story of the Western accomplishment rate in the last century before 1950
is one of decline if we take these plots seriously. Whether we should take
them seriously is the subject of Chapter 21.
• • •
FIFTEEN
EXPLANATIONS I:
PEACE AND PROSPERITY
Seeking to explain the kinds of data that I have laid out in the last two
chapters, the social sciences turn to a list of usual suspects. Economic
conditions, political conditions, social conditions, and demographics each
offer variables that are likely to be correlated to some degree with accomplishment in the arts and sciences. The task is to decide which combination
of those variables does the best job of illuminating the underlying processes.
In this and the following chapter I use qualitative and quantitative arguments in tandem. The problem with the quantitative technique, multiple
regression analysis, is that it requires extended technical explanation.You may
reasonably ask whether you need to work through all that to understand the
conclusions. The answer is no. The explanation of what is going on can be
stated quickly and clearly. The quantitative analyses are valuable because they
substantiate the conclusions. The material is too important to consign to an
appendix—it is the quantitative analysis, not the narrative account, that makes
the conclusions credible—but I begin this and the following chapter with
self-contained non-technical discussion of the results, and you will be able to
follow the subsequent chapters if you choose to skip the rest. For those
prepared to make the investment, I have tried to make the quantitative
portion of each chapter understandable to those who have no background in
statistics.
The natural place to start searching for explanations of the patterns and
trajectories of human accomplishment is with the summa bona of today’s
world, peace and prosperity. Besides being worthy goals in themselves, peace
and prosperity might reasonably be expected to promote accomplishment.
332 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
War and civil unrest disrupt all sorts of human activities; why shouldn’t the
arts and sciences be among them? The role of prosperity is even more obvious. Starting around the time Europe discovered the New World, Europe’s
economies began a sustained, burgeoning expansion of wealth, unique in
history, that continues to this day. During this same period, human accomplishment in the arts and sciences also flourished to a degree unique in
history. A connection seems inescapable.
WAR AND CIVIL UNREST
Streams of human accomplishment have not typically been disrupted
by war and civil unrest.
I begin the discussion of each topic with an italicized summary of the main
finding. In this case, it represents a hypothesis that had to be rejected. The
hypothesis—that war and civil unrest tend to disrupt streams of accomplishment—is simple and obvious. At the extremes of total chaos, it must be
true. But we are looking for patterns, not worst cases. Total war is rare,
and the effects of even total war can be brief—consider how few years it
took Germany and Japan to recover from the devastation of World War II.
Genuine civil chaos has been even rarer, typically brief and isolated to a few
cities. The issue is not the effects of war and civil unrest at their worst, but
whether war and civil unrest generally disrupt accomplishment.
The stories surrounding the most famous periods of great accomplishment suggest that the effects cannot be large. The first and most famous
golden age of them all, in Athens from the repulse of Xerxes’ invading fleet
at the straits of Salamis in –479 to the death of Aristotle in –322, took place
against a backdrop of civil and military strife. It began in the aftermath of a
war, albeit a winning one. The First Peloponnesian War followed only 19
years later and lasted for 15 years. After a single decade of peace, the Great
Peloponnesian War broke out. Thereafter followed 31 years of conflict that
ended with Athens’ abject surrender in –404. The Greek mainland descended
into near chaos over the next few decades. Nowhere was the disruption of
daily life greater than in Athens itself, ravaged by both war and a plague in
–430 that killed a third of the population. And yet this century and a half of
war and devastation embraces the Periclean Age. Skipping over the merely
significant figures and listing just the major ones, those were the years that
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 333
saw Aeschylus, Pindar, Parmenides, Anaxagoras, Sophocles, Herodotus,
Protagoras, Euripides, Myron, Polykleitos, Lysippos, Phidias, Thucydides,
Socrates, Democritus, Hippocrates, Polygnotus, Aristophanes, Zeuxis,
Eudoxus, Praxiteles,Theophrastus, and, of course, Plato and Aristotle. Everyone in that list from Aristophanes to the end did his most important work in
the darkest years of Athens’ troubles and their aftermath.
Life in Renaissance Florence was not quite as harrowing as in Athens,
but it was not tranquil. In the autumn of 1495, the Florentine Renaissance
was about to enter its most sublime decades. Leonardo da Vinci, age 43, was
beginning work on The Last Supper. Michelangelo, just turned 20, had already
completed Madonna of the Stairs and was entering the period that would
account for much of his finished sculpture. Raphael had turned 11 and was
learning his craft from his father. Also that autumn, Florence had just ousted
its ruler, was invaded by a French army under the command of Charles VIII,
and was spared destruction only because it paid a large ransom. Florence
would spend the next five years as a theocratic republic under the religious
radical Savonarola, followed by his ouster and execution. The year 1495 is
illustrative, not anomalous. Florence was in a chronic state of civil strife, invasion, or threat of invasion, during its greatest years.
The Dutch golden age in the last two-thirds of 17C gathered strength
in the middle of the Thirty Years’War and ended in 1648 with its treaty with
Spain. Only four years later, the first of three Anglo-Dutch wars broke out,
ending in 1654 with the Netherlands’ defeat. Rembrandt was 48 that year,
Vermeer 22, Huygens 25. A decade later came the second Anglo-Dutch war,
bloody but effectively a draw. Five years after that the French invaded and the
Dutch were forced to breach the dikes to save Amsterdam from conquest.The
third Anglo-Dutch war broke out the same year, ending in 1674. The Dutch
golden age was not a peaceful one.
Of the most famous golden ages, only France’s La Belle Époque, dated in
various ways between 1870 to 1914, was a time of peace. Even in this case,
France was on a downhill slide politically. Just as Athens’ most intense period
of great work began after defeat, Paris’s Belle Époque began in the aftermath
of France’s humiliating capitulation in the Franco-Prussian war, and it
continued during a period when France’s international standing eroded.
To say that (with the French exception) golden ages were punctuated
by war doesn’t tell us much because almost every European age from
1400–1950, golden or not, was punctuated by war. Here are the major wars
that occurred during those centuries involving Western Europe:
334 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Hundred Years’ War. England and France, 1337–1453.
Civil war within the Holy Roman Empire, 1400–1410.
Intermittent wars among Milan,Venice, and Florence, 1402–1454.
Hussite Wars, mostly within Bohemia, 1419–1436.
War of the Poles and Teutonic Knights (Prussia), 1454–1466.
War of the Roses, within England, 1455–1485.
War between Denmark and Norway, 1493–1497.
The Italian Wars, major Continental powers and Britain, 1494–1527.
War between Denmark and Sweden, 1506–1513.
French Wars of Religion, 1562–1598.
Dutch War of Independence, Spain and the Netherlands, 1567–1593.
Wars between Sweden and Poland, 1600–1611 and 1617–1629.
War between Sweden and Russia, 1613–1617. 1632–1634.
Thirty Years’ War, the major Continental powers, 1618–1648.
English Civil War, 1642–1646, followed by periodic political turmoil until
the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
War between Venice and Turkey, 1645–1670.
War between England and the Netherlands, 1652–1654, 1665–1667,
1672–1674.
First Northern War, Sweden and Poland, 1655–1660.
Franco-Allied War, France, the Netherlands, German principalities,
1672–1678.
War of the League of Augsburg, France, England, German principalities,
1688–1697.
Great Northern War, Sweden, Denmark, Russia, Poland, 1700–1721.
War of the Spanish Succession, most of the Continental powers and Britain,
1701–1714.
War of the Quadruple Alliance, France, Britain, Netherlands, Spain,
1718–1720.
War of the Polish Succession, German and Italian principalities, France,
Spain, Poland, Russia, 1733–1738.
War of the Austrian Succession, the major European powers, 1740–1748.
War between Sweden and Russia, 1741–1743.
Seven Years’ War, the major Continental powers and Britain, 1756–1763.
Russo-Austrian-Turkish War, 1787–1792.
War between Sweden and Russia, 1788–1790.
French Revolution, 1789–1792.
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 335
War of the First Coalition, the major Continental powers and Britain,
1792–1796.
Napoleonic Wars, the major Continental powers and Britain, 1796–1815.
Belgian War of Independence, Belgium and the Netherlands, 1830–1831.
The Revolutions of 1848, France, Austria, Italy, Bohemia, Hungary, and
Germany, 1848–1849.
Crimean War, Britain, France, and Russia, 1853–1856.
War between France and Austria over Lombardy, 1859.
Wars of the Italian Reunification (Risorgimento), the Italian principalities,
1860–1870.
Schleswig-Holstein War, Austria, Prussia, Denmark, 1864.
Seven Weeks’ War, Austria, Prussia, Italy, and Saxony, 1866.
Franco-Prussian War, 1870–1871.
World War I, 1914–1918.
World War II, 1939–1945.
The list, long as it is, represents only a portion of all the European
conflicts from 1400 to 1950. It omits all the wars exclusively among countries in Eastern Europe and Russia, one-battle wars such as the British defeat
of the Spanish Armada in 1588, conflicts involving the major European
powers that occurred outside Europe (the American Revolution, for example), and the chronic Balkan wars pitting the Ottoman empire against Austria
and Hungary. Some of the wars on the list lasted only a matter of weeks, but
most of them were bloody and significant. Many of them involved armies and
casualties of epic magnitude. The Thirty Years’War (1618–1648) cost an estimated eight million lives, of whom about seven million were civilians, and
laid waste to large portions of Germany and Bohemia. Other obscure wars on
the list involved multiple battles with casualties in the tens of thousands.
The chronicle of civil unrest is as long as the list of wars. In volume
three of his four-volume study, Social and Cultural Dynamics, Pitirim Sorokin
lists all the internal disturbances for the major European countries from
ancient Greece through the early 1900s. For just the period after 1400,
France has 79 separate internal disturbances, Germany and Austria share 43,
and England has 66.1
It remains possible that the most severe wars and civil disorders could
produce important effects on accomplishment that run-of-the-mill strife
could not. The noticeable dip in the total number of significant figures in the
336 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1600s (see graph on page 248) leads one to wonder whether the Thirty Years’
War might have played a role, for example. A first look at accomplishment
coming out of Germany during that period (when Germany lost about a
third of its population) lends modest support to the hypothesis—the number
of significant figures in the aftermath of the war, from 1650 to 1700, fell from
29 to 26. On the other hand, the number of German significant figures had
increased from 12 in 1550–1600 to 29 in 1600–1650, the half-century that
saw the actual fighting. This is typical of an ambiguous historical record that
calls for multivariate analysis that can take several variables into account at the
same time.
The results of that quantitative analysis in the second half of this chapter say that war and civil unrest did not play such a role, at least in Europe
from 1400 to 1950. Given the narrative record I have just reviewed, the
conclusion is not surprising. Peace cannot explain the trajectory of human
accomplishment because there hasn’t been enough peace for a good test. This
doesn’t mean that some degree of war and civil unrest are good for human
accomplishment, just that they haven’t consistently impeded it. Consistently is
an important qualification here. It remains certainly true that accomplishment in the arts and sciences has suffered in specific cities during specific
periods of the most intense conflict.
ECONOMIC WEALTH AND GROWTH
Accomplishment in the arts and sciences is facilitated by growing
national wealth, both through the additional money that can support
the arts and sciences and through indirect spillover effects of economic
vitality on cultural vitality.
Human accomplishment in the arts and sciences first became possible because
of wealth. Only with the accumulation of a surplus beyond the necessities of
survival could human communities support a class of people who were
engaged in work that did not directly contribute to food, shelter, clothing,
and raising the next generation.
Logic suggests that this relationship between wealth and accomplishment could persist almost indefinitely. Expansion of wealth is accompanied
by increases in the number of people who get the opportunity to identify
and fulfill their talents, including talents in scholarship and the arts. Expansion of wealth is accompanied by increases in the number of jobs for such
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 337
persons once they succeed in identifying their talents. Expansion of wealth is
associated with demands for new technology, applications for new scientific
findings, and growth in expenditures on concert tickets, books, an evening
at the theatre, and pictures to hang on the wall. Expansion of wealth is associated with larger numbers of colleges and universities.
This doesn’t mean that wealth alone causes accomplishment to occur.
The case of the Italian Renaissance illustrates the general problem. Florence
was booming when the Renaissance began. A class of rich merchants had
emerged, and conspicuous consumption was in vogue. A link between that
burgeoning wealth and the Renaissance seems incontestable. And yet as
economic historians have accumulated data, that explanation has had to be
revised, as Charles Mee describes:
Historians have debated for more than a century the connection between
economics and the artistic blossoming of the Renaissance. At first they
thought the new capitalism produced unprecedented prosperity and, so,
spare cash with which to commission art. Then it was discovered that Europe
actually passed through a prolonged depression, and the economic determinists explained that during recession and inflation smart capital moves into art.
Recently, detailed examination has revealed that the economies of some
towns collapsed while those of others bloomed—and yet nearly all of them
produced quantities of art.2
Florence’s economic prosperity undoubtedly explains something—
Florence could not have been the center of the Renaissance if it had
remained a sleepy subsistence village instead of growing into a great financial
center of Europe. But whether wealth was a direct cause of Florence’s artistic
accomplishments or whether the wealth and artistic accomplishments were
both effects of some other cause is difficult to untangle.
Spain supplies the most intriguing connection between economics and
accomplishment in the arts. In the decades after Columbus discovered the
New World, Cortez conquered the Aztecs, and Pizarro conquered the Incas,
Spain was flooded with gold and silver—on the order of 200 tons of gold
and 18,000 tons of silver from 1500–1650.3 It was a fortune of spectacular
proportions, and it probably destroyed Spain as a major European power. It
needn’t have—the windfall could have been used for capital investment
in agriculture and industry. But instead it was frittered away on war and
luxury. Worse than merely wasted, Spain’s temporary riches also inculcated in
her people a reluctance to work that spread from the rich through the
formerly industrious working class. “The love of luxury and the comforts of
338 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
civilization have overcome them,” wrote a Moroccan ambassador to Madrid
in 1690–1691, long after the Spanish should have realized it was time to get
back to work,
. . . and you will rarely find one of this nation who engages in trade or travels abroad for commerce as do the other Christian nations. . . . Similarly the
handicrafts practiced by the lower classes and common people are despised by
the nation, which regards itself as superior to the other Christian nations.
Most of those who practice these crafts in Spain are Frenchmen [who] flock
to Spain to look for work . . . [and] in a short time make great fortunes.4
Spain used its treasure to invigorate the other European nations while
losing its own momentum. By the mid-1600s, Spain had sunk into an
economic torpor from which it would not fully recover through the middle
of 20C.
Spain’s record of significant figures in the arts and sciences parallels its
economic roller coaster. Beginning half a century after the discovery of the
New World came the artists: painters Zurbaran,Velazquez, and El Greco (an
immigrant from Crete); writers Cervantes, Gongora y Argote, Lope de Vega,
Quevedo y Vallegas, and Calderon de la Barca; and composer Cabezon. All of
these men were major figures, accompanied by another 27 significant figures
in the arts inventories. Then, just as abruptly as Spain had begun producing
significant figures, it stopped. Between 1650 and 1850—during the same two
centuries when Britain, France, and Germany were producing hundreds of
significant figures and even Italy in its decline produced several dozen—Spain
produced a single major figure (Goya) and 11 significant figures.
What is the connection between economics and human accomplishment in the case of Spain? One might argue that the riches encouraged its
mini–golden age of writers and painters and its economic decline caused the
subsequent dearth. But it is easier to argue that the misused wealth did nothing but harm. Spain was a major economic and cultural force in Europe
before the discovery of the New World. Through 1650 Spain was simply
continuing to participate, as it had before, in the general European creative
era—its output even during its best years was not remarkable compared to the
other major contributors. Windfall wealth didn’t necessarily help Spain when
it was pouring in, but it hurt Spain in the long run. Spain was, in Richard
Tawney’s memorable description,“like an heir endowed by the accident of an
eccentric will,”and was debilitated in the ways that great fortunes often debilitate unprepared heirs.5
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 339
A stronger case for the good effects of wealth is supplied by the Netherlands in 17C. A small country with few natural resources, controlled by Spain,
threw off its foreign rulers and within a few years of the peace of 1609
became the most dynamic economy in Europe, “the image of Venice in the
days when Venice was thriving,” as a Venetian diplomat observed in 1618.6
Dutch growth continued without a break for the rest of 17C. As in the
case of Spain, the production of significant figures tracked almost perfectly
with the riches, from only 6 significant figures in the last half of 16C to 46
during the course of 17C. The home-grown Dutch major figures of 17C
include a roster of painters that only Florence at its height could match—
Rubens, van Dyck, Hals, van Ruisdael,Vermeer, and Rembrandt. Spinoza in
philosophy and Huygens in the sciences would have ornamented any country in any era. Descartes wasn’t born in Holland, but he lived there during the
prime of his career.
Unlike Spain, the Netherlands did not go into an economic funk, but
growth slowed. From 18C onward, the Netherlands became just another
European small-but-prosperous country. As in Spain, the production of great
figures in the arts and sciences effectively came to a stop. Between Jan
Swammerdam, who died in 1680, and Hugo de Vries, who began his career
two centuries later, the Netherlands produced a solitary major figure (Daniel
Fahrenheit, 1686–1736).
These case studies could be augmented, but the point can be summarized by looking at the correlation between national wealth and accomplishment. For the entire period from 1500 (when the available estimates of GDP
begin) to 1950, the correlation of the number of significant figures with per
capita GDP is .47—a substantial relationship.[7] The correlation with changes
in GDP is smaller, .24, but statistically significant. Wealth and increases in
wealth have a simple bivariate relationship with accomplishment.
The regression analyses demonstrate that these correlations persist after
controlling for factors such as population and population density, but with an
unexpected twist. Richer is better, but part of the effect comes from being
richer compared to other countries during the same time period, not from being
richer in an absolute sense. Specifically, countries that have more per capita
gross domestic product (GDP) than others at a given point in time tend to
produce more significant figures than their poorer competitors, particularly
in the visual arts and the sciences. This finding could be interpreted as reflecting two separate causal routes. The direct route is that money is available to
build universities and buy paintings. The indirect route is that a country’s
• • •
340 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
economic prosperity at any given time reflects a broad cultural and national
vitality that goes beyond economics, and this greater vitality encourages
accomplishment in the arts and sciences independent of monetary support.
This ends the non-technical half of the chapter. Some readers will prefer to
go directly to Chapter 16. The rest of this chapter is for those who are curious about the details of the regression analyses.
A PRIMER ON REGRESSION ANALYSIS
Readers who are familiar with regression analysis may skip directly to the
next section (page 346). Readers who are completely unfamiliar with statistics of any sort and have managed to get this far without reading Appendix 1,
“Statistics for People Who Are Sure They Can’t Learn Statistics,” should
consider reading it now.
The tool I employ in the subsequent analyses is regression analysis, the
most widely used multivariate technique in the social sciences. The mathematics of regression analysis are complicated, but its purpose and structure are
simple. You are faced with a phenomenon that you want to explain, the
dependent variable. You have identified some conditions that might be causing
this phenomenon, the independent variables. Regression analysis tells you how
much each cause affects the phenomenon after taking all the other hypothesized causes into account, and how much confidence you can have that the
results were not produced by chance.
It is the ability to take many variables into account simultaneously that
makes regression analysis so valuable. Consider, for example, the problem of
deciding whether war and civil unrest have effects on accomplishment. I
could start by preparing a table of numbers on a country-by-country, war-bywar basis, as in the example I raised about German accomplishment in the
years before and after the Thirty Years’ War. But to calculate those numbers
for every country and every period between every war would be inconclusive. We would observe some occasions when war seemed to depress the
number of significant figures and others when it did not, but we would
still have the problem of extracting a generalization from all those before/
during/after comparisons. Furthermore, we know that the number of significant figures increased rapidly during the last two centuries. Somehow, the
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 341
comparisons have to take into account the chronological point at which the
comparisons are occurring.
The sensible initial goal—compare the number of significant figures
coming out of times of peace and times of war—cries out for some method
of taking a variety of variables into account at the same time and summarizing the magnitude and strength of the relationships. Regression analysis
provides that method.
Interpreting the Results of a Regression Analysis
A regression analysis produces three numbers of immediate interest for our
purposes: beta coefficients, p values, and expected values.[8]
Beta coefficients. A regression analysis produces a number, often called
simply “the beta” after the Greek letter that is its conventional symbol, for
each independent variable.The beta is a coefficient, meaning that it multiplies
the value of the independent variable with which it is paired. Suppose you
are trying to predict how tall your child will be. To help you make this prediction, you are given a database containing the mother’s height, father’s height,
and the sex of the child for a large sample of other parents and their children.
You put these data into a regression analysis in which the dependent variable
is the child’s height and the independent variables are mother’s height, father’s
height, and the child’s sex. If the beta for the variable called “father’s height”
is +.7, the regression results are saying that an extra inch of father’s height is
associated with an extra 7/10s of an inch of height in a child of a given sex
and with a mother of a given height. The beta tells you the estimated size of the
net relationship between an independent variable and the dependent variable after
taking all the other independent variables into account.
p values. Each beta is associated with a number between 0 and 1 called
a p value. The letter p stands for probability and expresses the statistical significance of the beta. Since “statistical significance” is widely misunderstood,
some elaboration is in order.
A statistically significant relationship is not necessarily large in size. It is
not necessarily important. To say that a relationship is statistically significant
merely says that it is unlikely to have been produced by chance. The standard
way of determining statistical significance is to assess the results against the
assumption that the true size of a relationship is zero. A common threshold
of statistical significance is called “the .05 level,” meaning that if the true
magnitude of beta were zero, a beta of the observed size could be expected to
342 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
appear by chance five out of a hundred times. A beta that is significant at the
.01 level is expected to appear by chance only once in a hundred times. When
the level goes beyond a one-in-a-thousand chance, it is conventionally designated by .000, indicating that the actual p value can be expressed only with
four or more decimal places.
If one is dealing with highly predictable phenomena in the hard
sciences, statistical significance can be reached with a few dozen cases. But for
the messier relationships that the social sciences take up, statistical significance
is seldom found in small samples. Moreover—and this is a point to remember—even a relationship that is only trivially important will be statistically
significant if the sample is large enough. To see this, consider the problem of
deciding whether a coin is fair. You toss the coin 10 times and heads comes
up 6 times. Intuitively, you know that this result doesn’t mean anything. You
throw the coin 10,000 times and it comes up heads 6,000 times. Intuitively,
you know that something is wrong with that coin. You have intuited the
difference between statistically insignificant and significant results. The probability that the difference is a result of chance has gone from very high in the
first case to near zero in the second, even though the proportion of heads is
the same in both cases.
Is it important to know whether a result is statistically significant? In the
case of samples in the thousands, usually no, because almost anything will be
statistically significant. In such cases, you will be focusing on the range within
which you may safely assume that the value of the beta lies, not whether it is
significantly different from zero. In the case of samples of a dozen or two, the
answer is usually no again, because even important relationships (in a substantive sense) are unlikely to meet the threshold of statistical significance. The
samples in the following analyses have several hundred observations, large
enough to expect that substantively important relationships will reach statistical significance. In any case, the point to take away from this discussion is
that the level of statistical significance tells you the probability that the true value of
beta is different from zero.
Expected values. A regression analysis permits you to “predict” what
value the dependent variable will take on for any particular set of circumstances. Go back to the example of predicting your child’s height. Let’s say
you are 5 feet 10 inches, your spouse is 6 feet, and your child is female. Given
the results of the regression equation, you can plug in the betas for each of
those three variables and come up with the expected height of your own
child. Whether you can have any confidence in this expected value depends
• • •
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 343
on the explanatory power of the regression equation, but the expected value
represents the best possible guess given the available data.
A Final Wrinkle: Dummy Variables
A few sentences ago I wrote that “you can plug in the betas for each of those
three variables and come up with the expected height of your own child,”but
one of those three variables was the child’s sex. How can a number be multiplied by sex? In Chapter 16, I analyze the role of political systems. How can
a number be multiplied by a code of “democracy”?
The answer lies in the use of what are known as dummy variables. The
computer doesn’t see “female” or “male,” “democracy” or “autocracy”; it sees
a 1 or a 0. Let’s say that in the prediction of your child’s height we have arbitrarily assigned 1 to stand for female and 0 to stand for male, and the beta for
sex is –2.4. “Plugging in the betas” means that you multiply –2.4 by 1 if your
child is female, and multiply –2.4 by 0 if a male. If we hold parental heights
constant, and rely on the results from this particular sample, these results say
that the expected height of a female is 2.4 inches less than the expected
height of a male.
Dummy variables can be used for categories that have more than two
options. Suppose the analysis of political systems has four categories—
democracy, autocracy, totalitarianism, and limited monarchy, let’s say. Your
analysis of four categories needs three dummy variables (just as the analysis of
the two categories of sex needed just one dummy variable), because one
category serves as a reference group.9 You then code a 0/1 variable for each
of the other categories.
These are the bare essentials. The technical characteristics of the regression
model used in the analyses that follow—it is known as a “negative binomial
model”—and the reasons for choosing it are given in the note.[10] I periodically attach other notes to expand on some points in the text, but just the
material above should let you make sense of the regression tables that follow.
344 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
BASICS OF THE PRESENTATION OF RESULTS
The Control Variables
Each of the analyses in this and the next chapter uses the same set of variables
intended to extract the effects of potentially confounding variables.[11]
The population of the country. A basic assumption of the Poisson family
of regression techniques, and one appropriate to these data, is that the
phenomenon being examined can be expressed as an incidence rate. The
observed number of events (the number of significant figures) represents that
incidence rate multiplied by a measure of “exposure”—in our case, the
population of the country. The population is incorporated into the regression
analysis in its logged form, with its coefficient constrained to be one.[12]
Population density, expressed in the logged value of population (to the
base e, as are all logged variables in the analyses) divided by geographic area.[13]
I use population density as a way of taking the geographic size of a country
into account. For example, France in 17C and 18C had one of the largest
populations in Europe, but it was scattered over 210,000 square miles at a
time of slow transportation and communication. The millions of people in
western and southern France were for practical purposes cut off from the
forces producing achievements in northeastern France. I use population
density instead of directly entering a measure of geographic size because the
correlation between population and density (.25) is much lower than
the correlation between population and area (.70), which diminishes the
likelihood of potential technical problems that go under the heading of
multicollinearity.
A set of dummy variables representing time. The steep rise in accomplishment from 18C onward suggests that any variable we use to explain
human accomplishment should take the chronological point in time into
account. Following Dean Simonton’s practice, I have aggregated the data into
generations, with one generation consisting of a 20-year period—a length of
time that corresponds to the typical length of the creative career.[14] Each
significant figure is assigned to the generation that contains the year during
which he turned 40 or died, whichever came first. I assign a dummy variable
to each generation—a total of 28 dummy variables for the period from
1390–1410 to 1930–1950. The reason for using dummy variables rather than
a single continuous variable is explained in note 10.
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 345
Two Approaches to the Dependent Variable
Many of the analyses use the total number of significant figures as the
dependent variable. But the different inventories had very different numbers
of significant figures in the database used for the quantitative analysis (Europe
from 1390–1950): 1,325 scientists, 713 writers, 507 composers, 429 artists,
and only 74 philosophers. The raw total is thus heavily loaded with scientists
and writers. The raw total has a certain natural appropriateness. In terms of
the daily life of a culture, it is reasonable that the total be tilted toward
the scientists and away from the philosophers. Among the arts, the greater
weight given to literature is commensurate with the role that literature played
in the daily life of a culture compared to music and art prior to 1950. Any
educated person with a middle class income could read the great writers and
keep their books at hand. Until the advent of the phonograph and highquality photographic reproduction, access to great music (at least, great music
played well) and great art was limited to those with wealth or access to scarce
cosmopolitan centers.
Nonetheless, it is prudent to see what happens when the imbalance is
eliminated by transforming the raw numbers so that they all have equal
weight—specifically, by multiplying the raw number in each two-decade
period and each inventory by the weight that will produce a thousand significant figures for each inventory over the whole period from 1390–1410 to
1930–1950.[15] I have replicated all the reported analyses using these weighted
numbers. The replications revealed few and minor differences.
The Choice to Analyze Sets of Independent Variables Separately
The presentations of regression results in this and the following chapter
show separate analyses for each set of independent variables—one for the
variables on war and civil unrest, another for the variables about the economy, and so forth. Why not follow the common practice of developing a
model and presenting all of the independent variables in one equation? My
reason involves the discrepancy between the theoretical capabilities of
complex regression analyses and their practical limitations. When dealing
with the kind of data reported here—counts of comparatively rare events,
arranged by countries over periods of time— choices must be made about
what regression model to use and how to implement it. Many of the choices
involve judgments on which reasonable people might disagree. One way of
coping with these uncertainties is to examine the results from a variety of
346 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
perspectives, which is done in the analyses that follow. But a larger problem
remains. Suppose, for example, that per capita GDP is important when
entered along with the control variables, but ceases to have an important role
when half a dozen other independent variables are added to the equation. If
I were dealing with a database of normally distributed variables, taken from
one point in time, with no lower bound to the value of the dependent variable, and a set of other independent variables that are all coded in natural
metrics that directly measure the construct in question, then it might make
sense to focus exclusively on the larger model and conclude that per capita
GDP has no independent role. When dealing with a database that has none
of those comforting simplicities, I prefer to look at independent variables
separately and show you how they relate to the number of significant figures
after the basic control variables are included. In an epilogue to Chapter 16, I
combine the pieces into a single equation (page 376).
THE REGRESSION ANALYSES: WAR AND CIVIL UNREST
The variables for measuring war and civil strife use data from Pitirim
Sorokin’s Social and Cultural Dynamics mentioned a few pages ago.Volume III
contains two long appendices detailing with wars in one and internal disturbances in the other, beginning in ancient Greece and carrying through the
1920s for European countries.16 I used this material to produce separate
measures for the cumulative severity of war and unrest experienced by a
country over the course of each generation from 1400 to 1950, applying
comparable standards to the years until 1950 not covered by Sorokin.17 The
measure of war is based on the size of the armies involved relative to the
country’s population, the number of fronts on which the war was fought, and
the duration of the conflict over the course of the generation in question.The
measure of unrest uses Sorokin’s own index of the severity of internal disturbances, which was based on the social area of the disturbance (weighted by
the size of the population centers involved), the intensity of the disturbance
based on the amount of violence and the number of socioeconomic changes,
and duration.18 The distribution of measures for both war and unrest are
severely skewed to the left, and are entered as logged values in the analysis.
The scales for these two variables have no natural meaning in themselves—they go from “no war” and “no unrest” during a generation to
“extremely high.” The top score on war goes to France from 1790–1810,
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 347
1800
THE UNITED STATES RETURNS
In Chapter 13, the scatter plots for Europe and the United States
had to be considered separately. Using regression analysis permits me
to combine the European and American data. A main reason is the
more detailed breakdown of time periods. Comparing a European
country and the United States over the entire period from
–1950 is unrealistic—the United States went from a tiny,
insignificant country to the most powerful nation on earth during
those 150 years. Comparing two-decade periods reduces the
unrealism, and adding the other basic control variables further
reduces it to the point that combining the European and American
data is feasible.
followed by Austro-Hungary in 1630–1650. At the top of the unrest scale is
the Netherlands during its Great Revolution in 1570–1610, followed by
Russia in 1430–1470 and Britain in 1630–1650.
War and unrest might affect the appearance of significant figures via two
different routes. One involves interference in the ongoing work—the artist
can’t paint, the writer can’t write—during a period of war or unrest. The
other involves the effects of war or unrest on the children who have the
potential to grow to be great artists or scientists. War and unrest could disrupt
their education. It could also lead children to see the world as irrational and
unpredictable, which would work against the development of personality
traits that favor creativity.19 If this hypothesis is true, then it is important to
consider the effects of war and unrest during the period preceding the generation in question. The table on page 348 shows the results of a regression
analysis employing the current values of war and unrest along with their
values in the preceding generation, plus the standard control variables.
The main items of interest are the four lines that detail the variables we
are using to characterize war and unrest. The short answer is that war and civil
unrest have no relationship with significant figures worth worrying about in
this model.
Might a relationship emerge if we looked at the same data from other
perspectives? To check that possibility, a number of other analyses were
conducted, standard procedure when working with multivariate analyses.
The standard replications for every analysis used equally weighted inventories
348 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
WAR AND CIVIL UNREST AS PREDICTORS OF THE
NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a generation
Observations: 427
Exposure: Country population
Percent
change
Beta p value per SD*
Variables for characterizing war and unrest
War index, current generation +.004 .893 +1
War index, 1st preceding generation –.036 .163 –7
Unrest index, current generation –.012 .432 –3
Unrest index, 1st preceding generation –.006 .700 –2
Control variables
Population density (logged) +.039 .696 +4
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Results are based on a random-effects negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures for a standard
deviation increase in the independent variable on that line, holding all the
other independent variables constant.
and the fixed-effects option. Neither produced results materially different
from the random-effects results shown above. To give you a sense of the rest
of the iceberg lying under the table that ends up being printed when a regression analysis is reported, the note lists some of the other alternatives that were
tried.[20]The meager result of these efforts was the discovery that the number
of significant figures in the visual arts had a statistically significant relationship
with the war index in the first preceding generation. The effect was small,
isolated, and not robust—probably meaningless, in other words.[21] Taken
together, and in combination with the qualitative record, we emerge from
this exercise with reason to have some confidence that war and civil unrest
had no important consistent relationship to human accomplishment in this
data set.[22]
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 349
”
p
WALKING THROUGH THE NUMBERS IN THE TABLE
Start with the problem of judging whether the size of the relationship is important for the war measure in the current generation (the
first row). The sign of the beta is positive, which says that increases
in the war index are associated with an increase in significant figures.
The magnitude of the beta, +.004, looks small. In fact, it is impossible to tell whether it is small just by inspecting it, because the war
variable is not measured in a metric that has a natural interpretation,
such as inches or number of people, but you can tell how big it is by
using the right-hand column, labeled “Percent change per SD.
The entry for the first row is +1, which says that if the war index
increases by one standard deviation, the increase in significant figures
is 1 percent—not a big effect. The value is .893, telling you that
this variable is nowhere close to statistically significant.
This table happens to have no statistically significant variables.
They will be easy to spot in subsequent tables because they will be
in boldface and italics.
THE REGRESSION ANALYSES: ECONOMIC
WEALTH AND GROWTH
Sophisticated measures of national economic activity such as gross domestic
product (GDP) are of recent origin. Even some of the advanced European
nations did not begin to produce such statistics until 20C. The measure of
national economic wealth that I use is an estimate of GDP, but estimate is a
word that needs to be kept in the forefront in this instance.
I combined several sources to reach the estimates of GDP that are
used for the analysis that follows, as described in the note.[23]The net result of
this effort is a database of generation-by-generation estimates of GDP from
1490–1510 to 1930–1950 for all the European countries except Poland and
the Balkans, plus estimates for the United States and Canada from their
foundings onward.
The primary variable for assessing the role of economics is logged per
capita GDP, in thousands of 1990 international dollars.
[24] The rationale for this
variable is that the amount of wealth is positively related to human accom-
350 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
plishment—the richer, the better.[25] As in the case of war and unrest, I also
prepared lagged values of both variables. The lagged variables provide information about the degree to which changes in economic wealth are related to
the production of significant figures.
An alternative measure of economic wealth is a measure of GDP relative
to other economies in the same generation. Specifically, it represents the standard
score of a country’s per capita GDP based on all the distribution of per
capita GDP among the countries in a given generation (for an explanation
of standard scores, see page 463).[26] The rationale is that wealth is relative.
Renaissance Italy during its most prosperous years had far more discretionary
income to be spent on paintings and architecture (for example) than is
implied by comparing per capita income in constant dollars in Renaissance
Florence versus the United States in 1940 (which is what the per capita GDP
variable does).
The results of the analysis using contemporary per capita GDP and two
lagged values produced the results shown in the table below.
ECONOMIC WEALTH AND GROWTH AS PREDICTORS OF
THE NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a generation
Observations: 308
Exposure: Country population
Percent
change
Beta p value per SD*
Variables for characterizing war and unrest
GDP per capita (in thousands of 1990
int’l dollars, logged) +.999 .000 +87
GDP per capita, 1st preceding generation –.069 .795 –4
Control variables
Population density (logged) +.105 .227 +12
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Results are based on a random-effects negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures for a standard
deviation increase in the independent variable on that line, holding all the
other independent variables constant.
EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY • 351
Unlike the story for war and civil unrest, a large and statistically significant relationship exists between wealth and the production of significant
figures in the arts and sciences. These results say that when per capita wealth
goes up by one standard deviation, the expected number of total significant
figures goes up by 87 percent. Once that relationship is taken into account,
the value of per capita GDP in the preceding generation has no important
relationship with the total number of significant figures.
When I replicated the same analysis for each of the inventories separately, per capita GDP showed comparably strong relationships with the art,
literature, and scientific inventories, but a smaller and statistically insignificant
relationship with the number of significant figures in the music inventory.
The measure of relative wealth, comparing countries within a single
generation, showed a substantial relationship with the total number of significant figures (a standard deviation change was associated with a 38 percent
increase, compared to the 87 percent increase for a comparable change in per
capita GDP in constant dollars). When both variables are entered into the
equation at the same time (along with the standard control variables), standard deviation increases in per capita GDP and in relative wealth produce
increases in the number of significant figures of 26 percent and 22 percent
respectively. If we take that result literally, then the two types of effects are
about equal. But the bivariate correlation between the absolute and relative
measures of wealth was so high (.61), that these results are unstable. A more
modest interpretation is that both the direct and indirect routes play substantial roles, with their exact relative proportions uncertain.
SIXTEEN
EXPLANATIONS II:
MODELS, ELITE CITIES,
AND FREEDOM OF
ACTION
The three explanations of human accomplishment I consider in this
chapter are not as obvious as peace and prosperity, but each has a
strong rationale and an effect on accomplishment that emerges unmistakably
in the multivariate analyses. As in Chapter 15, I begin with descriptive
accounts of the three and then lay out the regression results.
MODELS
Streams of accomplishment become self-reinforcing as new artists and
scientists build on the models before them.
The hypothesis is that the celebrity of people like Raphael and Faraday
provides inspiration for aspiring young artists and scientists who grow up in
their shadow. A related hypothesis is that success breeds success across fields—
vitality in one aspect of the arts and sciences contributes to vitality in others.
The logic is similar to that which we have already encountered when
discussing the Lotka curve, in the literature on cumulative advantage and
the Matthew effect (page 93). But the idea that a stream of human accomplishment is sustained by emulation is far older than contemporary social
science. In the later years of Tiberius’s reign, a few years after the death of
Jesus of Nazareth, a retired Roman soldier named Velleius Paterculus who had
turned amateur historian stated the puzzle as well as anyone has since. “I
cannot refrain from noting a subject which has often occupied my thoughts
354 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
but has never been clearly reasoned out,” he wrote. “For who can marvel
sufficiently that the most distinguished minds in each branch of human
achievement have happened to adopt the same form of effort, and to have
fallen within the same narrow span of time.”1 It was true of tragedy, when
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides appeared within a few decades of each
other. It was true of the Greek geniuses of the Old Comedy and the New
Comedy. It was most certainly true of the giants of philosophy, beginning
with Socrates, who were “so crowded . . . into a brief epoch that there were
no two worthy of mention who could not have seen each other.” Velleius
tentatively offered what seemed to him the most plausible explanation:
Genius is fostered by emulation, and it is now envy, now admiration, which
enkindles imitation, and, in the nature of things, that which is cultivated with
the highest zeal advances to the highest perfection; but it is difficult to
continue at the point of perfection, and naturally that which cannot advance
must recede. And as in the beginning we are fired with the ambition to overtake those whom we regard as leaders, so when we have despaired of being
able either to surpass or even to equal them, our zeal wanes with our hope;
it ceases to follow what it cannot overtake, and abandoning the old field as
though pre-empted, it seeks a new one.2
Nineteen hundred years after Velleius wrote, Alfred Kroeber, one of
the founding fathers of anthropology, compiled his own inventories of significant figures in Configurations of Culture Growth (1944), my source for the
Velleius quotations. Writing in the 1930s, when statistical methods were
nearly unknown in the social sciences, Kroeber invented ad hoc methods of
assessing the quantitative existence of the florescences of artistic and scientific
accomplishment that flare, then decline. To Kroeber, the florescences seemed
to peak and then collapse for reasons similar in spirit, beneath Kroeber’s
anthropological jargon, to the ones seen by Velleius. If an artistic or scientific
“high-value culture pattern,” as Kroeber called it, does not run into conflict
with something else in the culture, it will differentiate and expand through its
own momentum. But even if it encounters no opposition from the culture,
eventually it exhausts itself or develops strains that lead to “pattern rupture.”
In the 1970s, Dean Simonton attacked the question anew with an arsenal of quantitative techniques that his predecessors had lacked. His database
consisted of about 5,000 creative persons and anonymous products in Western civilization from –700 to 1839, aggregated in two-decade generations.
Using multivariate time-series analysis, he demonstrated that the strongest
predictors of creativity in a current generation are the number of creative
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 355
persons and products in the two preceding generations.3 Switching from
Western civilization to Chinese civilization, he subsequently found similar
results in a time-series analysis of 10,000 Chinese creators, leaders, and
celebrities stretching from –840 to 1979.4 Simonton has supplemented these
basic demonstrations of the relationship between creativity in adjacent generations with a number of articles elaborating the dynamics at work.5 Simplifying, they are variations on the ways in which models inspire emulation and
provide new creative material.
Because the inventories assembled for Human Accomplishment permit a
replication of Simonton’s analysis, there is no point in elaborating on the
qualitative record. The quantitative analyses presented on page 366 show the
same strong relationships between the preceding generations and the current
one that Simonton found, and lesser but significant relationships between
important figures in one field and the contemporary presence of important
figures in other fields.
CRITICAL MASS: ELITE CITIES
Streams of accomplishment are fostered by the existence of cities that
serve as centers of human capital and supply audiences and patrons for
the arts and sciences.
Treating cities as a cause of human accomplishment may seem like treating
restaurants as a cause of cooking. The causal relationship can be real, but it is
also trivial because it is so obvious. Cities are where the facilities and audiences for the arts and sciences reside; of course artists and scientists disproportionately work in them. But in this section I am making a somewhat
different and less obvious point: Cities are not only where the significant
figures worked, but where they were born and raised.
Cities as Nurturers of Talent
The reason why so many significant figures grew up in cities could still be
as simple as “That’s where the people are.”But cities dominate the production
of significant figures even after taking population into account. The table
on the next page shows a comparison between major European cities and
their surrounding regions for the period from 1800–1950.[6] The pairs were
chosen to be ones in which the city was large, where it was the only major
356 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
city within its geographic region (see Appendix 4 for a list of the regions), and
where the region as a whole had produced more than 25 significant figures.
Details of the calculation are given in the endnote.[7]
ORIGINS OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES: CITIES VERSUS
THEIR SURROUNDING AREAS, 1800–1950
Significant Figures per Million
City / Comparison Area City Area
Austria:Vienna / Lower Austria
Belgium: Antwerp / Belgium
Belgium: Brussels / Belgium
Britain: Bristol / Southwest England
Britain: Dublin / Ireland
Britain: Edinburgh / Lowland Scotland
Britain: Glasgow / Lowland Scotland
Britain: Liverpool / Northwest England
Britain: London / Southeast England
Britain: Manchester /Northwest England
Czech Republic: Prague / Bohemia
Denmark: Copenhagen / Country
France: Paris / Country
Germany: Berlin / Brandenburg
Germany: Cologne / N. Rhine.-Westphalia
Germany: Hamburg / Lower Saxony
Germany: Königsberg / East Prussia
Germany: Munich / Bavaria
Germany: Stuttgart / Baden-Württemberg
Hungary: Budapest / Country
Italy: Rome / Country
Netherlands: Amsterdam / Country
Netherlands: Rotterdam / Country
Norway: Oslo / Country
Poland: Warsaw / Country
Russia: Moscow / Country
Russia: St. Petersburg / Country
Spain: Madrid / Country
Sweden: Stockholm / Country
Switzerland: Geneva / Country
Switzerland: Zurich / Country
Combined
12 2
7 2
5 2
20 3
17 1
22 4
6 4
5 1
6 5
5 1
14 1
11 5
24 2
5 2
10 4
17 4
33 2
10 4
91 3
10 1
4 1
5 2
4 2
20 5
3 0.3
8 0.4
8 0.4
7 1
25 2
123 2
17 2
20 2
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 357
The ratios for the different cities vary widely, from a low of 6:5 for
London versus the rest of Southeast England to a high of 123:2 for Geneva
versus the rest of Switzerland. The combined ratio for all of these cities is an
unambiguous 20:2. The concentration of origins in the major cities is not a
function of simple population, but of other features about urban areas.
In thinking about what those features might be, another salient point is
that some cities have done much better than others. The table is restricted to
cities in regions that produced at least 25 significant figures. But many cities
at many periods of their history produced almost nothing. Thirteen cities
were among the European top twenty in both 1800 and 1950. From largest
to smallest as of 1950, they were London (at 8.3 million in 1950), Moscow,
Berlin, St. Petersburg, Paris, Rome, Madrid, Vienna, Hamburg, Barcelona,
Milan, Copenhagen, and Naples (at 1.0 million). Now go back and look at
the maps showing the origins of the significant figures for the period
1800–1950 (page 303).[8] If you want to argue that large cities are centers of
accomplishment, then London, Paris, Berlin, and Vienna make a powerful
case for you. But Rome, Madrid, Hamburg, Barcelona, Milan, and Naples
from 1800–1950 just as effectively make the case that large cities are not
necessarily centers of accomplishment. Similar contrasts could be drawn
throughout the history of modern Europe. The greatest centers of accomplishment in every era were among the largest cities in Europe, but some of
the largest cities in every era produced little or no accomplishment.
Furthermore, the big four (Britain, France, Germany, and Italy) have
exhibited strikingly different relationships between their cities and the origins
of significant figures. The maps on the following page provide a close-up of
the relationship between cities and the origins of total significant figures from
each of four countries during its most dominant period: Italy during the
Renaissance, France during the Baroque and Enlightenment, Britain during
the Industrial Revolution, and Germany between the end of the Napoleonic
Wars and World War I.
The stories for Italy and Britain are similar. Each country has several
cities and the color is concentrated in or around them. But Italy’s largest city
during the Renaissance was Naples, and yet Naples, along with the rest of
southern Italy, has almost no dots at all. Why not? A plausible explanation is
that for practical purposes Naples and southern Italy were not part of what
we think of as Renaissance Italy. They were controlled by the Spanish Hapsburgs and were politically and culturally separated from the rest of Italy. In
contrast, Britain’s largest city, London, was also the nation’s capital politically,
economically, and culturally. It also is the center of a mass of color.
358 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
FOUR MODELS OF HOW CITIES ARE RELATED TO THE ORIGINS
OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Italy During the Renaissance,
1400–1550
Circles: All cities of at least 25,000
people in 1500.
Britain During the Industrial and
Romantic Revolutions, 1750–1850
Circles: All cities of at least 50,000
people in 1800.
Note: All circles are sized proportionately to a common minimum of 25,000. The
minimum population sizes in each graph are chosen to provide roughly comparable
thresholds for a community with the attributes of a city.
France During the Baroque and
Enlightenment, 1600–1800
Circles: All cities of at least 40,000
people in 1700.
Germany Between Waterloo and the
Marne, 1815–1915
Circles: All cities of at least 60,000
people in 1850.
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 359
France shows a far different picture. No other country in Europe came
close to France in centralization, not only of its government and of its urban
population, but of its cultural resources. France had only six cities with populations greater than 40,000 people in 1700, with Paris dwarfing the other five.
The south of France shows a modest number of significant figures separated
from the rest, but otherwise the map resembles a pattern of iron filings scattered on a surface with a magnet where Paris sits.
Germany is also unique, but in the opposite way: No other country in
Europe produced so many significant figures from such scattered places. I
should note that the dispersion is not peculiar to 19C. If you review the maps
for earlier periods (pages 301–302), you will find that Germany always drew
its significant figures from scattered areas. For a world grown accustomed to
thinking of Germany as the centralized military-industrial society of the two
World Wars, it is easy to forget that until the last half of 19C, Germany was
politically and culturally the most decentralized region of Europe. And yet
cities are not irrelevant to the German story. Germany had 11 cities of 60,000
or more people in 1850 and several others not shown on the map that were
close. Furthermore, Germany had another set of towns—Göttingen, Heidelberg, Tübingen, Halle, Jena, and Freiberg, among others—with concentrations of human capital in the form of Europe’s finest universities. That leads
us to the theme of the following discussion: Significant figures are associated
not with just any sort of city, but a particular kind that I will call elite cities
where a critical mass of talent can form.
Talent and Critical Mass
Why did some cities become the cradles of significant figures while others
did not? Part of the answer depends not on the city itself but on the larger
culture. Accelerant, a word used in connection with fires, seems appropriate in
thinking about the role of cities. In a culture where the spark of creativity has
been lit, the following are some of the combustible materials that elite cities
possessed during the period from 1400–1950.[9]
Cities attracted human capital. As countries urbanized, some people in
rural areas decided to pull up roots and move to the city, while others decided
to stay put. On an individual level, these decisions were made for many
reasons. Taken overall, the process tended to select for talent, ambition,
industriousness, creativity, and spunk. Cities had a disproportionate amount
of a nation’s human capital, and the children who grew up there reflected
that disproportion.
360 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The disproportionate inborn talent that each new urban generation
enjoyed was augmented by educational opportunities far better than those in
the countryside. Primary education reached much larger proportions of
urban children than rural children. Access to secondary and university education was greater. The facilities and staffing of urban schools were better.
Some cities provided more raw material than others for talented children to feed upon. In his analysis of Western civilization from ancient Greece
to the first half of 19C, Dean Simonton discusses this raw material in terms
of cultural diversity.10 The literature on creative personalities consistently
demonstrates the importance of relativism, complexity, diversity, and richness. Simonton notes that, historically, talented children who grew up in a
rich, diverse cultural environment were more likely to develop than those
who grew up in a culturally monolithic environment.[11]
Children who grew up in cities were also more likely to become artists
and scientists just because there is a lot of art and science going on all about
them. For the visual arts and music, the first determinant of whether a city
had a lot going on was a large audience. Cities where thousands of people
filled concert halls and patronized art galleries tended to be the cities where
artists, composers, and musicians went to work. The secondary effect of an
audience was that the presence of artists and composers in a city drew other
artists and composers, which made the city still more attractive. At some
points in history—Paris’s domination of the art world from mid-19C until
World War II is an example—a city became so conspicuously the center of
activity that it acquired close to a monopoly.
Not all cities have audiences for art and music. The industrial cities of
England grew large over the course of 19C, but the money in those cities
mostly belonged to first-generation entrepreneurs who were too busy to go
to concerts and bought their art through agents in London and Paris. Many
were self-made men who scorned the arts as diversions of the idle aristocracy.
The cities with large audiences for the arts were political and financial centers
of power or intellectual centers.
With regard to the sciences, a city’s combustible material consisted
of facilities—libraries, laboratories, and colleagues. These are the properties of
universities, and small university towns accordingly produced significant
figures out of proportion to their populations. But urban centers could
also fill that role. Some of the great cities of Europe were the homes of
national libraries and research centers along with their local universities;
others were not.
There is an element of circularity in this portrayal of elite cities when
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 361
we are trying to explain where the significant figures worked—they went to
work where the action was, and they were the cause of the action where they
went to work. That circularity is a major part of the explanation for the selfreinforcing nature of streams of human accomplishment discussed in the
preceding section. But, again, the circularity is diminished when we consider
where the significant figures grew up rather than just where they worked. In
the quantitative analysis, I look at both aspects, with the first set of regressions
using the origins of significant figures as the dependent variable and the
second set using their workplaces. In both cases, the powerful stimulus given
to human accomplishment by elite cities—places such as London, Paris,
Florence, Vienna, and Berlin—is borne out by the quantitative record. The
largest effects are found for the variables recording the size of the largest city,
whether a city was a political or financial center, and whether a city was
home to a leading university.
FREEDOM OF ACTION
Streams of accomplishment are fostered by political regimes that give
de facto freedom of action to their potential artists and scholars.
The final contributor to human accomplishment that I take up in this
chapter is freedom of action. I mean by this phrase something related to, but
not quite the same as, political freedom in the form of constitutionally
guaranteed rights, limited government, and democratic rule. Political freedom technically defined fails to explain anything about accomplishment in
the arts and sciences for the same reason that war and unrest fail. Just as most
human accomplishment occurred in times of chronic warfare (because
chronic warfare has been the historical norm), most human accomplishment
occurred under regimes that had almost no guaranteed political freedoms
(because guaranteed freedoms have not been the historical norm). Perhaps,
given time, political freedom will prove to be a better environment for
accomplishment than any other system, but if we are looking at the
record until 1950, we have barely a century in which liberal democracy was
widespread.
Republics have a longer history than liberal democracies, but the nature
of a republic throughout history could be almost anything. A few were free
and well-governed societies that fit the modern sense of republic—republican
Netherlands, for example. Others, like republican Venice, were as authoritar-
362 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
ian and occasionally repressive as an autocracy. The Florentine republic was
on another dimension altogether—a paradox to political historian S. E.
Finer: “the very fountainhead of the republican ideology and home of its
most eloquent and influential publicists,”but akin to the Wild West in its practice of government, with sporadic shootouts and unofficial oligarchs who ran
the city behind the scenes. “The wonder is how the city managed to prosper,”
Finer continues, “for one is bound to suspect . . . that it did so despite and
”12 not because of its political institutions.
The form of governance does have an important relationship with
accomplishment if we focus on one extreme, the totalitarian state. The
amount of experience the world has with totalitarian states is even more
limited than our experience with liberal democracy, but the record is so onesided that the conclusion seems warranted:Totalitarian states effectively quash
human accomplishment in the arts and philosophy. They are only slightly less
stifling in the sciences, and then because they create isolated enclaves within
the totalitarian state that mimic to some degree the intellectual incentives and
institutions of non-totalitarian states.
These judgments are based on the Soviet, Chinese Communist, and
East European records through 20C. The inventories are of only limited use,
because they end in 1950, when even those as young as 50 had grown up for
at least their first 18 years in a non-Communist environment. It is still worth
noting that as of 1950 the Soviet Union had produced no significant figures
in the visual arts who had not made their reputations before the revolution.
Only two composers (Kabalevsky and Shostakovich) were among the significant figures born in Russia who can be said to have made their reputations
under the Soviet system. The significant figures among the writers who made
their reputations after the Revolution do not have happy biographies. Isaak
Babel was sent to the Gulag in the 1930s and died there. Valentin Katayev
restricted himself to light humor or stories about children (who could be
portrayed naturalistically, to a degree). Konstantine Fedin’s one good novel
was written in 1924, after which he parroted the Party line and helped prosecute writers who did not. Yuri Olesha was disgraced during the 1930s and
rehabilitated only after Stalin died. Mikhail Sholokhov wrote his masterpiece,
Tikhy Don, in his twenties and thereafter, writing under the eye of the Party,
produced only hack work. Satirist Mikhail Zoshchenko was brought under
strict scrutiny after 1930 and expelled in disgrace from the Union of Soviet
Writers in 1946.[13]
The totalitarian states of 20C obsessively sought industrial and military
strength, leading them to take special measures to nurture and reward scien-
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 363
tific talent. But special privileges apparently did not compensate for the
stifling effects of totalitarianism. The Soviet Union’s record up to 1950
amounted to only 11 significant scientific figures who had made their reputations under Soviet rule, compared with 105 in the United States whose
careers matured during the same period (1920–1950).
The common factor that distinguishes the totalitarian state from all
other political systems is the condition that I have labeled freedom of action. If
we ignore legal protections and focus instead on how much de facto freedom
artists and scientists enjoyed, the monarchies from 1400–1950 could be as
tolerant of heterodoxy and independent thought as contemporary democracies. This is not to say an autocracy such as France’s in 17C and 18C was
without its dark side but that its talented artists and scientists had considerable
freedom of action. Molière was well advised not to write a savage satire about
Louis XIV, and he lived in a world where the Catholic Church could prevent
him from presenting Tartuffe for five years, but Molière did have the freedom
of action to satirize many of the great and powerful while becoming one of
the greatest comedic dramatists of all time.
Freedom of action in an autocracy or strong monarchy could be the
result of liberties established by custom, or it could be the result of a tolerant
ruler. In smaller autocracies, the limits of geographic scope also encouraged
freedom of action. In 17C, for example, the area that would become
Germany numbered 300 principalities, 51 independent cities, and nearly
2,000 counts or knights who possessed some territorial sovereignty. Even the
largest German units such as Saxony existed in the midst of alternatives a few
miles away. The alternatives might not be relevant to a peasant family tied to
its small holding, but they were highly relevant to the young scholar or artist.
If monarchies are graded on the freedom of action they permitted, the
striking under-representation of significant figures from Russia, the Balkans,
and the Iberian peninsula (see the scatter-plot maps beginning on page 301)
has a ready, if partial, explanation. Russia was a repressive, despotic autocracy
in ways that France and the principalities of Central Europe were not. Property rights never developed in Russia, for example.14 Until the late 1700s,
Russia enforced obligatory service not just on the peasant but on the nobles.
Secret police, use of the military for internal suppression of dissent, and indiscriminate use of imprisonment and exile to Siberia were tools of the Russian
state long before the Bolsheviks perfected them. To the southwest, the
Balkans were ruled for most of the period after 1400 by the Ottoman
Empire. As one historian described Ottoman rule in the Balkans,
• • •
364 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The Ottoman system took children forever from parents, discouraged family
cares among its members through their most active years, allowed them no
certain hold upon property, gave them no definite promise that their sons and
daughters would profit by their success and sacrifice, raised and lowered them
with no regard for ancestry or previous distinction, taught them a strange law,
ethics and religion, and ever kept them conscious of a sword raised above
their heads which might put an end at any moment to a brilliant career.15
That the Balkans did not produce great art and science under the
Ottomans is no mystery.
At the other corner of Europe, Spain experienced a movement toward
despotism that coincided with the economic windfall discussed in the previous chapter (page 337). Until Isabella and Ferdinand, the same monarchs who
sponsored Columbus, Spain had been a poly-ethnic, poly-religious society.
Then came the Inquisition, different in kind, scope, and duration from any of
the Inquisitions elsewhere in Europe—different also in that it fell under the
direct control of the crown, not the Church. It was used to suppress, torture,
expel, and kill Jews, Moors, and Christian heretics, but also had open-ended
authority that made it a tool of state power against whomever the crown
identified as an enemy. And it went on for centuries, at different levels of
repressiveness under different monarchs, until it was finally ended in the early
1800s. Spain was not as repressive as Russia or the Ottoman empire. But if
one is looking for an explanation of Spain’s persistent underachievement in
the arts and sciences relative to its size, population, and wealth, its limited
freedom of action must be taken into account along with the cultural dissipation that followed its windfall from the New World.
In the quantitative analyses, I convert these observations about the
regimes in Europe to codings of de facto freedom of action that can be used
in the multivariate analysis. The results are that countries with a history of
despotism show sharply reduced levels of accomplishment. Parliamentary
monarchies and liberal democracies were generally more productive than
tolerant autocracies.
As in Chapter 15, the following sections describe the quantitative analyses
that led to these conclusions. As in Chapter 15, you may proceed directly to
the next chapter without much loss in substance.
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 365
THE REGRESSION ANALYSES: MODELS
The question to be explored is whether the rises and falls in human accomplishment are self-reinforcing processes that benefit from previous people
working in the same field or from concurrent people working in other fields.
Lagged value of significant figures. Lagged variables are a standard tool for
analyzing phenomena that stretch over time. In Chapter 15, I used the lagged
value of the war and unrest indices to explore whether conditions in childhood might have a delayed effect on the emergence of significant figures.
Lagged variables also have another use: to see whether the dependent variable
is partly caused by the preceding value of the dependent variable. To see how
lagged values are coded, consider this abbreviated mock-up of four observations in the visual arts inventory:[16]
No. of 1st lagged no. 2nd lagged no.
significant of significant of significant
Generation Country figures figures figures
1610–1630 Netherlands 4
1630–1650 Netherlands 6 4
1650–1670 Netherlands 8 6 4
1670–1690 Netherlands 3 8 6
In the above table, the lagged number of significant figures for the
Netherlands in 1670–1690 is 8 if the lag is for one generation and 6 if the
lag is for 2 generations. The results in the table below include values of lagged
total significant figures for the two preceding generations—or more precisely,
for reasons described in the note, rescaled logged values of those two variables.[17]
Significant figures working in the other domains. Another way of testing
the effect of models on the production of significant figures in one inventory
is to enter the number of significant figures being produced in the other
inventories. For example, if the dependent variable is number of artists, the
independent variables in such an analysis include the number of writers,
composers, philosophers, and scientists in the same generation. This analysis
is not available when the total number of significant figures is the dependent
variable, but it can be applied to the analyses of the separate inventories.
The table on the following page shows the analysis of the lagged significant figures variable. I extend the lagged values back a full century so you can
see how long the relationship persists.
366 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
THE FIVE PRECEDING GENERATIONS AS PREDICTORS OF
THE NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a generation
Observations: 352
Exposure: Country population
Percent
change
Beta p value per SD*
No. of significant figures in the five preceding generations†
First lag (0–20 years prior) +.368 .000 +87
Second lag (20–40 years prior) +.121 .029 +23
Third lag (40–60 years prior) +.041 .397 +7
Fourth lag (60–80 years prior) +.099 .030 +18
Fifth lag (80 –100 years prior) +.040 .334 +7
Control variables
Population density (logged) –.512 .000 –41
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Results are based on a random-effects negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures for a unit
increase in X, holding all the other independent variables constant.
† Logged and rescaled for zero values. See note 17.
Through the first two periods, representing 40 years, the betas for the
lagged variables show large, highly significant relationships to the number of
significant figures in the current decade.[18] But decay in the magnitude of the
effect is apparent. In the first lag, a standard deviation increase is associated
with a 87 percent increase in the total number of significant figures. That
increase drops to 23 percent for the second lag and is still lower thereafter. In
subsequent analyses, I include just the first two lagged values. Some technical
issues associated with the interpretation of time-series data and lagged variables are discussed in the note.[19]
Now we turn to the other way in which models could be important—
models not in the same field but in different ones. Is it the case that artistic
accomplishment is helped along if important work is also happening in the
sciences? Are authors inspired by living in a milieu where composers are writing great works?
To obtain an answer to this question for a given inventory, I created
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 367
variables which represented the total number of significant figures active in
other inventories. For example, if the dependent variable is the number of
significant figures in literature, the parallel independent variable is the
number of significant figures in all fields other than literature.
ACTIVITY IN OTHER INVENTORIES AS A PREDICTOR OF
THE NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Dependent variable:Total no. of significant figures in a given inventory
Independent variable shown: Total no. of significant figures in all the other
inventories combined
Independent variables not shown: Population density, time dummy variables
Observations: 446
Exposure: Country population
Percent
change
Beta p value per SD*
Results for the visual arts inventory +.029 .000 +44
Results for the literature inventory +.003 .411 +3
Results for the music inventory +.010 .011 +14
Results for the combined scientific inventories +.016 .000 +12
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Results are based on a random-effects negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures for a standard
deviation increase in the independent variable on that line, holding all the
other independent variables constant.
The effects of activity in other fields are statistically significant and large
for visual arts, and statistically significant but modest for music and the scientific inventories. Literature appears to have been unaffected by activity in
other fields.
THE REGRESSION ANALYSES: ELITE CITIES
In all the multivariate analyses you have seen so far, the unit has been the
country. To begin the exploration of the effects of cities, I use a database
consisting of all cities in Europe and the United States that had a population
of at least 30,000 sometime during 1400–1600, 50,000 in 1700, 100,000 in
1800, or 250,000 in 1900,[20] plus cities that were the political capital of a
368 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
country but failed to meet the population criterion, or cities that had an elite
university (see below) but failed to meet the population criterion. These
procedures produced a set of 110 cities. I characterized each city for each half
century from 1400–1950 on five dummy variables:
1. Industrial. A code of 1 was assigned to cities with economies that, during a
given half-century, were heavily dependent on manufacturing and other
industrial enterprises. The expectation for this variable is that industrial
cities were not (absent other virtues) favorable places for producing
significant figures.
2. Entrepôt. A code of 1 was assigned primarily to port cities, but also to few
inland cities (e.g., Leipzig) that were hubs for trading. The expectation for
this variable was that the cross-fertilization of information and goods
associated with entrepôts facilitates the production of significant figures.
3. Political or financial center. A code of 1 was assigned to cities that were
either capital cities of their countries or were centers of banking and
investment. The expectation was that political and financial centers are
cities with unusually high concentrations of educated and wealthy people,
encouraging the production of significant figures.
4. Elite university. A code of 1 was assigned if the city had an elite university
established no later than the preceding half century. In both Europe and the
United States, a handful of universities have acquired elite status, widely
known for their scholarship and serving as magnets for other cultural
resources. Classification as an elite university was based on whether
descriptions in basic reference sources used adjectives that indicated elite
status. The universities that qualified as elite for some or all of the period
since their founding were Cambridge, Oxford, the Sorbonne, Harvard,Yale,
and the universities of Edinburgh,Vienna, Louvain, Berlin, Göttingen,
Halle, Heidelberg, Leipzig, Tübingen, Bologna, Florence, Padua, Madrid,
and Salamanca.[21]
5. A non-elite university. A code of 1 was assigned if the city had a university
established no later than the preceding half century, but one that did not
qualify as an elite university.
These variables, along with the population of the city and the country
in which the city is located, were entered for each half century from
1400–1950. In this case, with both cities and countries acting as units, I
employed a negative binomial regression in which countries were entered as
dummy variables along with the time dummies, and the standard errors were
adjusted for clustering on the city. The results are reported in the table below.
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 369
CITY PREDICTORS OF THE ORIGINS
OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a half century
Observations: 943
Exposure: City population
Percent
increase
Beta p value if “yes”*
Variables for characterizing the city
Industrial economy (yes/no) +.183 .219 +20
Trading entrepôt (yes/no) +.063 .550 +7
Political or financial center (yes/no) +.493 .000 +64
Presence of an elite university (yes/no) +1.044 .000 +184
Presence of only a non-elite university (yes/no) –.212 .107 –19
Control variables
Country dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Results are based on a negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures if a dummy variable is coded “yes,” holding all the other independent variables constant.
Two characteristics of a city are systematically associated with the
appearance of significant figures who grow up there: whether the city is a
political or financial center, regardless of its population, and whether the city
is the location of an elite university. The effect of these latter two variables is
quite large. As the last column indicates, being a political or financial center
increased the expected number of significant figures by 64 percent, holding
everything else constant, while having an elite university increased that
expected number by 184 percent.
A curiosity in the table is the negative effect associated with having just
a non-elite university. This does not mean that the presence of such a university somehow discourages the appearance of significant figures. If the regression analysis is replicated without the elite university variable, then the
presence of any university is associated with a positive, though small and
statistically insignificant, increase in the number of significant figures.
These results were consistent with the analysis when it was replicated
separately for each inventory. The notable exception involved the role of an
370 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
industrial city in generating significant figures in the scientific inventories,
which was large and statistically significant. The relationship makes sense—
the industrial cities might not have had concert halls and art galleries, but
they were centers of technological activity and often of scientific research
as well.
On the basis of these results, it appears that the relevant variables are
whether a city is a political or financial center, and whether it is the home of
an elite university. The next step is to apply these findings to our usual database. I also include the size of the nation’s largest city, to see if it might explain
away (or attenuate) the role of the political and financial centers variable. The
results of the regression are shown in the table below.
ELITE CITIES AS PREDICTORS OF THE NUMBER
OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES IN A COUNTRY
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a generation
Observations: 436
Exposure: Country population
Percent
change
Beta p value per SD*
Variables characterizing a country’s elite cities
Population of the largest city (logged) +.077 .281 +13
Number of political and financial centers +.291 .000 +49
Number of cities with an elite university +.282 .000 +45
Control variables
Population density (logged) –.188 .111 –18
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Results are based on a negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures if a dummy variable is coded “yes,” holding all the other independent variables constant.
Large and statistically significant effects were found for the role of
political and financial centers and for elite universities, even after bringing
the population of the largest city into the equation. When the analysis is
replicated separately for each inventory, no interpretably distinctive patterns
emerge.
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 371
THE REGRESSION ANALYSES: FREEDOM OF ACTION
As the discussion of freedom of action in the first half of the chapter indicated
(page 361), I focus on the de facto political state of affairs, not on the formal
structure. I came to this position because the more conventional ways of categorizing polities proved to be useless in understanding where accomplishment flourishes. I begin with that exercise.
An Analysis Using a Conventional Political Typology
The conventional typology of political systems uses the following categories:[22]
Absolute monarchy. I follow S. E. Finer’s definition of absolute monarchy as “a regularly constituted and conferred office whose holder is legally
(procedurally) unconstrained, but not necessarily unconstrained by powerful
conventional understandings on matters of substance.”23 This label is used for
the type of monarchy that prevailed in most of Europe until the French
Revolution and in some countries into 20C.
Parliamentary monarchy. This category includes political entities that
were not yet democratic in a formal sense but in which the powers of the
head of state were limited, especially in the creation of new laws. England
from the Glorious Revolution in 1688 to 1832 falls in this category, for
example. I also used this code for what John Adams called “aristocratical
republics” such as Zurich or Venice, in which oligarchs exercised the same
power as monarchs.24
Republics. As I noted earlier (page 361), European republics varied
so widely that they don’t really belong in the same category. The difficulties
of coding them are compounded because they were usually small and seldom
coincided with modern national borders. I restricted the code of republic
to Switzerland and the Netherlands during the appropriate years of their
history.
Liberal democracy. This code was reserved for countries in which all
effective legislative and executive power is wielded by an elected legislative
body or bodies and an elected head of government.
Totalitarian states. An invention of 20C, the totalitarian state concentrates all power in the hands of a ruling group, not subject to recall or restraint
by the public. The code was used for the Soviet Union, Germany under Nazi
rule, and countries under their occupation or domination.
372 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Each country was coded by individual year, with the code for the twodecade generation representing the modal code.[25] The table below shows
the results.
POLITICAL SYSTEM AS A PREDICTOR OF THE
NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a generation
Observations: 422
Exposure: Country population
Percent Percent
p increase change
Beta value if “yes”* per SD†
Dummy variables for characterizing
the political system
Liberal democracy –.179 .198 –16
Parliamentary monarchy –.011 .925 +1
Republic +.382 .134 +46
Absolute monarchy (Reference group. Beta=0)
Totalitarian –.146 .447 –4
Control variables
Population density (logged) –.066 .551 –6
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Results are based on a random-effects negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures if a dummy variable is coded “yes,” holding all the other independent variables constant.
† Percent change in the expected number of significant figures for a standard
deviation increase in the independent variable on that line, holding all the
other independent variables constant.
The results show no pattern—liberal democracy, parliamentary democracy, and totalitarian states all do worse than the reference group, absolute
monarchy. Only the category for republics had a positive coefficient and, like
the coefficients for the other categories, it did not reach statistical significance. In sum: A conventional typology of political systems explains little.[26]
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 373
An Analysis Coding for De Facto Freedom of Action
After finding so little relationship of significant figures to a conventional
typology, I recoded the countries for the freedom of action they provided.
The objective was to regroup the observations into just four ordered categories going from high to low on this continuum. These codes obviously
involve judgments, described below.
Category 1. This category, intended to designate the countries with the
greatest freedom of action, was limited to liberal democracies.
Category 2. This category included all the parliamentary monarchies
and the Netherlands and Switzerland in their republican phases. I also coded
pre-unification Italy and Germany in this category. This coding is problematic for 18C Germany, when Prussia became a significant state on its own and
qualified as a large autocracy. But throughout 18C, Prussia represented well
under half the geographic area of Germany and was the origin of just 20
percent of German significant figures, so I left the coding for Germany as a
whole unchanged. Similarly, the southern part of Italy was ruled more like a
large autocracy than the north, but the Naples region (roughly, Italy south of
Rome) and Sicily accounted for only eight percent of all the Italian significant figures before unification of the country in 19C.
Category 3. This category, tolerant autocracy, was the default coding for
both true autocracies and strong monarchies. To be excluded from category
3, an absolute monarchy had to be notably repressive.
Category 4. This category, despotic government, intended to capture the
countries that were unusually repressive of human freedom of action,
includes all the totalitarian states of 20C plus the Balkans under the Ottoman
Empire, Russia, Poland when it was under Russian rule, and Spain during its
long imposition of an active, state-run Inquisition.
When these categories of freedom of action are treated as dummy variables, the results are as shown in the table on the following page.
How can category 4, despotic government, fail to show a large negative
effect, given the dismal records of the Balkans and Russia, which make up the
bulk of the despotic codings? The answer goes to the nature of regression
models, and offers an object lesson in the ways in which results can be decisively affected by judgments that have no clear right or wrong answer. The
model used to compute the results in the table takes the effects of the country into account. Suppose, for example, that I did not use either the randomeffects or fixed-effects model, but simply entered a vector of dummy variables
374 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
FREEDOM OF ACTION AS A PREDICTOR OF THE
NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a generation
Observations: 446
Exposure: Country population
Percent Percent
increase change
Beta p value if “yes”* per SD†
Dummy variables for characterizing
de facto freedom of action
Category 1 (liberal democracy) +.232 .100 +26
Category 2 (parliamentary monarchy) +.368 .002 +44
Category 3 (tolerant autocracy) (Reference group. Beta=0)
Category 4 (despotic government) –.241 .227 –21
Control variables
Population density (logged) +.047 .627 +5
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Results are based on a random-effects negative binomial model.
* Percent change in the expected number of significant figures if a dummy variable is coded “yes,” holding all the other independent variables constant.
† Percent change in the expected number of significant figures for a standard
deviation increase in the independent variable on that line, holding all the
other independent variables constant.
for country and had a list of beta coefficients associated with each country. In
that case, Russia and the Balkans (coded as a single “country” for the analysis) would have large negative coefficients which, in effect, are soaking up
some of the variance that would otherwise be explained by the variable for
despotic government. If I then rerun that equation without a vector of
dummy variables for country, the negative coefficient for the despotic
government variable becomes very large and highly significant.
Which model is correct? It is a question with no unequivocally right
answer. If I were to translate these results into narrative explanations, it might
be argued that something about Russian culture and Balkan culture (or Russian and Balkan people—any unmeasured characteristic will do) is the real
cause of the disproportionately small number of significant figures from those
countries, and that to leave out the dummy variables for country falsely
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 375
inflates the negative effect of despotic government. Conversely, it could be
argued that the real cause of the lower accomplishment is the despotic
governments that afflicted both regions throughout their histories. But there
is no way to tell which argument is correct, because despotic governments
existed throughout the whole time period. All we can be sure of is that two
places with despotic governments throughout the period 1400–1950 did
poorly, given their populations, in producing great accomplishment in the
arts and sciences. The quantitative analysis cannot tell us for sure that their
form of government was to blame.
Interpreting the significantly positive effect of category 2 governments
(parliamentary monarchy) is also problematic. Even though the dummy variables to control for time are in the equation, it remains the case that category
1 (liberal democracy) prevailed during the last half of 19C and the first half of
20C, while category 2 prevailed predominantly during 18C and early 19C. If
the accomplishment rate were declining for other reasons after mid-19C (as
the graphs in Chapter 14 suggest), then the smaller coefficient for liberal
democracy could be reflecting that larger trend. The modest but safe interpretation of the results in the table above is that the coefficients for type of
government move in the same direction as freedom of action, with the two
freest forms of government (categories 1 and 2) both showing positive effects
on accomplishment. These results survive when I replicate the model without the problematic coding judgments for 18C Germany and for Spain
during the Inquisition.
EPILOGUE: THE FULL MODEL
At the outset of the regression analyses in Chapter 15, I described my reasons
for presenting the results in chunks, with a few basic control variables serving
as a first check on whether the variables for explaining accomplishment that
we were examining had an important independent role to play, before putting
all the variables into the hopper together.
The table below illustrates the reason for this cautious approach. It
includes the most important variables from all the sections in the last two
chapters, combined into a single regression equation. The columns show the
results when two options are used: the random-effects option, which takes
the role of the individual country into account under the assumption that
countries are different in ways that are unrelated to the independent variables,
and the fixed-effects option, which sacrifices some efficiency but does not
376 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
require an assumption that the unmeasured characteristics of the country are
unrelated to the independent variables in the model.27
THE FULL MODEL, COMPARING RESULTS FOR
RANDOM EFFECTS AND FIXED EFFECT
Dependent variable: Total no. of significant figures in a generation
Observations: 312
Exposure: Country population
Random Effects Fixed Effects
Beta p value Beta p value
War and Civil Unrest
War index +.055 .009 +.066 .001
Unrest Index +.011 .387 +.011 .328
Economic Wealth
GDP per capita (constant dollars, logged) +.501 .006 +.259 .135
Models
Significant figures, first lag +.407 .000 +.402 .000
Significant figures, second lag +.158 .004 +.150 .003
Elite Cities
Population of the largest city (logged) –.295 .003 –.132 .236
Number of political & financial centers +.045 .445 +.122 .019
Number of cities with an elite university +.084 .306 +.168 .025
Freedom of Action
Category 1 (liberal democracy) +.042 .743 +.003 .978
Category 2 (parliamentary monarchy) +.082 .411 +.086 .354
Category 3 (tolerant autocracy) (Reference group. Beta=0)
Category 4 (despotic government) –.398 .021 –.325 .037
Control variables
Population density (logged) –.151 .261 –.512 .006
Time dummy variables (results not shown separately)
Bold italics indicate results statistically significant at or beyond the .05 level.
Both models use exactly the same data, and differ only in the way that
they take the effects of the individual country into account. For all the analyses you have seen so far, the differences produced by the two versions have
been trivial. But when many variables are assembled in the one equation, the
results diverge. If we believe the random-effects model, per capita GDP is
significant; the fixed-effects model says not. The fixed-effects model yields
highly significant results for political/financial centers and elite universities;
the random-effects model says no, it is the size of the largest city that counts.
EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, CITIES, AND FREEDOM OF ACTION • 377
Both methods contradict the earlier finding that war is not related to
accomplishment. If we believe the full model, we must conclude that war has
a statistically significant effect after all on accomplishment in the arts and
sciences—but a positive effect, encouraging the emergence of significant
figures, not a negative effect.
I prefer the random-effects model for conceptual reasons, and the relevant test for the full model indicates that it is statistically appropriate as well.
But the choice is not so one-sided that it is safe to take all the random-effects
results at face value and ignore the conflicts with the fixed-effect results.[28]
Nor is it appropriate to throw out the findings from the piece-by-piece
analyses and assume that the one-equation full model gives us a more accurate understanding of how these variables go together. In one instance—the
important negative role assigned to despotic government—the results of the
full model correspond to my reading of the narrative record, and I am predisposed to think that controlling for the additional variables in the full model
has exposed an authentic relationship that was obscured when the freedom of
action variables were analyzed alone. But in another instance—the positive
relationship of war to accomplishment—it seems just as likely that the relationship in the full model is spurious.
At this point different analysts will choose different ways to proceed.
Some will argue that if one conducts sufficiently sophisticated diagnostic
tests and continues to refine the variables and re-specify the model, eventually an iron-clad interpretation of the results is possible. I do not agree, believing that such efforts as often produce false confidence as they produce more
accurate results. My own interpretation of the findings in the last two chapters is to assume that large and statistically significant effects that emerged in
the separate pieces are plausibly important in explaining trajectories of
human accomplishment in the arts and sciences. The ways in which the
importance of those variables shifted when put into a full model are interesting, and ought to be kept in mind in subsequent work, but should not be
treated as decisive.
SEVENTEEN
WHAT’S LEFT TO
EXPLAIN?
The story line for Part 3 began with the steep upward climb of significant figures from the Renaissance onward. The last two chapters have
introduced five topics—peace, prosperity, models, elite cities, and freedom of
action—to try to explain why the timeline has that particular shape. How
much has been explained, and what’s left to explain?
At the level of the individual country and specific generation, the fit
between the variables we have examined and the actual production of significant figures is good enough to be informative, but not good enough to
answer all the important questions. You can get a visual sense of the amount
left unexplained from the figure on the next page. It shows the difference
between the actual and expected values for each of the countries for each of
the generations after entering the explanatory variables of the last two chapters.[1] A difference of zero means that the number of significant figures has
been perfectly “predicted.”A plus figure indicates that the equation underpredicted the actual number of significant figures; a minus figure indicates
overprediction.[2]
The predictiveness of the regression model is better than the figure
indicates, insofar as many of those dots close to the zero line represent several
observations stacked on top of each other. I cannot offer you the standard
statistic for expressing how much has been explained (R2), because the regression model for these data doesn’t produce it. I can report the square of the
correlation between the actual and predicted values of the dependent variable, which is .84, but it is no substitute for R2.
[3] Even without a precise
measure, however, it is clear that the model’s ability to predict how many
significant figures any country produces in any generation is limited. This
does not mean that the relationships discussed in the last two chapters are
380 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
For individual countries and time periods,
the difference between the actual and expected number
of significant figures is often substantial
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
Actual-Expected Significant Figures
Note: Data represent Europe, the United States, and Canada, 1400–1950.
meaningless after all; just that many other factors, not part of the equation, are
feeding into the process of producing significant figures. Such results are the
rule, not the exception, in analyzing social and cultural phenomena. Adding
more data of the same type—measures of education, health, equality, or
urbanization for example—are unlikely to add much explanatory power. The
variables already in the equation have already captured much of the information contained in those more detailed variables.
Three issues remain that lend themselves to investigation. First, the
regression results do not explain the falling accomplishment rate observed
after mid-19C in several inventories (Chapter 14). Nothing in the analyses of
the last two chapters would lead us to conclude that the conditions for
accomplishment deteriorated after mid-19C, and much would suggest that
they improved.[4] Wealth, cities and their cultural resources, and political
freedom of action all increased markedly during 19C and 20C—in their
quantitative expressions, more than keeping pace with than the increase in
population—and yet the production of significant figures per unit population
declined.
WHAT’S LEFT TO EXPLAIN? • 381
The second issue involves non-European streams of accomplishment.
The variables I introduced in the last two chapters are informative for Europe
from 1400–1950, but even a casual scan of the histories of East Asia, India,
and the Arab world tells us that GDP, population of the largest city, national
population, and the other economic and political variables that helped
explain the European trajectory are unlikely to work as well for those other
centers of accomplishment. China’s cities and wealth did not decline after the
end of the Song dynasty, for example, but its great artistic and scientific
accomplishments were mostly behind it by that time.
For West and non-West alike, there remains the final and great remaining question: Why do streams of accomplishment begin and end? So far, the
variable we have examined that has the most explanatory power is the
number of significant figures in the preceding generation. The relationship is
important in itself. It bears directly on the question that puzzled Velleius from
his vantage point two thousand years ago, that Alfred Kroeber tried to attack
with the limited tools available to him the 1930s, and that Dean Simonton
subsequently answered for both Western civilization and for China.5 The
processes that lead to human accomplishment in the arts and sciences are selfreinforcing, involving the emulation of models and the availability of a growing creative edifice that the new generation can build upon.
But valuable as it is, this finding does not tell us what generates a major
stream of accomplishment in the first place. We face a more pedestrian
version of the problem that faces cosmologists trying to understand the
history of the universe. They know a great deal about what happened
nanoseconds after the Big Bang began. They just don’t know how it got
started. The variables in the last two chapters tell us much about the dynamics governing streams of accomplishment once they are underway. They don’t
tell us what ignites the blaze or why it dies out. Those are the questions to
which I now turn.
 FOUR
AND DECLINE
OF
P A R T
ON THE ORIGINS
ACCOMPLISHMENT
Faced with the story of human accomplishment across time and
cultures, what is a parsimonious set of elements that helps to
explain what causes streams of accomplishment to begin and decline?
At this point I am no longer dealing with ideas and hypotheses that lend
themselves to clear-cut tests, though quantitative data can inform them.
Chapter 18 states the case for what I see as the mainspring for human
accomplishment, the inborn impulse of humans toward excellence.
Chapter 19 discusses two personal stances toward life, purpose and
autonomy, that cultures can foster or discourage, and that affect
the likelihood the people capable of excellence will devote their lives
to achieving it.
Chapter 20 takes up what I see as the elements that shape the nature
of human accomplishment: a rich organizing structure and a coherent
understanding of, and use of, transcendental goods.
Chapter 21 presents the case that the declines in the rate of
accomplishment from the mid-1800s onward reflect real changes in the
streams of Western accomplishment.
Chapter 22 brings together threads from throughout the book and
speculates about their meaning for accomplishment after 1950
and into 21C.
EIGHTEEN
THE ARISTOTELIAN
PRINCIPLE
In Chapter 5, as this attempt to inventory excellence in the arts and
sciences began, I took up a question that must be answered before such an
endeavor makes sense: Is there such a thing as excellence in human accomplishment that exists independently of subjective tastes and contemporary
intellectual fashion? Now, as I begin my attempt to explain the origin and
decline of bursts of excellence, the starting point must be another elemental
question: Is it in the nature of human beings to be drawn to excellence and,
given the chance, to pursue it, or is excellence something that must be
elicited from human beings who are naturally indifferent to it?
THE PRINCIPLE STATED
I proceed from the view that accomplishment in the arts and sciences is one
manifestation of a characteristic of human nature discussed at length by Aristotle in books seven and ten of the Nicomachean Ethics. A leading topic in
those books is the meaning of pleasure in human life. The core sentence for
our purposes: “Life is an activity, and each man actively exercises his favorite
faculties upon the objects he loves most.”1 Philosopher John Rawls distilled
the sense of Aristotle’s discussion into what he labeled the Aristotelian principle,
which Rawls stated as follows:
Other things equal, human beings enjoy the exercise of their realized capacities (their
innate or trained abilities), and this enjoyment increases the more the capacity is realized, or the greater its complexity.
386 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
I add the italics to signify the importance of this statement. If it is not
true, little of the rest of my explanation of what ignites excellence in human
accomplishment hangs together. If it is true, elements of the explanation
approach the self evident. Rawls continues:
The intuitive idea here is that human beings take more pleasure in doing
something as they become more proficient at it, and of two activities they do
equally well, they prefer the one calling on a larger repertoire of more intricate and subtle discriminations. For example, chess is a more complicated
and subtle game than checkers, and algebra is more intricate than elementary
arithmetic. Thus the principle says that someone who can do both generally
prefers playing chess to playing checkers, and that he would rather study
algebra than arithmetic.2
Rawls’s explanation speaks for itself, so I will add just a few comments.
Mainly, I want to emphasize that neither Aristotle nor Rawls is talking about
abstruse philosophical satisfactions but about the nature of pleasure. Exercising our realized capacities is, in the truest sense of the word, enjoyable.
We see the truth of the Aristotelian principle in our own lives, I assert,
and I invite you to test that assertion against your own experience. The things
we enjoy the most deeply are the things at which we are most expert. In
Chapter 5, I discussed the ways in which the expert and the novice experience the same event differently. Then, I was careful not to argue that the
expert enjoyed the same event more than the novice—it would have confused
the issue—but I will say it now. Let me add a qualification that, in a sense,
proves the principle:When a person is expert at something and does not find
his greatest enjoyment in its exercise, it is usually because he feels that he
became expert at something that does not draw upon his full capacities.
We see the truth of the Aristotelian principle from observations of
others. Teachers trying to interest students in classical music know that
Tchaikovsky’s 1812 Overture is a good way to begin, because children are
more likely to respond to it than to a Bach fugue. The children who respond
and go on to learn more about classical music begin to find that the Bach
fugue gets more interesting, while the cannons booming in the 1812 Overture
lose their charm. The beginning photographer takes one shot each of many
different scenes, and the pleasure comes from having pictures of lots of different things. The more deeply involved he becomes in photography, the more
shots he takes of the same thing, and the pleasure begins to come from solving subtle problems of lighting and composition. The pre-adolescent chess
prodigy revels in the flashy sacrificial attack. As he learns more about the
THE ARISTOTELIAN PRINCIPLE • 387
game, he begins to relish subtle positional strategies. The talented mechanic
who learns how to fix any car that someone brings into the shop dreams of
working on the more complicated problems posed by high-performance
racing engines.
EVIDENCE FOR THE PRINCIPLE’S REALITY
Until the 1960s, any psychologist who claimed that the Aristotelian principle
says something true about the behavior of human beings faced ridicule. From
its infancy through the first two-thirds of 20C, the new science of psychology was dominated by the behaviorist position, championed first by John
Watson in 1914 and later made famous by B. F. Skinner.3 The human mind
and personality are driven by positive and negative reinforcements, the
behaviorists said. A concept such as “enjoyment” is illusory—human beings
will enjoy whatever they are trained to enjoy. All that is necessary to elicit any
behavioral response is the appropriate set of reinforcement schedules.
During the height of the behaviorists’ influence, psychologist Abraham
Maslow published an article entitled “A Theory of Human Motivation”
(1943) that introduced the initial version of what would become his famous
needs hierarchy. His lowest level of human needs were primitive: food, water,
shelter, sex. But once those needs were satisfied, Maslow argued, the human
animal tried to satisfy a sequence of other inborn needs. The need for longerterm safety followed the need for day-to-day survival, then came a need for
intimacy with other people, then the need for recognition and respect from
others, and finally what Maslow called self-actualization.4 His statement of
the nature of self-actualization links the Aristotelian principle to the psychology of great accomplishment in the arts and sciences:
A musician must make music, an artist must paint, a poet must write, if he is
to be ultimately happy. What a man can be, he must be. . . . This tendency
might be phrased as the desire to become more and more what one is, to
become everything one is capable of becoming.5
Maslow may have been a lonely voice in 1943, but even as he wrote,
experimental psychologists were beginning to come across bits and pieces of
data that were hard to fit within the behaviorists’ model, and these anomalies
accumulated. Humans persistently exhibited tendencies to enjoy the stimulation of new things, complexity, surprises, even in the absence of any perceptible external reinforcement. People insisted on developing their skills,
388 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
extending themselves, in patterned ways that did not fit easily into the view
that humans are governed by a few primitive drives.6 In the late 1950s,
psychologist Robert White used the accumulated evidence to propose that
humans take satisfaction from dealing with the environment around them.
The reward (for all behavior must have a reward) is a feeling of “effectance,”
which in itself is sufficient to stimulate behavior. In the title of his article,
he managed to say it in plain language: “Motivation Reconsidered: The
Concept of Competence.”7 Here and there on the bleak plains of behaviorism, the possibility that man might be human in the Aristotelian sense was
putting up shoots.
In the years that followed, the evidence accumulated that humans enjoy
not just competence but excellence. Of the many strands that bear on the
Aristotelian principle, the one that comes closest to operationalizing it has
been the work of psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. In the early 1970s,
Csikszentmihalyi began studying the nature of enjoyment by interviewing
people who spent long hours and intense effort on activities that had little
monetary reward—in his initial study, rock climbers, chess players, composers
of modern music, amateur modern dancers, and high school basketball players. Why did they invest so much of themselves in this activity? What did they
get out of it? In the subsequent quarter-century, Csikszentmihalyi published
a series of books elaborating the data and the theory that now goes under the
label of flow, his word for what happens when one is fully engaged in an activity—the kind of absorption that leads you to lose track of time and of everything else that is going on around you.8 Flow is human enjoyment in its most
meaningful form.You are not saying to yourself, “How enjoyable this is,” but
are completely involved in the actual experience of enjoyment.
As Csikszentmihalyi and his colleagues analyzed the conditions that
give rise to flow, they arrived at a model that has been expressed in different
ways over the years, but its essentials can be conveyed in a simple plot, as illustrated on the facing page.
When you are faced with a challenge that is far beyond your skills, the
result is anxiety. When your skills are high but the challenges are low, you are
bored. If you have low skills and the challenge is also low, you are able to do
the job but are unlikely to become absorbed in it—apathy is the characteristic response. But when the skills are high and in balance with a stiff challenge,
flow occurs. It is the Aristotelian principle on a two-dimensional plot.
Other developments in psychology, especially those dealing with the
nature of intrinsic rewards, are coordinate with Csikszentmihalyi’s research
THE ARISTOTELIAN PRINCIPLE • 389
and with the Aristotelian principle. The note provides some sources.9 The
Aristotelian principle is not just something that philosophers wish were true
about human beings but corresponds to more systematic evidence about the
way humans behave. Human beings enjoy the exercise of their realized capacities, with the enjoyment increasing the more the capacity is realized. Those
with the capacity for excellence do not need to be cajoled into wanting to
realize it. The pursuit of excellence is as natural as the pursuit of happiness.
The Aristotelian Principle in Graphic Form
Sources: Adapted from Csikszentmihalyi 1975: 181 and Csikszentmihalyi 1997: 31. Challenges
Low High
High
Low
Skills
Anxiety
Apathy Boredom
Flow
NINETEEN
SOURCES OF ENERGY:
PURPOSE AND
AUTONOMY
The Aristotelian principle means that human beings with the potential for
excellence will usually try to realize that potential, given the chance.
But how hard they try, and how they go about it, are decisively affected by
how they see their places in the universe at one extreme, and their places in
their own families and communities at the other. Culture in turn affects these
ways of seeing, and in doing so affects the likelihood that the people with the
capacity for excellence will achieve it. I label two important ways of seeing
one’s place in the world purpose and autonomy. In this chapter I first describe
what goes into the two sets of qualities I have in mind, then consider how
they have corresponded with the history of accomplishment.
PURPOSE
A major stream of human accomplishment is fostered by a culture in
which the most talented people believe that life has a purpose and that
the function of life is to fulfill that purpose.
If the Aristotelian principle is valid, talented people of all personal convictions
enjoy the exercise of their realized capacities. Why should it make any difference whether someone thinks life has a purpose? Why shouldn’t people who
don’t think life has a purpose—I will use nihilists to label them—accomplish
as much as anyone else? My position is that they can accomplish a lot, but if
we are talking about means and distributions, nihilists as a group have a builtin disadvantage. The first reason for this has to do with the intense and
unremitting level of effort that is typically required to do great things. The
392 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
second reason goes to the nature of the goals that creative people set for
themselves.
Work
One of the most overlooked aspects of excellence is how much work it takes.
Fame can come easily and overnight, but excellence is almost always accompanied by a crushing workload, pursued with single-minded intensity. Strenuous effort over long periods of time is a repetitive theme in the biographies
of the giants, sometimes taking on mythic proportions (Michelangelo painting the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel). Even the most famous supposed exception, Mozart, illustrates the rule. He was one of the lighter spirits among the
giants, but his reputation for composing effortlessly was overstated—Mozart
himself complained on more than one occasion that it wasn’t as easy as it
looked1—and his devotion to his work was as single-minded as Beethoven’s,
who struggled with his compositions more visibly. Consider the summer of
1788. Mozart was living in a city that experienced bread riots that summer
and in a country that was mobilizing for war. He was financially desperate,
forced to pawn his belongings to move to cheaper rooms. He even tried to
sell the pawnbroker’s tickets to get more loans. Most devastating of all, his
beloved six-month old daughter died in June. And yet in June, July, and
August, he completed two piano trios, a piano sonata, a violin sonata, and
three symphonies, two of them among his most famous.2 It could not have
been done except by someone who, as Mozart himself once put it, is “soaked
in music, . . . immersed in it all day long.”3
Psychologists have put specific dimensions to this aspect of accomplishment. One thread of this literature, inaugurated in the early 1970s by Herbert
Simon, argues that expertise in a subject requires a person to assimilate about
50,000 “chunks” of information about the subject over about 10 years of
experience—simple expertise, not the mastery that is associated with great
accomplishment.4 Once expertise is achieved, it is followed by thousands of
hours of practice, study, labor.5 Nor is all of this work productive. What we
see of the significant figures’ work is typically shadowed by an immense
amount of wasted effort—most successful creators produce clunkers, sometimes far more clunkers than gems.6
As one reviewer of the literature on creative people concluded, “Not
only every sample, but every individual within each sample appears to be
characterized by persistent dedication to work.”7 The accounts that he
surveyed reveal not a few hours a week beyond 40, or a somewhat more
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 393
focused attitude at work than the average, but levels of effort and focus that
are standard deviations above the mean. Whether Edison’s estimate of the
ratio of perspiration to inspiration (99:1) is correct is open to argument, but
his words echo the anonymous poet from ancient Greece who wrote that
“before the gates of excellence the high gods have placed sweat.”8
The willingness to engage in such monomaniacal levels of effort in the
sciences and creative arts is related to a sense of vocation. By vocation, I have
in mind the dictionary definition of “a function or station in life to which
one is called by God.”9 I hedge on the necessity of God as the source. Many
scientists see themselves as having a vocation in the service of Truth. Many
other achievers see themselves as having a vocation without thinking about
where it came from. My point is that a person with a strong sense of this is
what I have been put on earth to do is more likely to accomplish great things than
someone who doesn’t. Ennui, anomie, alienation, and other forms of belief
that life is futile and purposeless are at odds with the zest and life-affirming
energy needed to produce great art or great science. Cultures vary in the
degree to which they promote or discourage these alternative ways of looking at the world.
The Choice of Content
Nihilists are also at a disadvantage when it comes to their choice of content.
Once again, I am talking about means and distributions for which there are
individual exceptions, but most of those exceptions come at the beginning of
a nihilistic period. Friedrich Nietzsche wrote about the great themes of
philosophy, as did Jean-Paul Sartre. They had to, because they were struggling
to bring down an edifice of thinking about the great themes that they
thought was wrong. But once the edifice is down, whether in philosophy,
literature, art, or music, the choice of content becomes more problematic. If
life is purposeless, no one kind of project is intrinsically more important than
any other kind. At the extreme, this can produce perversely capricious and
trivial choices that represent, as Ronald Sukenick put it with regard to the
plight of the novelist, “. . . ways of maintaining a considered boredom in the
face of the abyss.”10 But even short of the extreme, this broader generalization
applies: Without a sense of purpose, the creative personality has no template
that constantly forces an assessment of whether he is making the best possible
use of his talents.
People who see a purpose in their lives have a better chance of creating
enduring work than people who don’t, because the kind of project they work
394 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
on does make a difference to them. The general statement here is that to
believe life has a purpose carries with it a predisposition to put one’s talents
in the service of whatever is the best—not the most lucrative, not the most
glamorous, but that which represents the highest expression of the object of
one’s vocation.
The link is to some degree a tautology. We use the phrase life has a
purpose only when that purpose has a transcendental element, something
more important than the here and now. Thus when someone says something
like “Sure, my life has a purpose: to make as much money as I can,” we recognize that as mocking the word purpose. To have a purpose in life is to be
compelled to try to live up to that transcendental element. The composition
and role of the potential transcendental elements are discussed in Chapter 20.
For now, this simple proposition: Purpose in life shapes a life’s work, and for
the better.
[11]
PURPOSE, NOT SAINTLINESS
People who see purpose in their lives are not necessarily indifferent
to motives based on money, power, or fame. Some of the giants
spent a great deal of effort trying to get higher fees and complained
profanely at being underpaid. Some were vain about their celebrity
or bitter about their obscurity. Some sought power and relished the
exercise of it. But a common theme in the biographies of the giants
(and in the analyses of creative people in general) is that their work
expresses the purpose they saw in their lives, a purpose that they
usually had felt before they had achieved anything.
AUTONOMY
A major stream of human accomplishment is fostered by a culture that
encourages the belief that individuals can act efficaciously as
individuals, and enables them to do so.
Purpose refers to a person’s belief that life has a meaning. Autonomy refers to a
person’s belief that it is in his power to fulfill that meaning through his own
acts. Own acts is a crucial element, for the creative act is both audacious and
individual by nature. This is not equivalent to saying that great accomplishment always occurs among people acting alone. Scientific knowledge is
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 395
advanced by sharing ideas with colleagues, and there is the occasional example of a great collaboration in the arts. But creativity ultimately comes down
to small, solitary acts in which an individual conceives of something new and
gives it a try, without knowing for sure how it will turn out. Streams of
accomplishment are more common and more extensive in cultures where
doing new things and acting autonomously are encouraged than in cultures
that disapprove.
Whether people believe they have the power to fulfill their felt destiny
depends in part on their psychological makeup. Within any culture, audaciousness is a trait that has a distribution from none to a lot, and any culture
will produce some people who will do things on their own whatever anyone
else might say. But cultural norms foster or discourage autonomy among the
great middle of the distribution. In a familistic culture where the child’s paramount obligation is to his parents and the adult’s paramount obligations are
to the extended family, the proportion of actively creative people will be
smaller than in a culture where the obligations of family are less onerous. In
a culture that disapproves of open argument, taking a stand against the
consensus not only requires more courage than in a culture that accepts argument, it is also less likely to succeed. In a culture that dreads innovation, originality is suspect.
AUTONOMY, NOT WILLFULNESS
Lest there be any confusion: Autonomy as I am using the word has
nothing to do with simple willfulness (“I’ll do whatever I want”). A
sense of efficacy is crucial to the construct I am trying to convey,
which can seldom be sustained by people who are not genuinely
efficacious. In its turn, efficacy requires personal qualities—selfdiscipline, especially—that are inconsistent with willfulness.
There is no vector of good-to-bad on this dimension, merely different
ways of structuring a society. The extreme of familism may stifle individual
initiative but nurture lives rich in human relationships. The other extreme of
autonomy may be liberating but lonely. The point is not which system is
better in the abstract, but what is the relationship of familism to autonomy.
The proposition is that highly familistic cultures and ones that revere the past
will limit both autonomy and creativity and hence will be ones in which
streams of accomplishment are constrained.
396 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
THE HISTORICAL RECORD: EAST ASIA
Differences in purpose and autonomy help explain some of the differences in
patterns of accomplishment between East Asia and Europe. The cultural
differences in outlook are unmistakable, and their relationship to behavior is
persuasive, though I must make that case by painting in broad strokes indeed.
I begin with East Asia.
Purpose
The principal religious sources for both China and Japan were Daoism and
Buddhism. They borrowed from each other in both countries and produced
a variety of offshoots, with Zen being the best known in the West. Both
taught that purposeful action in one’s life on this earth is a snare and delusion.
Buddhism went the farthest, explicitly urging that the path to wisdom lies in
detaching oneself from the world. The life anyone lives right now is merely
one out of thousands. The quest for any earthly good is bound to be a cycle
of frustration. Life is painful, the origin of pain is desire, the cessation of pain
comes with the cessation of desire, and the way to the cessation of pain is
through an ascetic life of meditation. Daoism too taught the virtues of serene
acceptance, humility, gentleness, and passivity, with passivity conceived not as
weakness but as the way toward understanding the nature of the universe and
the individual’s role in it. Sometimes, the relationship between Daoist teachings and accomplishment as I have been talking about it in this book is startlingly explicit. This is from Laozi’s Dao-de Jing:
To seek learning one gains day by day;
To seek the Dao one loses day by day,
Losing and yet losing some more,
Till one has reached doing nothing
Do nothing and yet there is nothing that is not done.
To win the world one must attend to nothing.
When one attends to this and that,
He will not win the world.12
It is safe to say that neither Buddhism nor Daoism was a religion calculated to energize people to fulfill a purpose embodied in this life on this
earth. Theology isn’t the same as practice, however, and the fact that
Buddhism and Daoism were the primary religious doctrines of East Asia
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 397
doesn’t mean that everybody behaved as theology prescribed. Buddhism in
particular had little influence in China after about 1000. Even in the times of
the greatest national religiosity, the educated classes of China and Japan were
not known for religious fanaticism. Thus Buddhist and Daoist teachings,
despite their dismissive view of the workaday world, could inspire artistic and
poetic masterpieces and did not stop a curious Chinese scholar from making
observations about sunspots or calculating the value of /. It is best to think of
Buddhism and Daoism not as a day to day actuator of behavior among East
Asian scholars and artists, but as a cultural backdrop. Buddhism and Daoism
did not prevent the talented from realizing individual excellence. They stood
aside, as it were. The absence of a tradition that put fulfillment of one’s purpose
now, in this life, at center stage, lowered the creative energy that the human
capital in East Asia was capable of generating.
Autonomy
Familial constraints on personal autonomy have been the norm in human
history, and for understandable reasons. The more precarious the existence
of a community, the more important it is that a culture socialize children to
care for their parents and siblings. But if East Asia did not originate such
constraints, Confucianism articulated them at a new level of intellectual
sophistication (see page 41), reinforcing a mélange of cultural and historical
influences that have given East Asians ways of looking at the relationship of
the individual to family and society that differ profoundly from the West’s.
Psychologist Richard Nisbett’s The Geography of Thought (2003) has recently
brought together the growing literature on how these differences manifest
themselves. For our purposes, the chief point is that, throughout the histories
of their cultures, properly raised Chinese or Japanese children have made
their crucial life decisions with the wishes and welfare of their parents, then
of their extended family, and then of their community, in the forefront of
their minds. Nothing in either Chinese or Japanese culture encouraged the
maturing child to focus on his own ideas and ambitions and seek out ways to
fulfill them no matter what.
It is easy for Westerners to confuse deference with being intimidated,
perhaps because intimidation often lies behind deferential behavior in the
West. The East Asian understanding of deference is importantly different. The
roots of the deference lie in an internalized sense of what is seemly and
unseemly, virtuous and disgraceful. This internalized sense spills over into
398 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
behavior that affects accomplishment in the arts and sciences. It makes sense,
given a Confucian outlook, that the aesthetic authority of revered early
painters and poets could remain nearly intact for centuries. Chinese artists
were not necessarily afraid to try new things, but cultural cues made them less
motivated to try new things for the sake of originality and more motivated to
become a valued part of a high tradition.
In the sciences, the disapproval of open dispute took a toll on the abilpast.”13
A CAVEAT ABOUT UNCHANGING CHINESE ART
Generalizations about the unchanging nature of Chinese painting
and literature irritate specialists, for whom later Chinese artists can
be “as innovative as Cézanne or Picasso,” as one Chinese art scholar
said of Ming landscapist Dong Qichang, urging us “not to take too
literally the claims of Chinese artists that they are imitating the
I would add that the continuity of Chinese language and
customs indirectly affects the way we perceive changes in Chinese
art and literature. If Shakespeare had been writing in Latin and
living in a London still Roman in its manners, political organization,
and architecture, it would have been harder for him to do new
things with the story of Julius Caesar. Or, imagine that Michelangelo had not approached classic Greek sculpture with the excitement of rediscovering work that had been forgotten for more than
a millennium, but instead had been born into a world in which
master craftsmen had been turning out fine sculpture in the same
style in an unbroken line since Phidias. Michelangelo enjoyed the
advantage of a discontinuity in the West’s history that was not available to Chinese and Japanese artists.
So let it be clear that I am not claiming that the low value put
on personal autonomy in East Asia explains everything directly. On
the other hand, Chinese artists did say they were imitating the past,
as Western artists seldom felt constrained to do, and many of them
really did imitate it. Combining both the direct effects (the need to
justify one’s work in terms of the past) and the indirect ones (the
centuries of continuity engendered by the Chinese system), the role
of autonomy clarifies much about the different routes taken in East
and West.
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 399
ity of East Asian science to build an edifice of cumulative knowledge. As I
have noted elsewhere (see pages 38, 235), the history of Chinese science is
episodic, with the occasional brilliant scholarly discovery but no follow-up.
Progress in science in the West has been fostered by enthusiastic, nonstop,
competitive argument in which the goal is to come out on top. East Asia did
not have the cultural wherewithal to support enthusiastic, nonstop, competitive arguments. Even in today’s Japan, a century and a half after that nation
began Westernizing, it is commonly observed that Japan’s technological feats
far outweigh its slender body of original discoveries. One ready explanation
for this discrepancy is the difference between progress that can be made
consensually and hierarchically versus progress that requires individuals who
insist that they alone are right.
THE HISTORICAL RECORD: ISLAM’S GOLDEN AGE
For a few centuries at the turn of the first millennium, Islam presided over a
burst of exuberant scientific and philosophical inquiry. It began with the
translation of the treasure of Greek and Roman manuscripts that had lain
forgotten for centuries. It then went beyond translation, producing a large
body of original work in mathematics, chemistry, astronomy, optics, and
philosophy, among other fields. Then this burst of activity died away. Summarizing and simplifying the argument that follows: Islam provided a sense of
purpose and vitality that helped power the achievements of its golden age, but
Islam could not accommodate itself to the degree of autonomy required to
sustain it.
The extraordinarily rapid rise of the Arabic empire provides a number
of reasons for the ignition of the burst of activity.14 First, the empire brought
the neglected raw materials of the ancient world under one roof. In the
words of historian Thomas Goldstein, “A Muslim could study, from records
preserved on his own soil, the astronomies of India, Babylon, and Egypt;
Indian and Persian mathematics; the philosophical concepts of the Greeks; the
medicine, geography, astronomy, and mathematics of the Hellenistic age; the
botanical, pharmacological, zoological, geological, and geographic lore
amassed by the ancient world as a whole.”15The trade routes and commercial
centers—the elite cities—of the Arab world made these materials accessible
to scholars across the empire and encouraged cross-fertilization of ideas.
Second, the Arabs brought the energy of a new and vibrant culture to these
400 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
raw materials, as one might expect of a people who had conquered a land
mass stretching from northeast India to the Atlantic in little more than a
hundred years. The galvanizing effects of the new Islamic faith on its followers must be given credit for this energy. Purpose Islam had in abundance,
centering on service to the Faith. Initially, the Islamic elites engaged the
cultures they conquered undefensively, flexibly, and curiously.
Why did the burst of activity fade so rapidly? The specific explanations
diverge in their particulars, but they agree on the central point that, as
H. Floris Cohen, put it, “the root cause of its decline is to be found in the
Faith, and in the ability of its orthodox upholders to stifle once-flowering
science.”16 To Islamic scholar G. E. von Grunebaum, Islam was never able to
accept that scientific research is a means of glorifying God.
Those accomplishments of Islamic mathematical and medical science which
continue to compel our admiration were developed in areas and in periods
where the elites were willing to go beyond and possibly against the basic
strains of orthodox thought and feeling. For the sciences never did shed the
suspicion of bordering on the impious. . . . This is why the pursuit of the
natural sciences as that of philosophy tended to become located in relatively
small and esoteric circles and why but few of their representatives would
escape an occasional uneasiness which not infrequently did result in some
kind of apology for their work.17
When the religious leadership began to oppose scientific inquiry,
Grunebaum continues, the internalized misgivings of the scientific elites led
them to acquiesce.
For Turkish historian of science Aydin Sayili, Islam was unable to
achieve the reconciliation with the Greek philosophical heritage that Christianity achieved.18 Islam looked upon that heritage with suspicion from the
beginning. When the Islamic religious reaction set in, it was directed primarily against Greek philosophy, not science, but the linkage was strong, and
science was dragged down as well. For Arabist J. J. Saunders, the decisive
blows came during the waves of barbarian invasion and economic decline
starting in 11C, when the free, tolerant, and inquiring society of Omayyad,
Abbasid, and Fatimid days gave place under the pressure of invasions to “a
narrow, rigid, and ‘closed’ society in which the progress of secular knowledge
was slowly stifled.”19 What all three scholars agree upon is that the tenets of
Islam itself did not change. During the golden age, the orthodox did not
aggressively enforce those aspects of the Faith that discouraged free-flowing
inquiry and debate; once they began to do so, Islamic contributions to the
sciences effectively ended.
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 401
Put in terms of autonomy, Islam bore similarities to medieval Christianity, seeing life on this earth as important primarily as a preparation for
eternal life, and harboring deep suspicions about the piety of inquiring too
closely into the nature of God’s creation. But Islam, more than Christianity
at any point in its history, also saw God as sustaining the universe on a continuing basis, and as a deity who is not bound by immutable laws. To proclaim
scientific truths that applied throughout the universe and throughout time
could easily become blasphemy, implying limits to what God could and could
not do.20 Islamic piety consisted in obedience to God’s rules and submission
to his will, not presuming to analyze his works or glorify him with flights
of one’s personal fancies and curiosities. Indeed, expressing one’s fancies
through representational art or most fictional literature ran directly against
Islamic teaching. Islam was (and is) not a religion that encourages autonomy.
Seen in the framework I have been using, it is no surprise that the burst of
accomplishment in the golden age was aberrational, not characteristic, of
Islamic culture.
Arabic culture in general was also highly familistic and hierarchical, like
Chinese, Japanese, and Indian cultures, and this too worked against sustained
accomplishment. But the same may be said of less advanced cultures throughout the rest of Asia and elsewhere. Highly familistic, consensual cultures have
been the norm throughout history and the world. Modern Europe has been
the oddball.
THE HISTORICAL RECORD: EUROPE
Purpose and autonomy are intertwined with the defining cultural characteristic
of European civilization, individualism. Without getting pulled into historical
and philosophical points of contention about the origins and nature of individualism, the following are some of the basics as they impinge on purpose
and autonomy:21
The Athenian Formulation
The Aristotelian principle says that human beings delight in the exercise of
their realized capacities. Implied in that statement is an understanding of
what it means to be human that was the basis for Greek accomplishment—
mainly Athenian accomplishment—and laid the foundation for subsequent
Western thought. Classicist Bruce Thornton nicely sums up the Greek view
402 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
of the human being as “the unique, free person whose rational powers of
observation and critical inquiry, whose self-consciousness and perception
define him as a human being and give his life value.”22 In the Greek view,
acting as a rational individual is the essence of living a human life.
Ancient Greece was not an individualistic culture in the same way that
the West would later become, however. Acting rationally was not considered
to be the same as being self-sufficient. For Plato and Aristotle, self-sufficiency
was still a characteristic of the polis, not the individual (part of the reason
Athens could rationalize killing Socrates), and the Hellenistic schools that
subsequently recognized the self-sufficiency of the individual (e.g., the Stoics)
required that the self-sufficient individual remain detached from the things of
this world. In this detachment, Stoic moral individualism echoed Hinduism
and Buddhism, which allowed for liberation from this world only for individuals who renounced the things of this world.23
The Christian Transmutation
This brings us to role of Christianity in modern Europe. Mine is far from an
original conclusion, but in recent decades it has not been fashionable, so I
should state the argument explicitly: The Greeks laid the foundation, but it
was the transmutation of that foundation by Christianity that gave modern
Europe its impetus and differentiated European accomplishment from that of
all other cultures around the world.[24]
Christianity did not bestow that impetus immediately. It took more
than a thousand years. Through its early centuries, Christianity as practiced
was not individualistic. On the contrary, early Christianity was absorbed in
the collective Christian community to which individuals routinely subordinated their own interests. It was Christian theology itself that was potentially
revolutionary, teaching that all human beings are invited into a personal relationship with God, and that all individuals are equal in God’s sight regardless
of their earthly station. Furthermore, eternal salvation is not reserved for
those who renounce the world but is available to all who believe and act
accordingly. It was a theology that empowered the individual acting as an
individual as no other philosophy or religion had ever done before.25
The potentially revolutionary message was realized more completely in
one part of Christendom, the Catholic West, than in the Orthodox East. The
crucial difference was that Roman Catholicism developed a philosophical and artistic humanism typified, and to a great degree engendered, by
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 403
Thomas Aquinas (1226–1274). Aquinas made the case, eventually adopted by
the Church, that human intelligence is a gift from God, and that to apply
human intelligence to understanding the world is not an affront to God but
is pleasing to him. Aquinas taught that human autonomy is also a gift from
God, and that the only way in which humans can realize the relationship with
God that God intends is by exercising that autonomy. Aquinas taught that
faith and reason are not in opposition, but complementary.
In sum, Aquinas grafted a humanistic strain onto Christianity that
joined an inspirational message of God’s love and his promise of immortality
with an injunction to serve God by using all of one’s human capacities of
intellect and will—and to have a good time doing it. In Fernand Braudel’s
words, “The Renaissance distanced itself from medieval Christianity much
less in the realm of ideas than in that of life itself. It could perhaps be called a
cultural, not a philosophical betrayal. Its atmosphere was one of lively enjoyment, relishing the many pleasures of the eye, the mind and the body, as if the
West were emerging from a centuries-long period of Lent.” 26
This power of religious belief and a rediscovered humanism was a
potent combination. Eastern Orthodoxy never experienced a comparable
evolution. On the contrary, Orthodoxy resembles Islam in its stance toward
autonomy, making obedience the primary criterion for judging man’s relationship with God. It seems more than coincidence that Orthodox Russia
never developed individualism of the kind known in Western Europe.[27]
Western individualism had another step to take, initiated when Martin
Luther nailed his Ninety-five Theses to the door of the Schlosskirche in
Wittenberg in 1517. The exact importance of that additional step is a subject
of continuing dispute. A unique role for Protestantism has been most
famously advocated by Max Weber in “The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit
of Capitalism.”28 Weber proposed that specific features of Protestantism
encouraged thrift, industriousness, and the accumulation of wealth, and
underwrote the promethean growth of the European economy in 17C and
thereafter. That degree of specificity pushes the limits, and Weber’s thesis has
attracted criticism.29 But putting economic growth aside, is there reason to
think that Protestantism added anything to Catholicism in promoting accomplishment in the arts and sciences?
Historian Robert Merton, in his study of the growth of science in 17C
England, says yes, arguing for a direct link between Protestant characteristics
of methodical, persistent action, empirical utilitarianism, and anti-traditionalism and the development of the scientific method in England.30 An indirect
404 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
link is also possible. As a matter of theology, Aquinas’s Catholicism is more
enthusiastic about the human exercise of autonomy and intellect than
Lutheranism or Calvinism. As a matter of psychology, however, Protestantism pervasively affected the day-to-day practice of Christianity in ways that
emancipation.[31]
JEWS AS A COMPARISON GROUP
The role that some historians have assigned to Christianity and that
I have just endorsed raises the issue of Judaism. Judaism was not only
the first great monotheistic religion. It also taught, long before
Christianity came along, that individuals have a personal relationship
with God, and the Judaic Bible represents one of the earliest characterizations of the individual as a moral agent. If individualism is so
central to human accomplishment, why single out Christian individualism instead of grouping it with Judaic individualism?
Perhaps they should not be differentiated. The differing paths of
Christian and Judaic achievements can easily be explained by
specific historic circumstances, starting with the Diaspora. One may
go back to the account of Jewish accomplishment in Chapter 12 and
review the evidence that Jews have produced great accomplishment
wherever they’ve been given a chance. But it has also been noted
that Jews have made their greatest contributions to the arts and
sciences when they were not isolated but in direct contact with
another culture—first in the Middle East and Spain during the
golden age of the Arab empire, and then in Christian Europe after
One way of looking at this phenomenon is that
traditional Jewish culture is not all that different from Confucianism
or Islamic culture in the way that it embeds individual moral agency
in family and community. Orthodox Jewish culture is effective in
fostering human capital directly through its emphasis on education
and indirectly through its effects on mating patterns, but duty takes
precedence over vocation, and the interests of the family and
community takes precedence over self-fulfillment. The implication
is that the culture fostered by Christianity was as instrumental in
unleashing accomplishment among Jews as among Christians—
once that same Christian culture got around to relieving the
suppression it had imposed on Jews in the first place.
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 405
cut its adherents loose from a powerful institution and its attendant rituals.
While good Catholics confessed to the priest, did penance under the priest’s
instruction, and turned to the Church to tell them what the Bible meant,
good Protestants read the Bible for themselves, confessed directly to God,
received absolution directly from God, and didn’t do penance at all. In this
practical sense, Protestants were more on their own than Catholics were,
and it is plausible to see this as an extension of individualism and of a sense
of autonomy.
As history moved forward from 17C, the continuing effects of Protestantism divided into two currents, one involving true believers and the other
spawning more and more nonbelievers. For true believers—and in this secular age it is important to remember that true believers encompassed most of the
greatest writers and scientists of the Protestant countries until well into the
Enlightenment—the act of Protestant prayer had effects, incalculable but
surely significant, upon that stubborn confidence in one’s own beliefs that is
so valuable in creativity. Protestantism made prayer directly to God the focal
point of communication with God.[32] Prayer usually produced a sense of the
right thing to do, after which the believer was no longer doing something
that he hoped was right, but something that he knew was right, backed by the
ultimate Authority. There is nothing abstract about this source of individualism or its effects on human behavior. It is reflected in obdurate Protestant
resistance to secular authority during 16C and 17C. It was a mindset that led
some to the stake but, perhaps more indicative of its ramifications for science
and the arts, led Quakers to refuse to doff their hats to their social superiors.
Protestantism produced mavericks.
Protestantism also contributed to the secularization of Europe. It was a
classic case of unintended consequences. Martin Luther and the other dissidents “were working for the desecularization of the Church, and the restoration of Christianity to its primitive purity,” writes Christopher Dawson.
“They did not realize that the attempt to purify and separate religion from its
cultural accretions might find its counterpart in the separation of culture from
religion.”33 But that’s what happened. As court life became ever more dominant on the Continent, the hold of religion over intellectual elites slipped
away, to be replaced in 18C with the Enlightenment, which for a time served
as a kind of secular religion.
406 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
To keep this visual aid in two dimensions, I have collapsed different
strands of the argument. The horizontal dimension labeled belief in
autonomous efficacy combines two thoughts:The sense that one is free to act as
an individual, and the sense that individual action can be efficacious. I treat this
combined concept as a simple continuum from weak to strong.
The vertical dimension labeled purpose of this life also combines two
thoughts: The sense that life in general has a purpose, as opposed to being
pointless, and the sense that this life is uniquely important, and is not just one
of an ongoing sequence of lives. You may also conceive of this as a continuum directly from a weak to a strong sense of purpose. I inserted duty in the
middle, to indicate another way of thinking about this dimension. It is possible to take life very seriously indeed and to believe one has a purpose in life,
but still without believing that one has a personal destiny that must be
fulfilled come what may. Duty indicates that way of thinking about life. Duty
is in the middle not because it is between amusement and vocation in seriousSUMMING UP
I cannot supply quantitative measures of purpose and autonomy, but at least
I can visually specify the points made in the foregoing presentation. The
figure below locates the times and places I have discussed on the dimensions
of purpose and autonomy.
Belief in Autonomous Efficacy
Where Places and Times Fit on Purpose and Autonomy Purpose of This Life
Weak Strong
Vocation
Amusement
Duty
Medieval
Europe
East Asia,
India, and the
Arab world Post-Darwin
Secularism
Reformation
Protestantism
Renaissance
Catholicism
Post-Freud
Secularism
Post-Luther
Catholicism
Enlightenment
Humanism
SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE AND AUTONOMY • 407
ness, but because it is in the middle in its effects on accomplishment. Creative
elites in a culture with a strong sense of duty are more likely to work hard,
and be better able to carry on an existing stream of accomplishment, than in
a culture where the creative elites see life as a matter of amusement. But for
the ignition of creativity, an additional sense of vocation is required. That is the
nature of my argument, reflected in the graphic.
Renaissance Italy and Protestant Europe are both at the far right-hand
corner of the graphic. Both were cultures in which the creative elites saw
themselves as having vocations and held strong beliefs in autonomous efficacy
(Renaissance Catholicism is to the left of Reformation Protestantism on
autonomous efficacy mostly because they can’t both go in the same spot[34]). It
goes without saying that both were also centers of accomplishment. I place
the Enlightenment just below Protestantism on Purpose—the Enlightenment’s passionate commitment to reason was close to religious.
My argument also holds that Europe after Darwin remained a dutiful
culture, filled with virtuous and hard-working creative elites, but that their
sense of vocation had diminished. I use Darwin partly as a cause of secularization, and partly as a label for a secularization that had been occurring since
the beginning of the Enlightenment.
Finally, the graphic indicates my view of the post-Freud West as a place
where purpose and autonomous efficacy among the creative elites have
eroded. I am not arguing that the general populations of Europe and America necessarily changed in their morality, industriousness, or any other quality from late 19C through 20C. Rather, I propose that the creative elites
changed. After Freud, Nietzsche, and others with similar messages, the belief
in man as rational and volitional took a body blow. It became fashionable in
the Europe of early 20C to see humans as unwittingly acting out neuroses
and subconscious drives. God was mostly dead among the European creative
elites; morality became relative. These and allied beliefs substantially undermined the belief of creative elites that their lives had purpose or that their
talents could be efficacious.
At the opening of 21C, religion is an especially fraught topic in American life, with predominantly religious middle and working classes alongside
creative elites that are not only overwhelmingly secular but often aggressively
so. Introducing Christianity as an important causal variable into an account
of human accomplishment will engender more misunderstandings than I can
possibly forestall, but let me try anyway.
With regard to purpose, my position does not require that the secular
life be a life without purpose.[35] Rather, I argue that it is harder to find that
408 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
purpose if one is an atheist or agnostic than if one is a believer. It is harder still
to maintain attention to that purpose over years of effort. Devotion to a
human cause, whether social justice, the environment, the search for truth, or
an abstract humanism, is by its nature less compelling than devotion to God.
Here, Christianity has its most potent advantage. The incentives of forgiveness of sin and eternal life are just about as powerful as incentives get. The
nonbeliever has to make do with comparatively tepid alternatives.
With regard to autonomy, I do not see Christianity as its only source.
It is easily possible to believe in one’s efficacy as an autonomous actor by
holding to the secular Greek ideal of the human as “the unique, free person
whose rational powers of observation and critical inquiry, whose selfconsciousness and perception define him as a human being and give his life
value,” as Thornton put it. Possible—but, as in the case of purpose, harder if
one is not a believing Christian. For evidence, look around at today’s intellectual climate in both Europe and the United States. “Unique,” “free,”
“rational,” “powers of observation,” “critical inquiry”—every one of those
words and phrases is problematic in today’s postmodernist intellectual milieu.
It is much easier to use them with confidence if one is a Christian, or still
clings to the Christian/humanistic synthesis of early modernity.
Finally, my position is not at odds with the obvious fact that great
human accomplishment has been produced outside Christian cultures and,
for that matter, in cultures where the creative elites are secular. I am treating
Christian religious belief as one of the variables that help to explain how
human accomplishment in the arts and sciences has been ignited. I am arguing that Christianity is an important variable, one of the most important in
the story of modern accomplishment. I am not arguing that it explains everything—just as, for that matter, purpose and autonomy do not explain
everything. But they do explain a lot.
TWENTY
SOURCES OF CONTENT:
THE ORGANIZING
STRUCTURE AND
TRANSCENDENTAL
GOODS
Suppose now that everything else is in place. We have a culture with
wealth, elite cities, models, and freedom of action. People with the
potential for excellence have a sense of purpose and autonomy. But take a
musical prodigy, put him in different cultures that each enjoy those assets,
and his pursuit of musical excellence can lead him to compose a motet, an
atonal academic work, or heavy metal rock. The brilliant writer might produce an epic poem, a social novel, or a fictionalized account of his psychotherapy. The potential scientist might try to understand the world
through experimentation, observation, or pure logic. What are the variables
that help explain what kind of work is produced in a given era and place?
The two variables I use are labeled organizing structure and transcendental goods.
THE ORGANIZING STRUCTURE
The magnitude and content of a stream of accomplishment in a given
domain varies according to the richness and age of the organizing
structure.
By organizing structure, I mean the framework for the conduct of science or
the arts and the criteria according to which a society evaluates achievement.
410 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
In the sciences, the structure from the Renaissance onward has been an
evolving scientific method. In the arts, structure not only takes different
forms in the visual arts, literature, and music, but has also taken different
forms across time and cultures. The rules of haiku are a structure, as are the
rules of the sonnet. Pointillism is a structure. Structures can be nested: the
movement in a symphony has a structure, the symphony of which it is part
also has a structure, and the tonal harmony that the symphony employs has
yet another structure.
One key characteristic of structure is its richness. To illustrate, recall the
comparison that John Rawls drew between checkers and chess when he was
describing the Aristotelian principle (see page 386). Both games are played
on a board with 64 squares, but they have different structures. Checkers has
one kind of piece, while chess has six different kinds of pieces. The movement of any checker piece is restricted to a single square per turn unless it is
capturing, while movement in chess is different for each piece. In checkers,
the goal is to capture all the opponents’ pieces. In chess, the goal is to trap
one particular piece. The structure of chess is objectively richer than the
structure of checkers. It is no coincidence that chess has thousands of books
written about tactics and strategy for every aspect of the game while checkers has a fraction of that number. The nature of accomplishment in checkers
and chess is also objectively different, as reflected in their relative places in
Western culture.[1]
I measure the richness of a structure by three aspects: principles, craft, and
tools. The scientific method offers convenient examples. Conceptually, a scientific experiment proceeds according to principles such as replicability, falsifiability, and the role of the hypothesis that apply across different scientific
disciplines. The actual conduct of a classic scientific experiment involves
craft—the generation of a hypothesis to be tested or a topic to be explored,
the creation of the methods for doing so, and meticulous observance of protocols and procedures during the actual work. The details of craft differ not
only across disciplines but within disciplines. They also have a family resemblance, in the sense that a meticulous scientist behaves in ways that are
recognizable to scientists in every field—“meticulous” being one of the
defining characteristics of craft practiced at a high level.
Tools play a double role. Sometimes they are created in direct response
to needs generated by principles and craft—accurate thermometers are an
example—but at least as often, a tool turns out to have unanticipated uses
that alter both principles and craft, independently expanding the realm of
things a discipline can achieve. An example is the invention of the diffraction
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 411
grating to study spectra of light, which 40 years later turned out to enable
astronomers to study the composition of the stars.
Structure in the arts also can be characterized according to principles,
craft, and tools. In the visual arts, the theory of linear perspective involves a
set of principles, the techniques of painting are the craft, and oil paint is a
tool. Similar distinctions apply to the principles of character development in
a novel, the craft of writing, and the tool of the quill pen; or to the principles of sonata form, the craft of musical composition, and the tool of the
pianoforte.
A structure that produces great accomplishment must foster two qualities in tension with each other: freedom and order. The scientific method is
again the exemplar, holding the scientist to rigorous standards while at the
same time giving him a framework within which he can attack any question
he can think of.[2] In the arts, reconciling freedom and order is inherently
problematic, “a remarkable coincidentia oppositorum,” in the words of Paul
Lang, “a self-discipline, a conquest of autonomy such as only the truly great
can achieve.”3 The larger and more flexible the structure, the more room for
freedom and order to coexist. (The novel offers more room for innovation
than haiku.)
The other dimension by which I characterize structures is age. No
structure is so large and flexible that it can offer room for innovation indefinitely, a problem that has plagued the arts more than science. The longer a
structure has existed, the more it has been filled up with the best work that
can be done within its confines, and the greater the incentives for artists to
seek new structures.4
Matching the richness and age of organizing structures with changes in
accomplishment has potential that I cannot realize in this presentation. At the
extremes, it should be easy to reach consensus. Few would deny that drama
is a richer structure for literary expression than the sonnet, though exquisite
work can be produced in both. But in painting, how does one compare as
structures the Renaissance’s “window on the world” with the “patches of
color on a canvas” that Manet and his colleagues introduced in mid 19C? In
music, how does one compare the richness of the operatic form with that
of the string quartet? Comparisons on specific dimensions are presumably
possible, but such tasks are for experts.[5] I can, however, demonstrate a
simpler relationship between structure and bursts of accomplishment, using
the bursts in the graphs in Chapter 14. In each case, the explosion was
preceded by and associated with events that enriched an organizing structure.
I restrict myself to the Western inventories.
412 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
Changes in Structure and Bursts of Accomplishment in the Arts
The Visual Arts, 1420 (see page 317). The increase in accomplishment
after 1420 is explained mainly by the appearance of painters, and is the archetypal case of response to a newly enriched structure. Two major changes
occurred at about the same time, and the explosion followed right on schedule. The first was the introduction of a new principle on a grand scale:
the meta-invention of linear perspective (see page 212). Brunelleschi had
unveiled his mastery of linear perspective about a decade before the trendline shifts upward. Masaccio’s Trinity at the church of Santa Maria Novella
was painted in the mid-1420s, and Alberti published Della Pittura in 1436.
The less obvious event was the invention that suddenly expanded the effects
a painter could achieve: the use of oil in paints, developed by Jan van Eyck
in the 1420s.
Literature, 1460 and 1700 (see page 318). The initial upward turn in
the trendline in 1460 started from a low base, but it was certainly the beginning of a burst. The credit for the timing goes to the invention of a tool that
transformed the relationship of writer to audience, the printing press. The
Gutenberg Bible was printed in 1454. But another underlying change in
structure had occurred as well: good literature was being written not just in
Latin, but in the vernacular. Dante had been the standard-bearer for the idea
with De Vulgari Eloquentia as far back as 1306, at about the same time that
works in vernacular French began to appear. Dante had then shown what
could be done with the vernacular when he wrote the Commedia in Tuscan
a decade later. Boccaccio and Chaucer were the most famous of those who
began writing in the vernacular, but the reach of their work was limited by
the laborious process of manual copying. The printing press gave the author
rapid access to a large audience.
The upward turn in literature in 1700 begins the run-up to the first
full-fledged modern novels, Pamela and Tom Jones, in the 1740s (see page
221). It was not marked by any landmark change—precursors to the novel
had been appearing sporadically since 1500—but by the spread of the idea
that fiction as well as drama could expound upon social and political themes.
Daniel Defoe, William Congreve, Jonathan Swift, Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
and Alain Lesage were the early exemplars of 18C. Once the idea took hold,
it provided such a wealth of possibilities that the production of significant figures continued to outstrip increases in population until the middle of 19C.
Music, 1470 (see page 319). The meta-invention of polyphony is an
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 413
example of a new principle that evolved gradually into an ever more complex structure, and the nature of the burst in music is accordingly ambiguous. The timeline on page 319 actually shows an upward trend beginning in
1400, and would have shown increases further back if the graph had started
earlier, all reflecting the elaboration of the new forms that polyphony had
made possible. But a conspicuously steeper increase began in the last half of
15C that may be ascribed in part to the invention of tools. In the middle of
the 1400s, the main instruments a composer had to work with were the
organ and the human voice. Stringed instruments were still limited in their
range and power. The trumpet was a long, clumsy instrument with a narrow
range and indifferent sound quality. The clavichord and harpsichord were still
in primitive forms. The last half of the 1400s saw major improvements in the
organ and the harpsichord. The viol, a bowed stringed instrument, appeared
in the second half of 15C, and we know from paintings that a three-string
violin was in use by the end of the century. New methods of metalworking
transformed the trumpet. In addition, the printing press was as important for
disseminating written music as it was for disseminating prose and poetry. By
1476 a complete liturgical folio had been printed using a double printing
process in which first the lines were printed in red and then the notes in
black. The expansion of tools in 15C continued into 16C, along with the
continued development of tonal harmony and new ideas for expressing text
musically and combining instruments into ensembles.
Changes in Structure and Bursts of Accomplishment
in the Scientific Inventories
The hard sciences (astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth sciences, and
physics) (see page 312). The unrivaled example of a new organizing structure
is the development of the scientific method itself, with the major developments occurring in the 1600s. The uptick that begins the major burst in the
hard sciences as a whole begins shortly thereafter, in 1720. But different
pieces of the scientific method emerged at different times for different sciences, and the bursts of activity in the sciences, not shown separately in the
graphs in Chapter 14, vary as well. Often, the triggering event was the invention of new tools or a major augmentation in the theory available to that discipline, usually with a lag time of a few decades.
Astronomy began a major burst in the last half of 16C, following on the
heels of the publication of Copernicus’s De Revolutionibus (new principle)
414 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
and augmented by the invention of the telescope (new tool) in early 17C.
Biology’s initial burst began in the second third of the 1500s, employing a
tool that Leonardo had developed a few decades earlier: the precise drawing
of three-dimensional objects applied to natural objects such as plants, animals, and the dissected human body. Chemistry took off in early 18C, a few
decades after Robert Boyle’s Skeptical Chymist had laid out principles of
modern chemistry, defining elements and chemical analysis, distinguishing
chemistry from medicine and alchemy, and urging the experimental method
upon his colleagues. The earth sciences began their upward movement at
about the same time, the antecedent events being the discovery that strata
could be used to analyze geologic history (a combination of principle and
tool) and the invention of the geologic map (tool) for analyzing the evolution of landforms. Physics offers a fascinating case of a rich set of principles,
bequeathed by Newton, that had to wait upon the invention of tools.
Between the Principia and the beginning of the burst in physics around 1800
came the invention of an accurate thermometer, devices for producing an
electrical charge, devices for storing an electrical charge, the aneroid barometer, an accurate chronometer, the achromatic lens, methods of measuring
electrical conduction, a method of measuring gravitational force at a given
latitude, the electroscope, artificial magnets, the electrometer, the torsion balance, the accelerometer, the pressure gauge, and methods to measure the rate
of flow of a fluid—not glamorous advances, but indispensable for giving
physicists of 19C the tools without which the scientific method itself was
limited.
Mathematics, 1560 (see page 313). Mathematicians already had the
principles of the organizing structure in the form of the mathematical proof
and a meta-tool in the form of the 10 Arabic (that is, Indian) numerals. The
burst in the last half of 16C followed the development in the preceding half
century of basic tools: the invention of +, –, =, ×, 3, the use of letters to stand
for unknowns, and the rest of a set of mathematical notation. They seem prosaic now, but try doing advanced mathematics without them. As the burst
gathered energy, more tools were introduced: the first tables of trigonometric functions, the introduction of mathematical induction, and decimal fractions.
Technology, 1770 (see page 315). The stuff of technology is tools, to a
large degree, and it is appropriate that the burst in technology began in the
decade after James Watt’s improvements made the steam engine into the great
tool of the industrial revolution. But the steam engine was more than a tool.
It also precipitated so deep a change in the organizing structure of technol-
• • •
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 415
ogy that it was tantamount to a change in principles. Prior to the invention
of an efficient, multi-purpose steam engine, technology could augment
human and animal muscle power, but could replace muscle power only by
using wind and water, each of which was limited to a few applications. With
the steam engine, most of those limitations disappeared and the actual level
of power produced by the steam engine was orders of magnitude greater than
anything muscles could do. The possibilities for applying technology expanded by orders of magnitude as well.
Medicine, 1520 (see page 314). Medicine moved up in incremental
fashion after an early burst that began in the 1500s when medical study was
given a structure that could be filled in with truths. Until then, humans had
been observing diseases and trying remedies for thousands of years, with
some ad hoc successes, but medicine was riddled with fundamentally incorrect notions about the nature of disease. When structures were proposed,
such as Galen’s, they were so misleading that they inhibited rather than facilitated subsequent progress. The signal accomplishment of the first half of the
1500s was a (largely) correct framework for thinking about disease based on
the principles that the body is a chemical system and diseases are specific ailments caused by specific agents, not an imbalance of the humors. It took
centuries for the framework to be filled in with actual cures for diseases, but,
with reasonably accurate principles established, accumulation of knowledge
that could lead to cures and to prevention was under way.
In summary: To explain the onset of a prolonged increase in the rate of
accomplishment, a first place to look is changes in the organizing structure.
In virtually every instance, it is possible to identify substantial ways in which
the principles, craft, or tools associated with a given field had changed, or
were in the process of changing, when the burst began.
TRANSCENDENTAL GOODS
A major stream of accomplishment in any domain requires a wellarticulated vision of, and use of, the transcendental goods relevant to
that domain.
“Platonic ideal” is a figure of speech still in use 2,300 years after Plato died
because the concept itself resonates so powerfully. We need not accept Plato’s
416 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
entire epistemological argument to think that the world is filled with objects
imperfectly embodying ideal qualities. We know they imperfectly embody
those qualities because we can envision perfection even if we never
encounter it. They are transcendental in that they refer to perfect qualities
that lie beyond direct, complete experience, even though they have referents
in everyday experience.
In the classic Western tradition, the worth of something that exists in
our world can be characterized by the three dimensions known as the true,
the beautiful, and the good. The triad did not become iconic in other intellectual traditions as it did in the West, but the same three qualities have been
recognized and treated as central in all of the great civilizations represented
in the inventories. I hereafter refer to the true, the beautiful, and the good as
transcendental goods.
scendental goods
qua
6
THE TRANSCENDENTALS
In metaphysics, the term transcendentals is rigorously defined in a
way that should not be confused with my more informal use of tran-
. The tradition began with Aristotle’s discussion of
the nature of existence—the nature of being—and the group of
properties that belong to being being. In Thomas Aquinas’s
elaboration, those properties are one, true, good, and beautiful.
The true and the beautiful are familiar phrases, even if we argue over
what they mean. The good is not a term in common use these days, and I
should spell out how I am using it. The ultimate Good, capitalized when
used in that sense, is a way of thinking about and naming God. But I will be
focusing on the good without the capitalization, explained by Aristotle in the
opening sentence of the Nicomachean Ethics: “Every art and every inquiry, and
similarly every action and pursuit, is thought to aim at some good; and for
this reason the good has rightly been declared to be that at which all things
aim.”7 Aristotle was evoking the concept, common to Plato and other Greek
thinkers, that every object and creature has an end and an excellence. The
end of the eye is sight, and excellence in the eye consists of clear vision. The
end of the pruning hook is cutting the branches of a vine, and excellence in
a pruning hook consists in being better able to cut off branches than other
tools not designed for that purpose.8 For human beings, the focus of my use
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 417
of the good, the question then becomes, what is the end of human beings and
in what lies excellence in achieving that end? The discussion of the
Aristotelian principle in Chapter 18 has already given you a hint of Aristotle’s
answer, but a specific answer is not important for understanding my use of
the good. If a culture has a coherent, well-articulated sense of what constitutes
excellence in human-ness—what constitutes the ideal of human flourishing
—it has a conception of the good as I am using the term.
The good in this sense is distinct from moral codes, but to hold a conception of the good is also to worry about right and wrong. In the preceding chapter, I noted that the word purpose rules out certain understandings of
the meaning of the phrase the purpose of life (see page 394). Similarly, the word
good rules out certain understandings of excellence in human flourishing. To
say, for example, that the end of human beings is to enslave other human
beings and excellence consists of enslaving them most ruthlessly makes a
mockery of language. But though a conception of the good gives rise to
moral codes, it should be remembered that the essence of the good is not rules
that one struggles to follow, but a vision of the best that humans can be that
attracts and draws one onward.
The inherent attractiveness of the good creates a second constraint on
understandings of it: whatever is the good for humans must be grounded in
an understanding of what is unique about humans. For example, to say that
excellence in human flourishing consists exclusively of having enough to eat
is to say that humans have no unique excellence. A culture that holds such a
view does not have a sense of the good.
My proposition is that great accomplishment in the arts and sciences
is anchored in one or more of these three transcendental goods. Art and
science can rise to the highest rungs of craft without them, wonderful
entertainments can be produced without them, amazing intellectual gymnastics can be performed without them. But, in the same way that a goldsmith needs gold, a culture that fosters great accomplishment needs a
coherent sense of the transcendental goods. Coherent sense means that the
goods are a live presence in the culture, and that great artists and thinkers
compete to come closer to the ideal that captivates them. A conception of
the beautiful was a live presence among artists of the Italian Renaissance and
among composers of the Baroque. A conception of the truth remains a live
presence in the scientific world of today’s West. To the extent that you can
think of an era and culture for which such statements are not true, I hypothesize that accomplishment in that era will have suffered thereby.
418 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
In discussing these issues during the preparation of Human
Accomplishment, I have become aware that introducing words such as true,
beautiful, and good into a discussion of historical issues is as problematic as
introducing religion. Three misconceptions seem difficult to avoid, so let me
begin by stating them explicitly. I will allude to them subsequently as well.
I am not using the good, true, and beautiful in a poetic sense. Their role
is not just “inspiration” in the abstract, though it can be that as well.
Conceptions of the good, true, and beautiful prevailing at any given time
concretely affect how excellence manifests itself.
I am not using the good, the true, and the beautiful in a saccharine
sense. Great paintings can portray brutality and ugliness. Great literature can
depict human depravity. Truths need not be uplifting.
The effects of a culture’s prevailing conceptions of transcendental goods
are not limited to believers. When I said a moment ago that a conception of
the beautiful was a live presence among artists in the Italian Renaissance, I
didn’t mean that every single artist spent his days thinking about what the
beautiful meant, nor that all artists consciously held such a view. Rather, a
culture’s prevailing view provides a resource that suffuses the practice of that
domain independently of the variation in beliefs among specific people.
The Role of Transcendental Goods in the Sciences
The good. The profession of scientist is an embodiment of what
Aristotle had in mind as the excellence of human beings, the exercise of
human capacity for rational thought. Other aspects of excellence which
involve the capacity of humans to discern right behavior have less direct relationship to the conduct of science. The whole point of science is not to
determine what should be, but what is. From a cold-blooded perspective,
worries about the moral dimension of the good only get in the way—vivisection may be a terrible thing to do to animals, for example, but banning
vivisection makes certain kinds of scientific knowledge more difficult to
acquire. The contemporary debate about cloning and other forms of genetic research is another case in point. Should cloning be banned? Should stem
cell research be permitted? The debate is being conducted in terms of ethics.
But no matter who is right, restrictions will slow scientific accomplishment
in that domain. This does not mean that ethics should not be brought to bear
on science, but that these considerations come from outside the domain.
The beautiful. Beauty can be an integral part of the satisfaction that sci-
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 419
entists take in their discoveries. Mathematicians are often attracted to mathematics because of qualities they consciously see as beautiful. Scientists in
every field have been known to fall in love with their work because of aspects
of order and harmony that fall within the realm of the beautiful. Physicists
have been known to doubt their results because they were not elegant. But
beauty is not intrinsic to the enterprise itself. The work and words of theoretical physicist Ludwig Boltzmann encapsulate the role of the beautiful in
the sciences. At his inaugural lecture upon assuming a chair at the University
of Leipzig, he reflected upon the sense of the beautiful as it must have
arisen through human evolution, arguing that it was advantageous for survival “to construct in our minds the most accurate pictures possible of our
surroundings and strictly to keep apart the true ones, those which correspond with experience, from the false, which do not. We can therefore
explain the genesis of an apprehension of the beautiful as well as of the true
in our mechanics.”9 The beautiful is the true, in a way, as the poet Keats
observed. Boltzmann also created scientific beauty. His most famous achievement, inscribed on his gravestone, is among the most elegantly simple of any
of the physical laws: S = k log W.
[10] And yet it was also Boltzmann, aesthetically so sensitive to the beautiful and elegant in science, who was the actual
author of the famous bon mot often attributed to Einstein, “Elegance is for
tailors.”11 When push comes to shove in the sciences, the ugly but correct
equation wins and the beautiful but wrong one loses.
The true. Ultimately, the transcendental good that matters in the conduct of science is truth, and truth alone. Scientists can win acclaim for
an insight that has not yet been verified but the acclaim is ruthlessly provisional. If the ingenious idea doesn’t pan out (remember cold fusion?),
its authors disappear from history. The discovery of truth is the coin of scientific eminence.
In trying to predict where streams of scientific accomplishment will be
found, I am in part stating a tautology: In cultures where no group of people see themselves as engaged in understanding the truth in how the world
works, we will find no stream of scientific accomplishment. The relationship
of the true as a transcendental good to scientific accomplishment becomes
less tautological when a continuum is invoked: The intensity of scientific
activity is positively related to the clarity of a culture’s articulation of the
nature of scientific truth and to the strength of a culture’s commitment to the
search for truth.
420 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The Role of Transcendental Goods in the Arts
In the arts, all three of the transcendental goods have played different roles
at different times, interacting in ways that make it difficult to say which
is which.
The beautiful. It goes without saying that beauty has often been the
explicit measure of excellence in art. Artists in some eras have denied that
any other consideration is even relevant. In Chapter 5, I backed away from
using beauty as the standard of excellence in the arts, substituting high aesthetic quality instead, because criteria that do not fit the everyday meaning of
beauty may be used to judge a work of art. Now, however, we are talking
about those conditions that cause fine works of art to be created, not the
standards for judging them. I propose that one of those conditions is artists’
embrace of a transcendental standard of the beautiful as a good-in-itself.
Exactly what that conception of the beautiful might be is less important than that a coherent conception exists. By way of illustration, suppose
you were able to talk to painters from the Tang dynasty, the Italian
Renaissance, and France in the 1860s, three different eras and cultures with
different conceptions of the beautiful. What links them is that they each had
a well-articulated conception of the beautiful that the artists of the age saw
themselves as trying to realize in their work independent of other considerations. Contrast that with a conversation you would have had with painters
in two other eras, medieval Europe and Europe between the World Wars.
Two more radically different sets of painters are hard to imagine, but they
would have this in common: they would both resist the idea of a wellarticulated conception of the beautiful as an independent goal in their work.
The medieval painters would not have been hostile to the concept of
beauty, because they would see beauty as pleasing to God. But, for most,
pleasing God and glorifying God would have been the point, not the creation of beauty in itself. Most 20C inter-war artists would have turned the
conversation to the nature of the creative act, the imperative of self-expression, and the ways in which the concept of the beautiful had become an
impediment to the progress of art, not a framework for it.12 That a work
might turn out to be beautiful by classical definitions would be coincidental.
The true. Truth has also played an explicit role in the arts, with as many
different roles for the true as there have been conceptions of the beautiful.
In the visual arts, the centuries-long quest to perfect techniques for depicting people and objects was linked to the service of truth; so was the quest to
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 421
capture the inner truth of a face or event, a quest that led some artists in 19C
to abandon literally accurate depictions. Shakespeare attained his unique
stature because of his unmatched ability to use drama to convey deep truths
about human personality and the human condition.The novel was expressly
seen as a vehicle for truth—in Stendhal’s famous words from Le Rouge et le
Noir,“A novel is a mirror that strolls along a highway. Now it reflects the blue
of the skies, now the mud puddles underfoot.” In music, the role of the true
in the form of compositional logic—often logic of mathematical precision—
is popularly associated with the works of J. S. Bach, but has characterized
serious musical composition more broadly.
The good. The roles of the true and the beautiful in the arts have been
leitmotifs in some of the preceding chapters, but I have not had much to say
about the good. It is at least as important as the beautiful in shaping the
nature of accomplishment in the visual arts and literature. Sometimes the
shaping is a direct product of a moral vision, whether religious or secular. In
Giotto’s The Lamentation and Hugo’s Les Misérables, completely different as
these works are, the role of the moral vision that the artist brought to the
work is palpable. The translation of the moral vision onto the canvas or into
the written word is often what separates enduring art from entertainment.
Extract its moral vision, and Goya’s The Third of May, 1808 becomes a violent cartoon. Extract its moral vision, and Huckleberry Finn becomes Tom
Sawyer.
But the expression of the artist’s moral vision is only one way—even a
minor way—in which conceptions of the good shape the content of the arts.
An artist’s conception of the purpose of a human life and the measure of
excellence in a human life provides a frame within which the varieties of the
human experience are translated into art. Good art often explores the edges
of the frame, revealing to us the depths to which human beings can fall as
well as the heights to which they can climb. But the exploration of the edges
of the frame is given structure by the nature of the frame. The depiction of
violence in the absence of a conception of the good in human life is mere
sensationalism; in its extreme form, a type of pornography. The depiction of
violence in the presence of such a conception can be profound and clarifying; in its extreme form, a Macbeth.
Thus I hold that a stream of great accomplishment in the arts depends
upon a culture’s enjoying a well-articulated, widely held conception of the
good. I suggest as well that art created in the absence of a well-articulated
conception of the good is likely to be arid and ephemeral. To exclude a con-
422 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
ception of the good from artistic creations withdraws one of the major
dimensions through which great art speaks to us. For an artist to have no
understanding of or commitment to the good is a handicap.
Changes in the Role of Transcendental Goods
If the question is what changes occurred in the conceptions of the true, the
beautiful, and the good in the arts from 1400–1950, I refer you to the histories of the arts, which are in large degree descriptions of such changes. But
if the question is whether artists and scholars saw themselves as employing the
transcendental goods relevant to their respective fields, the answer is simpler:
From 1400 until about 1900, yes. In the sciences, allegiance to truth as the
guiding transcendental good remained unchanged thereafter. But for the arts,
over a period starting in the late 1800s and extending through World War I,
many of those who saw themselves engaged in high art consciously turned
away from the idea that their function was to realize the beautiful, and then
rejected the relevance of the true or the good as valid criteria for judging
their work.
The change was least drastic in literature. An avant-garde—James Joyce
is the exemplar—rejected the traditional conventions of narrative and tried
to do for literature what their contemporaries were doing in the visual arts,
but a large number of the best writers continued to write novels and poetry
in familiar forms that were underwritten by more or less coherent conceptions of the true and the beautiful. For writers, the main casualty of 20C
was a unifying conception of the good in the Aristotelian sense and of goodness in a moral sense. Exceptions existed, but the community of European
and American writers from World War I to 1950 was for the most part
secularized and disillusioned with Western culture. Many had substituted
politics for religion as the source of their beliefs about right and wrong. With
notable exceptions—Eliot,Yeats, Faulkner, Pound—they came from the left,
caught up in the widespread enthusiasm among intellectuals for the young
Soviet Union.
The moral vision that came with allegiance to Communist socialism
lent itself to two tracks, neither of which had much to do with a transcendental conception of the good. The idealistic objectives of Communism were
equality, liberation of the proletariat from grinding poverty and inhuman
working conditions, and other admirable goals, but that same Communism
held that man has no soul, that there is no God, and that you have to break
eggs—meaning kill innocent people for social ends—if you want to make
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 423
an omelet.[13] There’s only so much a writer can do with a moral vision
that excludes the soul and rationalizes the slaughter of innocents. Émile Zola,
Maxim Gorky, and a few others had earlier shown that good literature is
possible with that moral vision, at least until the Revolutionaries actually
take power, but the range of themes is restricted and the logic of ideology
pushes literature toward what came to be known as Socialist Realism—
simplistic morality tales.
The other track for the left of the 1920s and 1930s was the kind of
nihilistic, situational morality that by the end of the first half of 20C had
become known as existentialism, fostered primarily by French intellectuals.
This option consisted of an explicit denial that the classic conception of the
good has any meaning. Human beings have no end; having no end, there is
no definition of what constitutes excellence in a human life. Nihilist writers
could still have their characters struggle with moral decisions, but if there’s
no real right or wrong out there, objective and regnant, what’s the point of
the struggle? Their characters could aspire to happiness, but the denial of the
good means that whatever happiness they find is likely to be ephemeral. Not
surprisingly, the pointlessness of life became a pervasive theme among the
serious writers of this era. The portrayal of repugnant acts no longer aimed
to clarify the vision of the good, but was used to deny the existence of any
such thing, or, more depressingly, was inserted merely for the sake of sensationalism.
The effects of withdrawing the good from serious literature were substantial. I would enter most of the serious novels from 1920–1950 as evidence for my earlier statement that art in the absence of a well-articulated
conception of the good is likely to be arid and ephemeral. But most is not
the same as all—in America, the single exception of Faulkner is of huge consequence, and other countries have their own examples.
The more drastic revolution occurred in the visual arts and music. That
painters, sculptors, and composers rejected the traditional ideals that had
ruled their arts during early 20C is not a new or controversial proposition.14
The artists and composers themselves said so, long and loudly. What happened was not merely one more turn in the endless cycle in which artists try
to do something different from that which has gone before, but a wholesale
throwing off of a legacy that had become unendurably burdensome. “The
great geniuses of the past still rule over us from their graves,” painter and
author Wyndham Lewis lamented. “[T]hey still stalk or scurry about in the
present, tripping up the living . . . a brilliant cohort of mortals determined
not to die, in possession of the land.”15 And so the artists of 20C did some-
424 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
thing about it. They killed off the geniuses from the past as best they could.
Jacques Barzun describes their three strategies:
One, to take the past and present and make fun of everything in it by
parody, pastiche, ridicule, and desecration, to signify rejection. Two, return to
the bare elements of the art and, excluding ideas and ulterior purpose, play
variations on those elements simply to show their sensuous power and the
pleasure afforded by bare technique. Three, remain serious but find ways to
get rid of the past by destroying the very idea of art itself.16
Barzun’s reference to “excluding ideas and ulterior purposes” is what I
have in mind by eliminating transcendental goods. Sometimes, the new way
of thinking was expressed bluntly and cynically. “To be able to think freely,”
Andre Gide wrote, “one must be certain that what one writes will be of no
consequence,” adding that “The artist is expected to appear after dinner. His
function is not to provide food, but intoxication.”17 Sometimes the proponents of the new art used the old language, but in a way that involved an
Orwellian redefinition of words. Here, for example, is Guillaume
Apollinaire’s use of the word beauty in an essay extolling Cubism: “The modern school of painting seems to me the most audacious that has ever
appeared. It has posed the question of what is beautiful in itself. It wants to
”18 visualize beauty disengaged from whatever charm man has for man.
The idea that beauty can have meaning “disengaged from whatever
charm man has for man” is audacious, but audacity was not in short supply
among the new wave of artists in 20C—nor was contempt for their audiences. Painters and composers not only discarded their role as realizers of the
beautiful, they put themselves and their own needs on the loftiest of
pedestals. Arnold Schoenberg, who announced the death of tonality and
then did all he could to make his prediction come true, wrote that
. . . those who compose because they want to please others, and have audiences in mind, are not real artists. They are not the kind of men who are
driven to say something whether or not there exists one person who likes it,
even if they themselves dislike it. . . . They are more or less skillful entertainers who would renounce composing if they did not find listeners.19
Contempt for the audience could not be plainer, nor the godlike role in
which Schoenberg placed the artist.
This is not the place to go into the reasons why artists and composers
working in the high culture became so alienated from the legacy of Western
SOURCES OF CONTENT • 425
culture and from their audiences in early 20C, but merely to note that they
did. In this sense, the mainstream of the visual arts and of concert music in
20C was qualitatively different from the mainstreams of the preceding five
centuries. I say mainstream to acknowledge that each of the arts in the first
half of 20C had a channel that was a lineal descendent of pre-20C traditions
—men such as Stravinsky and Kandinsky, who were aware of the legacy and
valued it, but sought, as artists had sought before, to use the raw materials of
great art in new ways for their own time. But they and other artists in this
channel tended to come early in 20C, and their numbers dwindled as time
went on. The generalization remains: In large part, the visual art and concert
music of 20C is what visual art and concert music become when their creators do not tap transcendental goods.
SUMMING UP
I have argued in this chapter that great accomplishment in the arts and sciences is fed by both a rich organizing structure—and one that is still vital—
and a coherent sense of transcendental goods. These two shapers of content
need not vary together. In 18C Europe, the visual arts still had a strong sense
of beauty and the good, but the organizing structure was aging and had lost
vitality—a problem not unlike that facing Chinese artists at the same time.
In 20C, which I have taken to task for its rejection of transcendental goods,
concert music got a whole new organizing structure in the form of atonality and serialism, and the visual arts concocted one new organizing structure
after another.
In the shaping of great accomplishment, structure and transcendental
goods interact. In terms of its principles, tools, and craft, an organizing
structure can be intricate and complex but nonetheless arid if it does not tap
into transcendental goods. Conversely, artists may want to express their
understanding of the true, the beautiful, and the good but, in the absence of
a rich organizing structure, those expressions are likely to be trite or sentimental. Only a few eras in human history have had the fortune to possess the
resources of both rich, vital structures and transcendental goods at the same
time—the eras that we look back upon as golden ages.
TWENT Y -ONE
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT
DECLINING?
We arrive at this penultimate chapter with two ways of looking at the
trajectory of human accomplishment. One perspective focuses on
the count of significant figures, presented at the outset of Chapter 11. That
count increased rapidly from 1700–1950. The other perspective, presented
for the separate inventories in Chapter 14, focuses on the rate of accomplishment after taking population into account, and specifically on the rate of
accomplishment in the West. Though the results vary among the inventories,
the overall story is one of recent decline, usually starting sometime in 19C.
The figure on the following page shows the aggregates across inventories.
The time has come to try to make sense of these competing story lines.
I begin this endeavor assuming that I face a skeptical reader, which is as it
should be. It is one thing to see a graph of the Chinese accomplishment
rate in literature that shows the great ages occurring more than a thousand
years ago, followed by decline (see page 323). The trajectory does not clash
with the accepted reading of the history of Chinese literature by either
Chinese or Western scholars. It is quite another thing to see a graph of the
Western accomplishment rate in literature that shows a decline from the mid
1800s to 1950 (see page 318), a century that produced some of the greatest
novelists and many important poets.
The key to reading these graphs, and the others in Chapter 14, is to take
the rate for exactly what it measures, neither more nor less. “More” means
confusing the rate with a measure of magnitude. The Western literature rate
declined steeply in the decades when Flaubert, Hardy, Twain, Zola, Conrad,
and James were publishing their greatest works, for example. The fact that the
rate was declining doesn’t mean these works aren’t just as important as they
are usually seen to be. A rate does not measure the quantity of fine work.
428 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The conflicting stories told by the count of significant
figures and the rate of accomplishment
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
Rate
Standard Scores
Count of Significant Figures
Note: Lines are two-generation moving averages for total significant figures from Europe,
USA, and Canada, expressed in standard scores (see page 463).
“Less” means assuming that the rate means nothing at all. It may mean
nothing at all, fully explained by artifacts, but that is an empirical issue to
be tested, not assumed. In the course of this chapter, I consider three such
artifacts:
• The supply of human capital for the arts and sciences cannot be
expected to keep up with population.
• The markets for the arts and sciences are subject to market
saturation.
• The procedures for assembling the inventories undercounted the
significant figures in the most recent decades.
The three possibilities are discussed separately for the arts and sciences
in subsequent sections of this chapter, but they draw upon common ways of
thinking about what a decline in a rate means, and share two additional artifacts that understate the decline, so I begin with those issues.
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 429
THINKING ABOUT WHAT A RATE MEANS
FOR THE ARTS AND SCIENCES
When the accomplishment rate in, say, literature goes down, it means that
there are fewer significant authors per unit of population, but the numerators
for the ratios are small. For example, the United States in 1900 had a population of 76 million people, of whom 22 were adults who would end up as
significant figures in the literature inventory. That’s fewer than 3 authors per
10 million people. What difference can it make to the state of a culture if that
raw number increases or decreases by a few people?
The answer goes back to the nature of the sample that significant figures
represents. For every author, composer, painter, or scientist whose work
survives into the history books and makes him a significant figure by the definition I have used, there are thousands of other people engaged in those
occupations. Millions more are engaged in consuming the products of their
work. The totality of all those people make up the environment for literature,
music, art, and science. I used a stringent criterion for significant figures—
being mentioned in 50 percent of the sources—for technical reasons
described elsewhere (see page 110), but the number of significant figures is
highly correlated (in excess of .9) with the results produced by less stringent
criteria. So when the number of significant figures (by my definition) goes
down, there is reason to be confident that the numbers of these larger groups
of people are moving down as well.[1]
Thus the changes in the rate of significant figures in a given field can
indicate a change in the Zeitgeist. When the ratio of significant figures to the
total population goes down in literature, to continue with that example, one
of two changes (or possibly both in tandem) must have occurred: the proportion of the total population involved with good literature as producers, critics, and audience, has gone down, or the proportion of people who write
lasting work has gone down. The former is likely to signify a reduction in the
value that the culture places on good literature. The latter is likely to signify a
degradation in the quality of contemporary literature itself. I say “likely”
because other causal mechanisms could be at work, but these are explanations
that must be considered.
The explanations for a falling accomplishment rate can be benign. The
first half of 20C offers an obvious possibility for the case of literature: among
all the new talents who might have been engaged in novels and plays, a large
portion became engaged in film and, later, television. The total cultural inter-
430 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
2
3
HOW CHANGES IN RARE EVENTS CAN CHANGE
THE ATMOSPHERE
If you doubt that changes in the rates of rare events can affect daily
life, consider the crime rate. Unless you live in a high-crime area,
your chances of being the victim of a violent crime (murder, rape,
aggravated assault, robbery) within, say, a year, are so small that they
require several decimal places to express. They have always been
small, even when American crime was at its highest. And yet
changes in the violent crime rate have large effects on the national
milieu, and even larger effects in our major cities. It is a truism
among New Yorkers that the city in 2000, after a decade of falling
violent crime, felt like a different place than it did in 1990. Daily life
had materially changed—and yet the chances that any given New
Yorker would be mugged over the course of a year had changed
only infinitesimally. Like changes in the accomplishment rate, a
change in the violent crime rate is an indirect indicator of broader
phenomena. In the New York of 2000, graffiti no longer covered
public spaces. Beggars had become rarer. The squeegee men had
disappeared. People behaved less fearfully and took fewer elaborate
precautions against being mugged. The collateral aspects of a highcrime city had faded as part of the anti-crime policy. New York was
a more inviting city not just because crime had gone down, but
because of a variety of changes that are reflected in changes in the
crime rate.
est in drama and story-telling did not diminish, but it found new outlets. This
same explanation can be seen as pessimistic:Yes, the new outlets account for
the diminished rate of fine literature, but the new uses to which that talent
was put did not generate films or television that many people will care about
a hundred years from now. To summarize the rest of the chapter: My explanation for the recent decline in the scientific inventories is that it has been
largely benign, while my explanation for the decline in the rates for the arts
inventories is more pessimistic.
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 431
TWO WAYS IN WHICH THE DECLINES
ARE UNDERSTATED
A pessimistic statement that applies to all of the inventories: The declines you
see in the graphs in Chapter 14 are all understated. Two well documented
phenomena make it so: (1) more recent events and people get attention just
because they are recent, and (2) the de facto population available for great
accomplishment in the arts and sciences has been increasing more than the
raw population that I have been using as the denominator.
Epochcentrism
At the end of 1899, the editor of London’s Daily Telegraph, with the assistance
of learned consultants, selected the “100 Best Novels in the World” from all
the novels written in any language.4 In all, 61 authors were represented in the
list of 100 best novels. Only 27 of them —fewer than half—qualified as significant figures in Human Accomplishment’s inventory of Western literature.
Seventeen of the 61—28 percent—were not mentioned even once by any of
the 20 sources used to compile that inventory; not even by the most encyclopedic ones. And yet each of those 17 who are now ignored had written
one of the supposedly 100 best novels of all time as judged in 1899. Sic transit gloria mundi.
Recent lists have not been more judicious. In 2002, the editors of the
Norwegian Book Clubs in Oslo published a list of the 100 best books of all
time, based on their survey of about 100 well-known authors (e.g., Doris
Lessing, Salman Rushdie, Seamus Heaney, Norman Mailer) from 54 countries.5The last 100 years monopolized almost half of the titles. The winners—
supposedly the 100 best books in any genre written in any language since the
dawn of civilization—included Nikos Kazantzakis’s Zorba the Greek, Doris
Lessing’s The Golden Notebook, Toni Morrison’s Beloved, Salmon Rushdie’s
Midnight’s Children, and Astrid Lindgren’s Pippi Longstocking. Franz Kafka got
three titles on the list, the same number as Shakespeare. The list will appear as
ludicrous to observers a century from now as the list of 1899 does today.
Such lists exhibit the same bias that plagues more sophisticated histories
and chronologies, found whenever historiometricians have looked for it:
The recent past gets more attention than it will prove in the long run to have
deserved. Dean Simonton, one of the first scholars to document this effect,
named it epochcentric bias.
6 The magnitude of the bias for general histories
is large. Two scholars who measured it for a news almanac published in 1978
432 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
found the decay in attention given to preceding eras to be exponential.
Applying their findings, the implication is that (for example), the half century
from 1800–1850 gets only 35 percent as much coverage as 1900–1950, for
reasons having nothing to do with the potential amount of material that
might have been included, but simply because those events were a century
further back in time.[7]
The epochcentric bias for inventories of accomplishment in the arts
and sciences is less extreme in histories of the arts and sciences than in general
histories. The relevance of a political or military event seldom lasts more than
a few years, and general histories focus on the few events that have had reverberations down the decades and centuries. A fine painting or musical composition has an importance to experts on art and music that is independent of
its historical influence on subsequent work. I have been able to document the
lesser impact of epochcentric bias in the arts through exploratory analyses
described in the note.[8] But this is not to say that it disappears. The minimal
assumption is that the numbers of significant figures in the inventories are
inflated in 19C and 20C. Without this inflation, the decline in the accomplishment rate in 19C and 20C would be larger.
The Growth of the De Facto Population Available
to Become Significant Figures
At any moment in history, people with the potential for great accomplishment exist in every society we have been examining, and in roughly similar
proportions over time. The overwhelming majority of these people have
gone to their graves without realizing that potential. We know this to be true
just because of what we know about the distribution of opportunity. If 90
percent of a country’s population lives by farming at a near-subsistence level,
without education, isolated from contact with the outside world, something
approaching 90 percent of all the potential Faradays and Cézannes remain
subsistence farmers and their wives.[9]
Such conditions prevailed in Europe until a few centuries ago. To put it
another way: If we wish to estimate the accomplishment rate relative to the
number of people who have a realistic chance of realizing their talents, then the
proper denominator for computing the accomplishment rate is not the population, but a shadow number that I will call the de facto population, consisting
of people who have that realistic chance, whether through education, exposure to the larger culture, the lowering of barriers against one’s ethnicity, race,
class, or sex, or simply by growing up in a family that is prosperous enough to
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 433
help their children do something with their lives. From this perspective, the
accomplishment rate in Tuscany in 1500 should be computed by dividing the
number of significant figures by the total number of craftsman, merchants,
and aristocrats in Florence, Siena, and a few other important Tuscan towns—
a fraction of the total Tuscan population.
Calculating a precise value for the de facto population across the
centuries is impossible, but I can convey the shape of the trends. Suppose that
we define realistic chance relative to the urbanization of Europe and simple
exposure to the rudiments of education and the possibilities offered by the
larger culture. From 1400–1800, centuries in which urbanization and the
growth of the middle class still touched small proportions of the total European population, changes in the de facto population tracked closely with
changes in the raw population. Then sometime in the 1800s, the de facto
population began to increase more rapidly than the population as a whole, a
change caused by the accelerating growth of the middle class, the spread of
primary education, accelerating urbanization, and the development of a railroad system that transformed access to cities from the countryside.
To see just how rapidly, consider one fragment of the de facto population, those who obtained a university education. In Belgium and the Netherlands, the number of university students rose 3.5 times faster than the
population from 1850–1900 and 8.6 times faster from 1900–1950. In AustroHungary, the number of university students rose 3.1 times faster than the
population in 1850–1900 and 23.4 times faster than population in
1900–1950.10The numbers for France and Germany do not go back to 1850,
but, from 1900–1950, the university population in France rose 48 times faster
than the increase in population. In Germany, it rose 9.2 times faster.11
For the United States, which saw a disproportionate increase in its
worldwide share of significant scientific figures in 20C, I can be more specific
about the changes in professional training. In 1870, the first year for which
official statistics are available, one Ph.D. was conferred in the entire United
States. In 1880, that number had risen to 53; in 1900, 382. The percentage
increases during this period were ridiculously high because of the low base.
But consider 1900–1950, after the base had gotten higher: The number of
Ph.D.s in scientific, medical, and technological fields increased 16.2 times
faster than the population.12
The effect of the growing de facto population on the accomplishment
rate is direct and substantial. Suppose we assume that the de facto populations
in 1400, 1800, and 1950 consisted of 10 percent, 25 percent, and 75 percent
of the total European population respectively. These are estimates, and should
434 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
be given no more weight than that, but enough is known about the size of
the European urban populations (where almost all opportunity was concentrated) from 1400 onward, and the proportion of those urban populations
who had access to skills and education, to put these estimates within a reasonably narrow range.[13] The figure below shows the magnitude of the effect on
the accomplishment rate when the estimated de facto population is substituted for the total population in computing the accomplishment rate.
Any plausible estimate of the de facto population
must be expected to increase the estimated decline
in the accomplishment rate
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
Rate Based on the Estimated De Facto Population
Rate Based on Total Population
Rate Based on the Estimated De Facto Population
Rate Based on Total Population
Note: Lines are two-generation moving averages for total significant figures from Europe,
USA, and Canada.
If the question is how much art and science has been produced relative
to the people who had a chance to produce it, the West has been on a downhill slide since the end of the Renaissance. And the graphic above makes no
correction for epochcentrism in 19C and 20C.
In the rest of the chapter, I will not try to incorporate actual estimates
of the effects of epochcentrism and the growth of the de facto population.
But as I go through the various arguments trying to explain away the decline
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 435
as an artifact, keep in mind that the size of the decline I am working with is
already understated in these respects.
THE NATURE OF THE DECLINE IN SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY
It may seem absurd to argue that science and technology declined in any
sense during any part of 19C or 20C. Those two centuries saw more progress
in the well-being of mankind, by orders of magnitude, than any other two
centuries in the history of mankind, and it was made possible by unprecedented strides in science and technology.14 If the scientific inventories were
designed to measure the impact of events on daily life, the rate of accomplishment unquestionably would have gone through the roof.
But that’s not what the inventories purport to measure. Rather, they are
designed to capture significant advances in knowledge. The impact of an
invention such as the internal combustion engine was so far-reaching that it
is hard to imagine a metric that could express it. But as an increment in
human understanding of how the world works, it was similar to many other
contemporaneous developments. The question at issue here is whether the
inventories fairly represent such increments across time.
Potential Artifacts That Don’t Seem to Apply
The supply of human capital devoted to science and technology could not
keep up with population. I have already presented the data responding to this
hypothesis (see page 433). The number of scientists has increased more
rapidly than population during the same century that declines in the rate of
accomplishment occurred. If we do not observe proportional increases in
significant figures in the sciences, something more complicated than a failure
of human capital devoted to science and technology must be at work.
The market for science and technology becomes saturated after a certain
point, and the West passed that point in mid 19C. Market saturation is a
complicated issue for the arts, and is discussed at length in the following
section of this chapter. The same arguments do not apply to the sciences. If
the question is the marketplace for publication of scientific findings, the same
hundred years that saw a decline in the accomplishment rate for science saw
a proliferation of technical journals and informal systems for exchanging
436 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
work across the world. If the question is the economic marketplace for
science, corporate investment in science and technology—basic science as
well as applied science—is a product of the century from 1850–1950. I know
of no evidence for the notion that it became harder to get scientific discoveries noticed during 20C, that journals were more likely to turn down articles about significant advances, or that corporations were less willing to look
at the possibilities for making a profit out of a scientific discovery. On all of
these dimensions, it would appear that that support for good basic science and
useful technology was open-ended. The more the scientists could produce,
the more the system was ready to absorb.
The use of significant figures as the measure systematically underestimates
scientific accomplishment in 19C and 20C. Despite the general applicability of
epochcentrism that inflates attention to recent occurrences, a special case
could be argued for science that goes like this: From the mid 1800s onward,
the larger-than-life scientist or inventor, working in his laboratory with a few
assistants, exemplified by people like Lavoisier and Faraday, gave way to the
scientist as member of a large team. The number of significant figures who
show up in the inventories from mid 19C onward is radically reduced by
including just the team leaders.
In one sense, this argument is surely true. If I were to list as significant
figures all the people who substantively contributed to the achievement of
the scientific events over the period 1400–1950, then I would expand the
number of significant figures many-fold, and almost all that increase would
come in the last century. But remember the underlying phenomenon that the
inventories are trying to capture: what has been done, not who did it. It
turned out for reasons discussed in Chapter 9 that focusing on people was a
better way to calibrate what has been done in the arts than focusing on works
of art. But in the sciences, I also assembled inventories of events, so we are in
a position to ask whether the inventories of people and events tell different
stories.15 Additionally, I have weighted measures for both persons (the index
scores) and events (percentage of sources including the event), so we are in a
position to ask whether the weighted and unweighted measures tell different
stories. The figure on the facing page shows four measures: the accomplishment rates based on significant figures and on events, weighted and
unweighted.
We can reject the hypothesis that declines in the measure based on
significant figures are attributable to changes in the number of people
involved in making scientific discoveries. Measures based on events that
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 437
Significant events for the combined scientific inventories show
as much decline from 19C onward as significant figures
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Standard Scores
Weighted people Weighted events
Unweighted people Unweighted events
are quite different conceptually and mathematically tell indistinguishable
stories.[16]
Scientific and technological discoveries after the mid 1800s were more
complex than in earlier days, and therefore the increments in knowledge they
represent could be undercounted. This is another plausible hypothesis that
would work against the ordinary epochcentric inflation of recent events.
Consider, for example, the radio—an invention of incalculable importance,
but one that depended on many scientific and technological advances. If the
inventory of events had invention of the radio as just one entry, it would be
vulnerable to charges that it undercounts complex technological accomplishments. But the inventory actually has 19 different events associated with the
invention of the radio, including the separate inventions of the rectifier, the
amplifier vacuum tube, amplitude modulation, and the superheterodyne
receiver. The invention of the airplane has 16 events associated with it. Even
though the inventory stops at 1950, it includes 13 events associated with the
invention of the computer. The inventory has 26 separate events relating to
the biochemical basis of heredity, and 100 separate events involving discoveries about the structure of the atom. Scientific and technological discoveries
438 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
were often more complex after the mid 1800s than in earlier centuries, but
they also generated correspondingly more detailed accounts in the chronologies, duly reflected in the inventory.
As these examples indicate, the real problem with the inventories is
likely to be in the direction of epochcentricism, inflating the number of
events in 20C. It seems unlikely, for example, that chronologies of scientific
events written a few centuries from now will still include 100 events about
the unfolding understanding of the structure of the atom between 1897 and
1950, and more likely that historians will have condensed that number to a
handful. The inventions of the radio and the airplane are more likely to be
represented by a few entries than by 19 and 16 respectively. The inventories
are not perfect—in the box, I describe the most glaring problem I have
found—but it is not as easy as one might think to specify ways in which
scientific accomplishment since mid 19C is understated, and easy to think of
ways in which it may have been inflated.
rate of accomplishment for those decades.
WHEN AN INVENTORY MISLEADS
In reviewing the individual inventories, the one case in which the
contents of the scientific inventories seems to under-weight the
importance of recent discoveries is astronomy. Chronologies of
scientific events customarily list many discoveries of individual
celestial objects—the moons of the planets, comets, asteroids, and
the like. About two dozen such events qualified for the astronomy
inventory. Except for a few of them, such as the discovery that some
planets have moons, these events have little substantive importance
for understanding the solar system or universe. Many of them
occurred in the early 1600s, shortly after the invention of the telescope, when population was still relatively low, thereby inflating the
The Case That the Rate of Accomplishment
in the Sciences Really Did Decline
It is time to consider the possibility that the rate of accomplishment in the
sciences really did fall after the mid 1800s.
In 1969, Gunther Stent, a molecular biologist at the University of California’s Berkeley campus, published The Coming of the Golden Age: A View of
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 439
the End of Progress.17 Stent’s position had been voiced quietly by scientists
before him, but he was the first to present a fully developed argument that
progress in science and technology, along with all other enterprises based on
accumulative knowledge, must soon come to an end—perhaps in Stent’s lifetime, perhaps in another generation or two.
Stent acknowledged that his readers would resist the idea, but he asked
them to consider the proposition in its component parts. No one would
argue that anatomy or geography were subjects without limits, for example.
But anatomy and geography differed from disciplines such as physics or
chemistry only in their expanse, not in their ultimate bounded-ness. Everything there is to know about chemical reactions, for example, can be known.
Once known, that field will be as closed to new discoveries as anatomy is
now. Furthermore, it is a mistake to think that just because much is still
undone in a given field means that much that is significant is still undone.
Consider the thousands of chemical reactions, for example, that have not yet
had papers written specifically about them. No matter; the goal of chemistry
is to understand the principles that govern the behavior of molecules during
reactions—a goal that was effectively reached in 1931 when Linus Pauling
published “The nature of the chemical bond.”18The same logic applies to the
huge numbers of varieties of insect and plant life still undiscovered. Few of
those undiscovered varieties will add substantively to our knowledge of biology. The catalogue of life will be more completely enumerated, not more
completely understood.
Stent’s argument, widely derided at the time, has been taken more
seriously by his colleagues in recent years, as described in John Horgan’s
The End of Science (1997).19 We may also apply his argument (which focused
on the post-1950 situation) retrospectively to the declines in the scientific
inventories.
Take as an analogy a large, complex jigsaw puzzle of an unusual kind.
Unlike most jigsaw puzzles, it has no picture on the box. Also unlike most
jigsaw puzzles, the pieces are of different sizes. Some are larger than others,
large enough to give a sense of what that part of the puzzle is about, especially
if just a few of the large pieces can be linked.
As the puzzle is assembled, the larger pieces serve as the focal points
around which other pieces are tested. When those are exhausted, the next
pieces to be worked on are ones with patterns or unusual colors on them,
because those are easier to match up with other pieces than, say, pieces of a
cloudless sky. At some point, the entire picture will be understood, even
though most of the sky is left undone.
440 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
The history of science has been something like assembling that jigsaw
puzzle. Long before the puzzle was complete, places had been found for the
largest and most revealing pieces. As more and more people began to work
on the puzzle in 19C and 20C, more pieces were linked up than ever before,
but many of them were filling in blanks for parts of the picture that were
already clear. The skills of the newly arrived puzzle assemblers can be just as
high as ever, they can work just as hard, they can put together as many or even
more pieces, but they will not be given nearly as large a place in the chronicle of how the jigsaw puzzle was assembled.
Life is no fairer for scientists than for anyone else. Physicist Richard
Feynman had a strong sense of how lucky he was to have come along when
he did. “It is like the discovery of America—you only discover it once,” he
wrote. “The age in which we live is the age in which we are discovering the
fundamental laws of nature, and that day will never come again. It is very
exciting, it is marvelous, but this excitement will have to go.”20 What Feynman didn’t mention was that his specialty, particle physics, was among the
most recent to hit its golden age, along with astrophysics, genetics, and neuroscience. For many specialties within astronomy, biology, chemistry, geology,
physics, and mathematics, the fundamental laws had been found decades or
centuries earlier. In philosophy, some of the fundamental truths had been
discovered not decades, not even centuries, but millennia earlier.
THE NATURE OF DECLINE IN THE ARTS
The next graphic parallels the plot given for the scientific inventories on page
437, showing both the rates for the unweighted and weighted number of
significant figures.
In the visual arts, the decline begins in the last half of the 1600s. Western literature shows a steep drop beginning in the second half of 19C. In
music the number of significant figures drops from the mid 1700s into the
early 1800s, and remains near the bottom thereafter. What can be going on?
Potential Artifacts That Don’t Seem to Apply
The supply of human capital devoted to the arts could not keep up with
population. On the contrary, the human capital devoted to the arts has
increased far more than population. As a case in point, consider that the
population of the United States as I write is on the order of 65 times greater
Declines in the arts
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900
Summed significant figures
Summed index scores
Standard Scores
Western Literature
Standard Scores
Western Music
Standard Scores
Western Visual Arts
Note: Lines are two-generation moving averages for significant figures from Europe,
USA, and Canada.
442 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
than the population of England under Elizabeth I. At first glance, it may not
seem reasonable to expect the United States to have 65 playwrights for every
one that Elizabethan England had. But this intuitive reaction is conditioned
by our knowledge that the Elizabethan playwrights included Marlowe and
Shakespeare, so we tend to think in terms of 65 playwrights of their caliber.
But if I were to ask the question another way—is it reasonable to expect
today’s United States to have 65 times as many people who make their living
from writing dramas as Elizabethan England?—the answer is of course yes.
The half century from 1570–1620 had only 20 English playwrights
mentioned in any of the sources, 13 of whom were significant figures.[21]
Compare this with the single year of 2000 in the United States, when the
Writers Guild that supplies writers for unionized television and screen projects numbered 12,735 members, about half of whom were employed during
2000.22This figure does not count all the non-unionized people who make a
living writing for television, the screen, and the stage.
Elizabethan England probably did not have as many as a dozen playwrights making a living at their craft in any one year. If we say 20, which is
surely too high, and say that 5,000 Americans made a living writing dramas
in 2000, which is probably too low, the ratio is 250:1. Making the case that
the United States today produces more than 65 times as many people who
make their living writing drama than did Elizabethan England is easy. So the
question becomes more complicated, and hinges not just on the number of
people producing work, but the capacity of a society to recognize work at any
one time. What is the saturation point for great accomplishment?
The market for great art becomes saturated after a certain point, and
increases in the number of artists can no longer be expected to produce a larger
number of important artists. It is plausible that the market for great accomplishment in the arts is limited. A society has a certain number of slots for
great poets or painters at any one time, and the number of those slots is about
the same for societies of widely differing size.
That a saturation point for stars exists in the performing arts is evident in
everyday life.When you go to your local music store, the racks of CDs for sale
in the classical music section do not allow you to select among the recordings
of the top 50 solo violinists in the world, but, for practical purposes, the top
dozen—and this does not represent the top dozen violinists playing today, but
the top dozen spread out since high fidelity recording began in mid 20C.[23]
The number of choices has nothing to do with the number of fine violinists.
The racks of long-playing records for sale in the 1950s probably also featured
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 443
a top dozen. A hundred years from now, it is safe to predict that a top dozen
will still dominate.
24 The same phenomenon characterizes the salaries of star
athletes, CEOs, and artistic performers. Why? In 1995, economists Robert
Frank and Philip Cook published a book called The Winner-Take-All Society
explaining the answer.
Frank and Cook list 11 conditions that give rise to winner-take-all
markets.[25] The one most pertinent to the case of the violinists is “cloning,”
the capacity to reproduce the best performance cheaply. If you are the music
company and can burn another 10,000 copies of Fritz Kreisler’s performance
of a particular violin concerto for pennies a CD, what’s the point in hiring a
lesser violinist to make a fresh recording of the same work? If you are the
consumer, what’s the point in buying the performance of a lesser violinist if
you can buy Kreisler at the same price—or even if Kreisler should cost a buck
or two more?
Winner-take-all markets can also occur under special conditions when
familiarity breeds contentment. We become accustomed to a particular brand
of scotch or coffee and continue to buy it even when alternatives we might
like just as much are available. Similarly, we get used to artistic products. If
you are already a Sue Grafton fan, you may well buy her latest mystery without looking at the dozens of other newly published mysteries that might be
just as good. If you are producing a television news segment about the Palestinian problem, you don’t go to the obscure professor who has just published
a brilliant essay on the subject; you go to the tried-and-true talking heads
whom your audience has come to expect. Thus do winner-take-all markets
arise even if there is no difference between the quality of alternatives, or even
if the rejected alternative is superior.26 A closely related condition is what is
known in politics as the advantage of incumbency. It is another version of
the Matthew Effect that we have encountered more than once already (see
pages 93, 353). Still another variant is limited mental shelf space—even if
we wanted to, we don’t have time to read a sample of every new mystery
writer that publishes, so we tailor our lists to fit the space available.
Another condition leading to winner-take-all markets is the desire to
have the best. If one surgeon has a 95 percent success rate and another has a
100 percent success rate in a life-and-death operation to be performed on
your child, how much extra are you willing to pay for the slightly better
surgeon? The answer is astronomically more than a slightly higher fee, and
reasonably so. In other cases, the desire for the best leads people to pay more
than most of us would think reasonable, but reasonable is a highly personal
444 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
decision and takes us into questions of expertise and devotion to a subject
that were discussed earlier (see page 65). The end result is the same: in products and celebrities alike, a few that get a reputation as the best, deserved or
not, enjoy a huge advantage.
To what extent might these conditions limit the number of significant
figures in the arts despite growth in the population?
Cloning and the Impulse to Buy the Best. These two conditions for
winner-take-all markets, so clearly an issue for contemporary musicians and
actors, do not apply with anything like the same force to the producers of
works of art. What separates the producers from performers is the degree and
nature of their product differentiation.
Return to the example of the 50 top violinists. They have their own
nuances and styles that an expert may be able to detect and evaluate, but all
50 will have superb technique, and the differences among them will only
occasionally be apparent to the average purchaser of classical music CDs. In
contrast, the works of the top 50, or the top 500, composers, painters, or
novelists are immediately, obviously, unique, and that uniqueness separates the
producer of art from the performer of it. Johann Sebastian Bach was a better
composer in historical perspective than Johann Strauss, Jr., but you can’t use
a Bach fugue to satisfy an urge to hear a Strauss waltz. That a publisher can
produce an extra 10 thousand copies of War and Peace for pennies a copy does
not cut into sales of Moby Dick.
Mental Shelf Space and Habit Formation. As my use of the Sue Grafton
example suggests, winner-take-all markets can apply to producers of art as
well as to performers. We have a limited amount of time to read, listen to
music, and watch drama (live or on film), and so we economize on our search
costs, as the economists say, and go with what we know we like. But while
these dynamics are not a bad explanation of the stupendous sales of a handful
of popular novelists, they do not help in explaining the production of significant figures. On the contrary, it backfires. Every new sensation spawns a
school of smaller fish that swim in the same pool—or perhaps it is more accurate to say that new sensations can create new pools along with new fish.
Arthur Conan Doyle opened the way for a long line of mystery writers who
purloined his formula of brainy, eccentric hero and genial sidekick. Agatha
Christie and the country house murder, Taylor Caldwell and the multigeneration family epic, Tom Clancy and the techno-thriller: Success in each
new subgenre of novel has opened up markets that have inspired publishers to
look eagerly for other authors who can be successful. New entry of producers of artistic works tends to resemble a win/win game. It can be hard to get
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 445
the reader who is comfortable with Sue Grafton to try the new mystery
writer, but if the publisher succeeds, the reader is likely to end up buying the
novels of both.
The use of significant figures as the measure systematically underestimates
artistic accomplishment in 19C and 20C. For the sciences, it is possible to
devise plausible hypotheses explaining why the usual epochcentric bias does
not apply and why scientific significant figures are undercounted for the most
recent decades. Those hypotheses don’t work, but at least they are plausible.
For the arts, I can think of only one such hypothesis. Call it greatness fatigue.
The logic is that we, the audience, have an elastic capacity for new mystery
writers or new pop songs, whereas our capacity to absorb great novels or
great music is less elastic. An audience of 400 million people cannot focus on
and recognize for posterity 10 times as many fine artists as an audience of 40
million people.
The problem with this hypothesis is to find a way to falsify it. The best
place to look is the most recent period of observation, 1900–1950, with its
greatly enlarged population compared to the preceding 50 years. Can we see
in retrospect any signs that the amount of great work outstripped the capacity of the audience to give it the reputation it deserved and that, if the audience had been up to its responsibilities, the number of people qualifying as
significant figures from that era would be higher, and also their eminence?
But where to look? The only way we could test this hypothesis is if two
conditions were met: (1) An unrecognized great work got sufficiently into the
public eye (the book or musical score was published, the painting or sculpture
was exhibited) so that posterity could know about it, and (2) posterity has a
better perspective on the quality of these works than contemporaries did.
Begin by assuming that both these conditions apply. I can find no
evidence that today’s critics have elevated their opinion of authors,
composers, or artists from the first half of 20C. It is easy to find examples of
people whose reputations are falling—compare Hemingway’s literary standing in 1950 with his standing today, for example—but that is appropriate.
Time is supposed to erode the reputation of all but the greatest work, peeling
off the effects of epochcentrism. Proving a negative is notoriously difficult, so
I will leave it to you to think of examples I have missed whereby a case could
be made that the audience of 1900–1950 suffered greatness fatigue.
A subtler form of greatness fatigue could have been experienced not by
the public, but by publishers, impresarios, and art galleries, who in
1900–1950 had great work shown to them that they uniformly rejected,
thereby preventing the public from ever getting a chance to read, hear, or see
446 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
it. This possibility is beyond empirical test. It is most plausible for genres that
were commercially unattractive. One can easily imagine that worthy poetry
went unpublished in 20C, for example. But did 1900–1950 really have an
invisible oeuvre of beautiful symphonies or exquisite representational art
created but never exposed to the world? It is hard to imagine. Isolated cases
of competent work, yes; a substantial body of fine work, no. It is more plausible to believe that people who could have created beautiful symphonies in
the classical style or exquisite representational art didn’t, because those genres
had fallen out of critical favor. But that would represent authentic decline in
accomplishment, not greatness fatigue.
The Case That the Rate of Accomplishment in the Arts
Really Did Decline
To argue that the rate of accomplishment in the arts really did begin to
decline in 19C or earlier is to cast one’s lot to some degree with the argument
that Western civilization itself is in decline, a persistent theme of intellectual
life from mid 19C onward. In his survey of the idea of decline, historian
Arthur Herman dates its beginning to Arthur de Gobineau’s Essai sur L’Inégalité des Races Humaines, published in 1853 on the heels of the 1848 revolutionary movements. When its apocalyptic view of the disintegration of
European culture was attacked, Gobineau shrugged it off. “I never supposed
that I can tell people today, ‘you are in a state of complete decadence, your
civilization is a swamp, your intelligence a smoldering lamp, you are already
halfway to the grave,’ without expecting some opposition.”27 And this was in
1853, when the raw counts of significant figures in all the arts and sciences
were shooting up, and the rate of accomplishment in the sciences and literature was at its peak.
Thinkers in both Europe (e.g., Nietzsche, Burckhardt, Berdyaev, Spengler, Sorokin) and in America (Henry and Brooks Adams, W. E. B. Du Bois)
developed variants of this pessimistic vision in works that culminated in
Arnold Toynbee’s 10-volume A Study of History (1933–1954).[28] As I read the
works of the declinists—or in some cases the excellent summaries in the two
sources in the note—I have three reactions.29 One is skepticism about laws of
history. One may acknowledge the erudition of a Spengler or a Toynbee,
admire their attempts to make a coherent whole from a breadth of knowledge
that few individuals have ever possessed, and nonetheless, with the advantage
of several decades of hindsight, see ways in which they got things wrong. My
second reaction is the occasional shock of recognition when a declinist fore-
IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING? • 447
casts future trends that apply with painful accuracy to today’s society. My
third reaction is that the best of the declinists are correct in this broad sense:
Western European culture had a coherence in its values and institutions that
did in fact begin to come apart during 18C, prompted by the Enlightenment
and the Industrial Revolution. The political and economic aspects of the
change represented not disintegration but great progress. The cliché is true,
however: Progress has prices, and the declinists successfully identified some of
those prices.
I described some of the ways in which I believe Western European
culture came apart under the headings of purpose and autonomy in Chapter
19 and of transcendental goods in Chapter 20. Those discussions taken
together provide the material for an argument—a strong argument, in my
opinion—that the environment for producing great art in any field became
progressively less favorable over the course of 19C, and that the environment
deteriorated even more rapidly after the turn of 20C.
The declinists blame the decline on the failure of the elites, who in their
view have lost the élan, self-confidence, and vitality of an earlier age.[30] But
19C also saw a phenomenon born not of cultural decay but of economic
vitality: the growth of the middle class into the dominant social force in 19C
and, in 20C, the spread of prosperity to blue collar workers and farmers.
An inevitable result of these transforming social trends was a huge increase in
the audience for popular plays, books, and music. The size of that new and
growing market was bound to have attracted talent that in another age would
have been monopolized by the aristocratic patrons of fine music and art.
A science fiction story written some decades ago had as its premise that the
dying Mozart is whisked by a time machine to the future, where modern
medicine cures him of the disease that was about to kill him in 1791. His
patrons send him into the modern world to continue composing ever greater
symphonies and operas. Within a few months he is caught up in the rock ’n’
roll world and, as I recall, dies soon thereafter of a drug overdose.[31] The
outcome of the story is not so implausible: If Mozart were alive today, he
might well be writing rock ’n’ roll—superb rock ’n’ roll, presumably, but not
another Don Giovanni.
I have no way of disentangling the relative importance of all these
elements. But I see no reason to conclude that the declines in the accomplishment rates in the arts are artifacts that understate recent accomplishment.
I see far more reason to suspect that the artifacts of epochcentrism and a
growing de facto population mean that the declines are understated.
TWENT Y -T W O
SUMMATION
Having explored data that sprawl over as much territory as these do, I
come to the end with an urge to insert more equivocations into the
conclusions than any reader can be asked to put up with. I will suppress that
impulse and state as simply as I can my best reading of the data.
THE REALITY OF EXCELLENCE
A colleague whom I asked to look at my treatment of mathematical accomplishment wrote back with a list of corrections. He added that although Carl
Gauss was ranked fourth in the mathematics inventory, a high ranking for an
ordinary mortal,
. . . it’s a wee bit uncharitable not to point out that Gauss, as well as being
a Grade A++ mathematician, was also a first-rank astronomer (found the
first asteroid after Piazzi lost it, e.g.) and physicist (co-invented electric telegraph, invented heliotrope, etc, etc.). If you asked a surveyor, his work on
surveying the Kingdom of Bavaria would probably put him in the first rank
of THEM, too. In the large sphere of pure and applied math, I doubt there
is anything Gauss wasn’t first rank in. He even, via his descendants, helped to
populate the state of Missouri. . . . Before the Eulers, Gausses and Newtons,
we are worms, worms.1
I would not go so far as to say that the rest of us are worms, worms, but
if the last several hundred pages can be said to have a principal message, it is
this: Excellence exists, and it is time to acknowledge and celebrate the
450 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
magnificent inequality that has enabled some of our fellow humans to have so
enriched the lives of the rest of us.
The book’s secondary message, more implicit than explicit, is this: It is
also time to render unto equality that which is appropriate to equality, and
unto excellence that which is appropriate to excellence. Equality is a fine
ideal, and should have an honored place. To have understood that each person
is unique, that each person must be treated as an end and not a means, that
each person should be free to live his life as he sees fit, so long as he accords
others the same freedom, that each person should be equal before the law and
is equal in God’s sight, and to incorporate these principles into the governance of nations—these are among the greatest of all human accomplishments. But equality has nothing to do with the abilities, persistence, zeal, and
vision that produce excellence. Equality and excellence inhabit different
domains, and allegiance to one need not compete with allegiance to the
other.
Excellence is not simply a matter of opinion, though judgment enters
into its identification. Excellence has attributes that can be identified, evaluated, and compared across works. The judgments reached by those who are
most expert in their fields, and who work from standards of excellence that
they are willing to specify and subject to the inspection of logic, are highly
consistent—so consistent that eminence in the various domains of accomplishment can be gradated with higher reliability than is achieved by almost
any other measure in the social and behavioral sciences. When the rating of
eminence is scrutinized against the reasons for that eminence, it also becomes
apparent that those who rank highest are those who have achieved at the
highest levels of their field.
Different readers will have had different reactions to the presentation
of those arguments in Part 2. To those who disagree, I ask only this: You
have been presented with a case, here and in the extensive literature that
informed it. A reply requires more than another assertion that we are
prisoners of canons that unjustly privilege some works over others, that the
achievements of those who have been ignored are just as good as the work of
those who are celebrated. What are the alternative standards of excellence?
The logic behind the standards? The methods for applying those standards to
works of art and science? Spelling out the answers to those questions will
probably do no more than clarify where the disagreement lies, but that would
be a step in the right direction.
SUMMATION • 451
THE FOUNDATIONS OF ACCOMPLISHMENT
The state of knowledge about the forces that produce bursts of human
accomplishment is bifurcated. On one set of questions, those addressed in
Part 3, the empirical record can be specified precisely, alternative views of the
data can be tested, and the resulting conclusions are subject to only a limited
degree of data-based debate. For example, I consider the data about the
dominance of Europe and of white males in Chapters 11 and 12 to be among
the least problematic in the book. Public controversy about these issues is
heated, but the data are knowable and straightforward. The analyses for
explaining the patterns and trajectories presented in Chapters 15 and 16 are
subject to more argument. With regard to the most important single variable
in those chapters, the effect of preceding generations on accomplishment in
succeeding generations, my analyses confirm what others have already
demonstrated, and the likelihood of finding contrary results is small. But it is
quite possible that better data or more sophisticated analyses of such issues as
economic growth will reveal relationships that I have missed. The role of
what I call elite cities may be confounded with the role of other variables
such as the degree of political and cultural diversity.
Part 4 represents another kind of analysis altogether: less quantitative,
more speculative, and definitely more opinionated. That does not mean my
arguments should be exempt from systematic quantitative investigation. But
my purpose in Human Accomplishment has been to get the arguments on the
table, saying to others who are exploring human accomplishment and to
those who might be drawn to the topic that it is time to take another look at
some old-fashioned explanations. Trying to convert those propositions into
hypotheses employing quantitative measures suitable for multivariate analysis
seemed a step too far for this book.
But serious propositions they are, and about a deeply serious question:
What are the conditions that ignite great accomplishment? For the rest of this
section, I will be especially ruthless about suppressing equivocations as I recapitulate the claims I advanced in Part 4:
The nature of accomplishment in a given time and place can be
predicted with reasonable accuracy given information about that culture’s
status with regard to the four dimensions of purpose, autonomy, organizing
structure, and transcendental goods.
The predictions will vary by field, because the richness of structure and
the vitality of transcendental resources can be different for different fields. At
452 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
the same moment in history, the reigning structure can simultaneously be
depleted in painting and vital in literature. At the same moment in history,
authors (for example) can be tapping into transcendental goods while
composers are not.
A culture can produce a stream of accomplishment while being strong
on only some of the four dimensions. The East Asian, South Asian, and Arabic
civilizations are examples. All were at a disadvantage (in terms of accomplishment in the arts and sciences) throughout their histories, in the sense that all
were cultures in which duty trumped vocation, familism trumped individualism, and consensus trumped debate. Nonetheless, each of those civilizations
produced great work in every field in which they developed rich structures
and sought to realize transcendental goods.
The limits facing civilizations where duty, family, and consensus are
primary values differ for the arts and sciences. In the arts, respect for tradition
means that artistic structures are not periodically rebuilt from scratch, but
elaborated slowly and incrementally. Respect for tradition does not diminish
the technical excellence of the work at its best, but it does militate against
variety and innovation. In the sciences, the constraints are more severe. The
fuel of the scientific method—nonstop debate and fierce competition to put
the next brick of the edifice in place—seems to demand individualism on the
Western model. Improvements in the state of knowledge can be made without it, but individualism is valuable for achieving breakthroughs.
Some specific propositions about the roles of the shapers of accomplishment:
In the arts, the richness of the structure has most of its effect on the
amount of work that is produced within a field; access to transcendental goods
has most of its effect on the enduring quality of that work.
Where artists do not have coherent ideals of beauty, the work tends to
be sterile. Where they do not have coherent ideals of the good, the work
tends to be vulgar. Lacking access to either beauty or the good, the work
tends to be shallow.
In the sciences (and humanities and the social sciences):Where scholars
do not have allegiance to ideals of truth, the work tends to be false.
Accomplishment in the arts and sciences that is sterile, vulgar, shallow,
or false does not endure.
SUMMATION • 453
PAST 1950
In many ways, we live in the best of times. As I wrote in the Introduction, we
at the outset of 21C would be foolish to choose any earlier time to be born.
We enjoy unprecedented wealth, health, and security. We have unprecedented access to the best that survives of everything humans in every culture
have achieved over the past ten thousand years.
We retain the conditions for continued great accomplishment in the
sciences. I see no important ways in which the allegiance to truth has been
compromised in the hard sciences. The structure of the scientific method is
self-renewing—certainly in its constant creation of important new tools and
crafts, but also in its refinement and relentless reexamination of its principles.
If the measure of the rate of accomplishment is to be the one I have used,
calibrating the number of bricks added to the edifice, then the accomplishment rate may continue to fall. But if the measure is the magnitude of the
changes in human life that new discoveries produce, there is no reason to
think that scientific accomplishment will falter, and many reasons to think
that it will increase. And who knows? Perhaps the Einsteinian universe is as
far from the final answer as the Newtonian universe was, and basic science
will find vast new terrae incognitae to explore.
The arts are another story. On three of the four dimensions—purpose,
autonomy, and transcendental goods—I believe it can be demonstrated that
the conditions for great accomplishment in the arts moved toward the unfavorable end of the spectrum in the first half of 20C. It does not seem possible to make a case that any of those conditions improved in the second half
of 20C, and it is easy to make a case that some of them got worse.
If the conditions for accomplishment got worse in the second half of
20C, the implication is that accomplishment did too—that the accomplishment rate in the arts continued to go down, in terms of the measure I have
used. Whether that happened in fact will require more distance from
1950–2000 to establish. But one may speculate. What play, novel, painting,
sculpture, film, or musical composition produced during 1950–2000 are you
confident will still be considered important as a work of art two hundred
years from now? I can think of only a handful, and my confidence even in
them is shaky.
Perhaps I am too unfamiliar with fine work that has been done. I am
told that superb concert music, still almost unheard in the United States, has
been produced in the last few decades by composers in Eastern Europe, and
that some of the poetry of the last half-century, though not famous, reaches
454 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
the highest artistic level. Perhaps I am simply too pessimistic. The auction
prices for post-1950 art are high and still climbing. The world’s film industries
produce hundreds of major productions each year that draw hundreds of
millions of ticket-buyers. The music industry turns out thousands of songs,
more books are being published than ever before, and new possibilities for
artistic expression are being generated by new technology. Why not entertain
the possibility that the last half of 20C has seen a small-r Renaissance; that the
arts are robust and thriving but don’t happen to fit my tastes?
My pessimism goes back to themes I discussed in Chapter 5. The reason
that some works of art endure is because people who know the most about
that art continue to be attracted to them, and thus continue to talk and to
write about them. For a work of art to continue to be compelling in this way
requires substance—things for the expert to ponder, to discover beneath the
surface, to be excited about anew upon reacquaintance.
I specify experts because they are the people who write the histories
that carry the names forward into time. But my point applies to a broader
audience. Indulge me in one more thought experiment, a familiar one:You
will be stranded on a desert island, and you can take just 10 books and 10
music CDs. What do you choose? My prediction is that even people who
don’t listen to classical music regularly will take Bach, Mozart, and
Beethoven. Even people who haven’t picked up Shakespeare in years will
take the collected works of Shakespeare.When we want something we can go
back to again and again, we choose the same giants that the experts choose.
My proposition about the literature, music, and visual arts of the last half
century is that hardly any of it has enough substance to satisfy, over time.
The post-1950 West has unquestionably produced some wonderful
entertainments, and I do not mean wonderful slightingly. The Simpsons is
wickedly smart, Saving Private Ryan is gripping, Groundhog Day is a brilliant
moral fable. The West’s popular culture is for my money the only contemporary culture worth patronizing, with its best stories more compelling and
revealing than the ones written by authors who purport to write serious
novels, and its best popular music with more energy and charm than anything
the academic composers turn out. It is a mixed bag, with the irredeemably
vulgar side by side, sometimes intermingled, with the wittiest and most
thoughtful work. But the quality is often first-rate—as well it might be. The
people producing the best work include some who in another age could have
been a Caravaggio or Brahms or Racine, and perhaps dozens of others good
enough to have made their way onto the roster of significant figures.
Why not be satisfied with wonderful entertainments?
SUMMATION • 455
THE ARISTOTELIAN PRINCIPLE RECAST
Realized capacities are pleasing not only when they are exercised, but also
when they are seen to be exercised. Or to recast the first two-thirds of the
Aristotelian principle: Human beings enjoy watching the exercise of the realized
capacities of their species, and this enjoyment increases the more the capacity is realized.
To be in the presence of greatness is exciting, even when we are not
capable of appreciating all the nuances of the achievement. The best has a
magic about it, whether we are eating a meal cooked by a great chef, watching a great athlete perform under pressure, or witnessing anything done
superbly well, far beyond our own reach.
Now comes the last clause of the Aristotelian principle: “. . . or the
greater its complexity.” The depth of gratification we get from watching people
perform at the pinnacle increases as the difficulty and importance of what
they are doing increases. Danger and self-sacrifice are part of this calculation,
which explains why no sporting achievement has the same grip on our imaginations as heroism in war. In the sciences, Einstein’s E=mc2 became an icon
not only because it represented such a dazzling mental leap, but because it
illuminated our understanding of the very universe. In the arts, writers and
painters and composers are engaged in another kind of complex and difficult
endeavor, explaining ourselves to ourselves. When they succeed at the highest level, they transcend what we ordinarily believe to be within the capacity
of our kind. Many chapters ago, I used the question, “How can a human
being have done that?” as a device for conveying our response to the highest
accomplishments in the arts. There is another aspect to the reaction, not a
question but a declaration of pride: “A human being did that!”
That’s why we cannot be satisfied with a culture that turns out nothing
but shiny, craftsmanlike entertainments. We may outstrip our forebears in
wealth, creature comforts, health, and lifespan. We may outstrip them in the
breadth of political freedom and equality our governments provide. But a
culture that is unable to compete with the past’s greatest expressions of the
human spirit is in some sense a backward culture—the kind of backwardness
that led Edward Gibbon to call the Romans at the apex of their empire “a
race of pygmies.”2 It is dispiriting to know that the greatest accomplishments
are monopolized by past cultures whose heights we are unable to match.
Being part of a culture that produces new giants would be inspiriting.
It is not at all clear to me how a culture gets from here to there,
however, because I come to the end of this book convinced that religion is
indispensable in igniting great accomplishment in the arts. I use religion at
456 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
once loosely and stringently. Going to church every Sunday is not the definition I have in mind, nor even a theology in its traditional sense. Confucianism and classical Greek thought were both essentially secular, and look at
the cultures they produced. But both schools of thought were tantamount to
religion in that they articulated a human place in the cosmos, laid out a clear
understanding of the end—the good—toward which humans aim, and set
exalted standards of human behavior. And that brings me to the sense in
which I use religion stringently. Confucianism and Aristotelianism, along
with the great religions of the world, are for grownups, requiring mature
contemplation of truth, beauty, and the good. Cultures in which the creative
elites are not engaged in that kind of mature contemplation don’t produce
great art.
Suppose that this reading of history is correct. Today’s creative elites
are not just overwhelmingly secular but often hostile to the idea that transcendental goods have any meaning. Such is the reason to fear that wellmade entertainments are as much as we can hope for. Great art requires a
source of inspiration that the people who produce those entertainments are
not tapping.
But what has been true for the last few decades need not be true
perpetually. Gloomy prognoses sell short the regenerating power of certain
truths.
The first of these truths is that the hold of great art on the human imagination is so binding that the present intellectual nihilism cannot survive. Not
too many years from now, it seems safe to predict, people who love literature,
music, and painting for their power to express beauty, truth, and the good will
once again dominate the faculties of the world’s leading universities and set
the tone for public conversation about artistic excellence. It is bizarre that
people who do not love literature, music, or painting for their transcendental
power came to have any sort of influential role at all. It is a situation that was
the product of specific historical circumstances, easily understandable in
retrospect. Those historical circumstances are ephemeral. Signs that they are
already coming to an end can be discerned. When the change is complete,
children with the potential to create great art will once again grow up having
worthy conceptions of what great means.
Gloomy prognoses also sell short the way in which thoughtful human
beings are drawn to fundamental questions of existence. “Why is there something rather than nothing?” is a question that none of us can avoid
completely, even in times when such questions are least fashionable. “What
does it mean to live a good life?” is another. It is difficult to think about these
SUMMATION • 457
things outside spiritual frameworks. The successive blows to traditional religion thought to have been struck by Darwin, Freud, and Einstein made some
intellectuals give up the option of thinking about such questions within such
frameworks, but there are good reasons for thinking that this too will prove
to be ephemeral. It may well be that the period from the Enlightenment
through 20C will eventually be seen as a kind of adolescence of the species—
a time when humans were deprived of the comforting simplicities of childhood and exposed to more complex knowledge about the world. In the
manner of adolescents, humans reacted injudiciously, thinking that they
possessed wisdom that invalidated all that had gone before—if Darwin was
right, then Aquinas was no longer worth reading; if Freud was right, the Nicomachean Ethics must be wrong. But adolescence is temporary, and when it
passes young adults discover that their parents have gotten smarter. That may
be happening with the advent of the new century, as glib answers to solemn
questions start to wear thin.
I hope the underlying question posed by the foregoing chapters can
play a modest role in that process. If it is a statement of fact, as I believe can
be demonstrated, that human beings with the potential for excellence generally have done best in cultures where people believe the universe to have
transcendental meaning, one must ask why. The easy answer is that the giants
of the past were deluded. They imagined that what they were doing had some
transcendental significance, and, lo and behold, their foolishness inspired
them to compose better music or paint better pictures. But this line of
thought can become embarrassing when one confronts just what those selfdeluded people accomplished. Is it not implausible that those individuals who
accomplished things so beyond the rest of us just happened to be uniformly
stupid about the great questions? Another possibility is that they understood
things we don’t.
This is not the prelude to a revelation of what those understandings are,
but a suggestion that when human beings are functioning at the heights of
human capacity, it is a good idea to begin by assuming that they are doing
something right. Johann Sebastian Bach does not need to explain himself; he
made a prima facie case that his way of looking at the universe needs to be
taken seriously. It behooves us to do so.
I first encountered this injunction as a college undergraduate, many
years ago, in one of those rare moments that stand out from otherwise forgotten classes. It happened near the close of an introductory philosophy course
taught by a grand old Platonist named Raphael Demos. He had spent two or
three lectures on free will, reviewing the positions that philosophers have
458 • HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
taken on that fraught issue. At the end, he said something like, “Now you
know what the great philosophers have said about free will. Maybe you’re
wondering what I think.” He paused for effect. “Well,” he said briskly, “I
think that since we all act every day as if we have free will, why not believe
it?” We laughed, as he had expected. It was only later, thinking about it, that
I realized he had not given us just a laugh line. He had asked us a koan of a
question, one to meditate upon. Human beings cannot help acting as if they
had free will. What does that tell us?
I will put my question again: Human beings have been most magnificently productive and reached their highest cultural peaks in the times and
places where humans have thought most deeply about their place in the
universe and been most convinced they have one. What does that tell us?
It is not a question to be answered with a quip. We strive to answer it
knowing that human limits force us to look through a glass darkly. But
persistent seeking is, after all, at the heart of the spirit that enables people to
achieve great things. The rest of us may not be able to paint like Titian or
compose like Debussy, but all of us who feel impelled to try to live the best
possible human life are engaged in the same larger enterprise.
That larger enterprise has little triumphalism or hubris about it. The
enduring impression I carry away from this exploration of human accomplishment is not so much what the people who built the human résumé did
as how they did it. Some fit the image of the genius in their public personae
(though more did not), but, in the way they did their work, they more
commonly resembled a craftsman at his bench, struggling to get it right,
agonizing over mistakes, doing it over again, with a vision of perfection insistently pulling him onward.
A story is told about the medieval stone masons who carved the
gargoyles that adorn the great Gothic cathedrals. Sometimes their creations
were positioned high upon the cathedral, hidden behind cornices or otherwise blocked from view, invisible from any vantage point on the ground.
They sculpted these gargoyles as carefully as any of the others, even knowing that once the cathedral was completed and the scaffolding was taken
down, their work would remain forever unseen by any human eye. It was said
that they carved for the eye of God. That, written in a thousand variations, is
the story of human accomplishment.
APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1
STATISTICS FOR PEOPLE
WHO ARE SURE THEY
CAN’T LEARN
STATISTICS*
The following is aimed at the liberal arts graduate who has not taken
a math course since high school and knows nothing whatsoever about
statistics but wants to understand the statistical terms in the text.
DISTRIBUTIONS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS
Why Do We Need “Standard Deviation”?
Every day, formally or informally, people make comparisons—among people,
among apples and oranges, among dairy cows or egg-laying hens, among the
screws being coughed out by a screw machine. The standard deviation is a
measure of how spread out the things being compared are. “This egg is a lot
bigger than average,”a chicken farmer might say. The standard deviation gives
him a way of saying precisely what he means by “a lot.”
* Adapted from The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life by
Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. Copyright © 1994 by Richard J.
Herrnstein and Charles Murray. Reprinted with permission of The Free Press, a
Division of Simon & Schuster Trade Publishing Group. I have made a few minor
changes to the original text, eliminating some material specific to issues in The Bell
Curve and rewording a few sentences to fit the context of Human Accomplishment.
462 • APPENDIX 1
What Is a Frequency Distribution?
To get a clear idea of what a frequency distribution is, imagine yourself back
in your high school gym, with all the boys in the senior class assembled before
you (including both sexes would complicate matters, and the main point of
this discussion is to keep things simple). Line up these boys from left to right
in order of height.
Now you have a long line going from shortest to tallest. As you look
along the line you will see that only a few boys are conspicuously short and
tall. Most are in the middle, and a lot of them seem identical in height. Is
there any way to get a better idea of how this pattern looks?
Tape a series of cards to the floor in a straight line from left to right,
with “60 inches and shorter” written on the one at the far left,“80 inches and
taller” on the card at the far right, and cards in one-inch increments in
between. Tell everyone to stand behind the card that corresponds to his
height.
Someone loops a rope over the rafters and pulls you up in the air so you
can look straight down on the tops of the heads of your classmates standing
in their single files behind the height labels. The figure below shows what you
see: a frequency distribution.
The raw material of a frequency distribution
60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80
This a frequency distribution. What good is it? Looking at your high
school classmates standing around in a mob, you can tell very little about their
APPENDIX 1 • 463
height. Looking at those same classmates arranged into a frequency distribution, you can tell a lot, quickly and memorably.
How Is the Distribution Related to the Standard Deviation?
We still lack a convenient way of expressing where people are in that distribution. What does it mean to say that two different students are, say, 6 inches
different in height? How “big” is a 6-inch difference? That brings us back to
the standard deviation.
When it comes to high school students, you have a good idea of how
“big” a 6-inch difference is. But what does a 6-inch difference mean if you
are talking about the height of elephants? About the height of cats? It
depends. And the things it depends on are the average height and how much
height varies among the things you are measuring. A standard deviation gives
you a way of taking both the average and that variability into account, so that “6
inches” can be expressed in a way that means the same thing for high school students
relative to other high school students, elephants relative to other elephants, and cats relative to other cats.
How Do You Compute a Standard Deviation?
Suppose that your high school class consisted of just two people who were 66
inches and 70 inches. Obviously, the average is 68 inches. Just as obviously,
one person is 2 inches shorter than average, one person is 2 inches taller than
average. The standard deviation is a kind of average of the differences from
the mean—2 inches, in this example. Suppose you add two more people to
the class, one who is 64 inches and the other who is 72 inches. The mean
hasn’t changed (the two new people balance each other off exactly). But the
newcomers are each 4 inches different from the average height of 68 inches.
So the standard deviation, which measures the spread, has gotten bigger as
well. Now two people are 4 inches different from the average and two people
are 2 inches different from the average. That adds up to a total of 12 inches,
divided among four persons. The simple average of these differences from the
mean is three inches (12÷4), which is almost (but not quite) what the standard deviation is. To be precise, the standard deviation is calculated by squaring the deviations from the mean, then summing them, then finding their
average, then taking the square root of the result. In this example, two people
are 4 inches from the mean and two are 2 inches from the mean. The sum of
the squared deviations is 40 (i.e., 16+16+4+4). Their average is 10 (40÷4).
464 • APPENDIX 1
The square root of 10 is 3.16, which is the standard deviation for this example. The technical reasons for using the standard deviation instead of the
simple average of the deviations from the mean are not necessary to go into,
except that, in normal distributions, the standard deviation has wonderfully
convenient properties. If you are looking for a short, easy way to think of a
standard deviation, view it as the average difference from the mean.
As an example of how a standard deviation can be used to compare
apples and oranges, suppose we are looking at the Olympic women’s gymnastics team and men’s NBA basketball teams.You notice a woman who is 5 feet
6 inches and a man who is 7 feet. You know from watching gymnastics on
television that 5 feet 6 inches is tall for a woman gymnast, and 7 feet is tall
even for a basketball player. But you want to do better than a general impression. Just how unusual is the woman, compared to the average gymnast on the
U. S. women’s team, and how unusual is the man, compared to the average
basketball player on the U. S. men’s team?
We gather data on height among all the women gymnasts, and determine that the mean is 5 feet 1 inch with a standard deviation (SD) of 2 inches.
For the men basketball players, we find that the mean is 6 feet 6 inches and
the SD is 4 inches. Thus the woman who is 5 feet 6 inches is 2.5 standard
deviations taller than the average; the seven-foot man is only 1.5 standard
deviations taller than the average. These numbers—2.5 for the woman and
1.5 for the man—are called standard scores in statistical jargon. Now we have
an explicit numerical way to compare how different the two people are from
their respective averages, and we have a basis for concluding that the woman
who is 5 feet 6 inches is a lot taller relative to other female Olympic gymnasts
than a 7-foot man is relative to other NBA basketball players.
How Much More Different? Enter the Normal Distribution
Everyone has heard the phrase normal distribution or bell-shaped curve, or, as in
the title of a controversial book, bell curve. They all refer to a common way
that natural phenomena arrange themselves approximately. (The true normal
distribution is a mathematical abstraction, never perfectly observed in nature.)
If you look again at the distribution of high school boys that opened the
discussion, you will see the makings of a bell curve. If we added several thousand more boys to it, the kinks and irregularities would smooth out, and it
would actually get very close to a normal distribution. A perfect one looks
like the one in the figure below.
It makes sense that most things will be arranged in bell-shaped curves.
APPENDIX 1 • 465
Extremes tend to be rarer than the average. If that sounds like a tautology, it
is only because bell curves are so common. Consider height again. Seven feet
is “extreme” for humans. But if human height were distributed so that equal
proportions of people were 5 feet, 6 feet, and 7 feet tall, the extreme would
not be rarer than the average. It just so happens that the world hardly ever
works that way.
Bell curves (or close approximations to them) are not only common in
nature, they have a close mathematical affinity to the meaning of the standard
deviation. In any true normal distribution, no matter whether the elements
are the heights of basketball players, the diameters of screw heads, or the milk
production of cows, 68.3 percent of all the cases fall in the interval between
one standard deviation above the mean and one standard deviation below it.
In its mathematical form, the normal distribution extends to infinity in
both directions, never quite reaching the horizontal axis. But for all practical
purposes, when we are talking about populations of people, a normal distribution is about 6 standard deviations wide. The numbers below the axis in
the figure below designate the number of standard deviations above and
below the mean. As you can see, the line has virtually touched the surface at
±3 standard deviations.
Furthermore, there are some simple characteristics about these scores
that make them especially valuable. As you can see by looking at the figure
below, it makes intuitive sense to think of a 1 standard deviation difference as
A perfect bell curve
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
466 • APPENDIX 1
“large,”a 2 standard deviation difference as “very large,”and a 3 standard deviation difference as “huge.”This is an easy metric to remember. Specifically: a
person who is one standard deviation above the mean in IQ is at the 84th
percentile. Two standard deviations above the mean puts him at the 98th
percentile. Three standard deviations above the mean puts him at
the 99.9th percentile. A person who is one standard deviation below the
mean is at the 16th percentile. Two standard deviations below the mean puts
him at the 2nd percentile. Three standard deviations below the mean puts
him at the 0.1th percentile.
Why Not Just Use Percentiles to Begin With?
Why go to all the trouble of computing standard scores? Most people understand percentiles already. Tell them that someone is at the 84th percentile, and
they know right away what you mean. Tell them that he’s at the 99th
percentile, and they know what that means. Aren’t we just introducing an
unnecessary complication by talking about “standard scores”?
Thinking in terms of percentiles is convenient, and has its legitimate
uses. We often speak in terms of percentiles—or centiles, an almost identical
term. But they can also be highly misleading, because they are artificially
compressed at the “tails” of the distributions. It is a longer way from, say, the
98th centile to the 99th than from the 50th to the 51st. In a true normal
distribution, the distance from the 99th centile to the 100th (or, similarly,
from the 1st to the 0th) is infinite.
Consider two people who are at the 50th and 55th centiles in height.
Using a large representative sample from the National Longitudinal Study of
Youth (NLSY) as our estimate of the national American distribution of
height, their actual height difference is only half an inch. Consider another
two people who are at the 94th and 99th centiles on height—the identical
gap in terms of centiles. Their height difference is 3.1 inches, six times the
height difference of those at the 50th and 55th centiles. The farther out on
the tail of the distribution you move, the more misleading centiles become.
Standard scores reflect these real differences much more accurately than
do centiles. The people at the 50th and 55th centiles, only half an inch apart
in real height, have standard scores of 0 and .13. Compare that difference of
.13 standard deviation units to the standard scores of those at the 94th and
99th centiles: 1.55 and 2.33 respectively. In standard scores, their difference—
which is .78 standard deviation units—is six times as large, reflecting the sixfold difference in inches.
APPENDIX 1 • 467
CORRELATION AND REGRESSION
So much for describing a distribution of measurements. We now need to
consider dealing with the relationships between two or more distributions—
which is, after all, what scientists usually want to do. How, for example, is the
pressure of a gas related to its volume? The answer is the Boyle’s Law you
learned in high school science. In social science, the relationships between
variables are less clear cut and harder to unearth. We may, for example, be
interested in wealth as a variable, but how shall wealth be measured? Is it
yearly income, yearly income averaged over a period of years, the value of
one’s savings or possessions? And wealth, compared to many of the other
things social science would like to understand, is easy, reducible as it is to
dollars and cents.
But, beyond the problem of measurement, social science must cope
with sheer complexity. Our physical scientist colleagues may not agree, but
we believe it is harder to do science on human affairs than on inanimate
objects—so hard, in fact, that many people consider it impossible. We do not
believe it is impossible, but we recognize that it is rare that any human or
social relationship can be fully captured in terms of a single pair of variables,
such as that between the pressure and volume of a gas. In social science,
multiple relationships are the rule, not the exception.
For both of these reasons, the relations between social science variables
are typically less than perfect. They are often weak and uncertain. But they
are nevertheless real, and, with the right methods, they can be rigorously
examined.
Correlation and regression are the primary ways to quantify weak,
uncertain relationships. For that reason, the advances in correlational and
regression analysis since late 19C have provided the impetus to social science.
To understand what this kind of analysis is, we need to introduce the idea of
a scatter diagram.
A Scatter Diagram
We left your male high school classmates lined up by height, with you
looking down from the rafters. Now imagine another row of cards, laid out
along the floor at a right angle to the ones for height. This set of cards has
weights in pounds on them. Start with 90 pounds for the class shrimp, and in
10-pound increments, continue to add cards until you reach 250 pounds to
make room for the class giant. Now ask your classmates to find the point on
468 • APPENDIX 1
the floor that corresponds to both their height and weight (perhaps they’ll
insist on a grid of intersecting lines extending from the two rows of cards).
When the traffic on the gym floor ceases, you will see something like the
figure below.
A scatter diagram
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80
Height in Inches
Weight in Pounds
Some sort of relationship between height and weight is immediately
obvious. The heaviest boys tend to be the tallest; the lightest ones the shortest, and most of them are intermediate in both height and weight. Equally
obvious are the deviations from the trend that link height and weight.
The stocky boys appear as points above the mass; the skinny ones as points
below it. What we need now is some way to quantify both the trend and
the exceptions.
Correlations and regressions accomplish this in different ways. But before
we go on to discuss these terms, be assured that they are simple. Look at the
scatter diagram. You can see just by looking at the dots that as height
increases, so does weight, in an irregular way. Take a pencil (literally or imaginarily) and draw a straight, sloping line through the dots in a way that seems
to you to best reflect this upward-sloping trend. Now continue to read, and
see how well you have intuitively produced the basis for a correlation coefficient and a regression coefficient.
APPENDIX 1 • 469
The Correlation Coefficient
Modern statistics provide more than one method for measuring correlation,
but we confine ourselves to the one that is most important in both use and
generality: the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient (named after
Karl Pearson, the English mathematician and biometrician). To get at this
coefficient, let us first re-plot the graph of the class, replacing inches and
pounds with standard scores. The variables are now expressed in general
terms. Remember: Any set of measurements can be transformed similarly.
The next step on our way to the correlation coefficient is to apply a
formula (here dispensed with) that, in effect, finds the best possible straight
line passing through the cloud of points—the mathematically “best” version
of the line you just drew by intuition.
What makes it the “best”? Any line is going to be “wrong” for most of
the points. Take, for example, the boys who are 64 inches tall, and look at
their weights. Any sloping straight line is going to cross somewhere in the
middle of those weights, and will probably not cross any of the dots exactly.
For boys 64 inches tall, you want the line to cross at the point where the total
amount of the error is as small as possible. Taken over all the boys at all the
heights, you want a straight line that makes the sum of all the errors for all the
heights as small as possible. This “best-fit” is shown in the new version of the
scatter diagram shown on page 470, where both height and weight are
expressed in standard scores and the mathematical best-fitting line has been
superimposed.
This scatter diagram has (partly by serendipity) many lessons to teach
about how statistics relate to the real world. Here are a few of the main ones:
1. Notice the many exceptions. There is a statistically substantial relationship between height and weight, but, visually, the exceptions seem to dominate. So too with virtually all statistical relationships in the social sciences,
most of which are much weaker than this one.
2. Linear relationships don’t always seem to fit very well. The best-fit line
looks as if it is too shallow—notice the tall boys, and see how consistently the
line underpredicts how much they weigh. Given the information in the
diagram, this might be an optical illusion—many of the dots in the dense part
of the range are on top of each other, as it were, and thus it is impossible to
grasp visually how the errors are adding up—but it could also be that the relationship between height and weight is not linear.
3. Small samples have individual anomalies. Before we jump to the
conclusion that the straight line is not a good representation of the relation-
470 • APPENDIX 1
The “best-fit” line for a scatter diagram
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
Weight Expressed in Standard Scores
Height Expressed in Standard Scores
ship, we must remember that the sample consists of only 250 boys. An anomaly of this particular small sample is that one of the boys in the sample of 250
weighed 250 pounds. Eighteen-year-old boys are very rarely that heavy,
judging from the entire NLSY sample, only one or two per 10,000. And yet
one of those rarities happened to be picked up in a sample of 250. That’s the
way samples work.
4. But small samples are also surprisingly accurate, despite their individual anomalies. The relationship between height and weight shown by the
sample of 250 18-year-old males is identical to the third decimal place with
the relationship among all 6,068 males in the NLSY sample (the correlation
coefficient is .501 in both cases). This is closer than we have any right to
expect, but other random samples of only 250 generally produce correlations
that are within a few hundredths of the one produced by the larger sample.
(There are mathematics for figuring out what “generally” and “within a few
hundredths” mean, but we needn’t worry about them here.)
Bearing these basics in mind, let us go back to the sloping line in the
figure above. Out of mathematical necessity, we know several things about it.
First of all, it must pass through the intersection of the zeros (which, in stan-
APPENDIX 1 • 471
dard scores, correspond to the averages) for both height and weight.
Secondly, the line would have had exactly the same slope had height been the
vertical axis and weight the horizontal one.
Finally, and most significant, the slope of the best-fitting line cannot be
steeper than 1.0. The steepest possible best-fitting line, in other words, is one
along which one unit of change in height is exactly matched by one unit of
change in weight, clearly not the case in these data. Real data in the social
sciences never yield a slope that steep. Note that while the line in the graph
above goes uphill to the right, it would go downhill for pairs of variables that
are negatively correlated.
We focus on the slope of the best-fitting line because it is the correlation coefficient—in this case, equal to .50, which is quite large by the standards of variables used by social scientists. The closer it gets to ±1.0, the
stronger is the linear relationship between the standardized variables (the variables expressed as standard scores). When the two variables are mutually independent, the best-fitting line is horizontal; hence its slope is 0. Anything other
than 0 signifies a relationship, albeit possibly a very weak one.
Whatever the correlation coefficient of a pair of variables is, squaring
it yields another notable number. Squaring .50, for example, gives .25.
The significance of the squared correlation is that it tells us how much the
variation in weight would decrease if we could make everyone the same
height, or vice versa. If all the boys in the class were the same height, the variation in their weights would decline by 25 percent. Perhaps, if you have been
compelled to be around social scientists, you have heard the phrase “explains
the variance,” as in, for example, “Education explains 20 percent of the variance in income.” That figure comes from the squared correlation.
In general, the squared correlation is a measure of the mutual redundancy in a pair of variables. If they are highly correlated, they are highly
redundant in the sense that knowing the value of one of them places a narrow
range of possibilities for the value of the other. If they are uncorrelated or
only slightly correlated, knowing the value of one tells us nothing or little
about the value of the other.
Regression Coefficients
Correlation assesses the strength of a relationship between variables. But we
may want to know more about a relationship than merely its strength. We
may want to know what it is. We may want to know how much of an increase
472 • APPENDIX 1
in weight, for example, we should anticipate if we compare 66-inch boys
with 73-inch boys. Such questions arise naturally if we are trying to explain
a particular variable (e.g., annual income) in terms of the effects of another
variable (e.g., educational level). How much income is another year of
schooling worth? is just the sort of question that social scientists are always
trying to answer.
The standard method for answering it is regression analysis, which has
an intimate mathematical association with correlational analysis. If we had left
the scatter diagram with its original axes—inches and pounds—instead of
standardizing them, the slope of the best-fitting line would have been a
regression coefficient, rather than a correlation coefficient. For example,
the regression coefficient for weight regressed on height tells us that for
each additional inch in height, we can expect an increase of 3.9 pounds.
Or we could regress height on weight, and discover that each additional
pound of weight is associated with an increase of .065 inches in height.
Multiple Regression
Multiple regression analysis is the main way that social science deals with the
multiple relationships which are the rule in social science. To get a fix on
multiple regression, let us return to the high school gym for the last time.
Your classmates are still scattered about the floor. Now imagine a pole,
erected at the intersection of 60 inches and 90 pounds, marked in inches from
18 inches to 50 inches. For some inscrutable reason, you would like to know
the impact of both height and weight on a boy’s waist size. Since imagination
can defy gravity, you ask each boy to levitate until the soles of his shoes are
at the elevation that reads on the pole at the waist size of his trousers. In
general, the taller and heavier boys must rise the most, the shorter and slighter
ones the least, and most boys, middling in height and weight, will have
middling waist sizes as well. Multiple regression is a mathematical procedure
for finding that plane, slicing through the space in the gym, that minimizes
the aggregated distances (in this instance, along the waist size axis) between
the bottoms of the boys’ shoes and the plane.
The best-fitting plane will tilt upward toward heavy weights and tall
heights. But it may tilt more along the pounds axis than along the inches axis
or vice versa. It may tilt equally for each. The slope of the tilt along each of
these axes is again a regression coefficient. With two variables predicting a
third, as in this example, there are two coefficients. One of them tells us how
APPENDIX 1 • 473
much of an increase in trouser waist size is associated with a given increase in
weight, holding height constant; the other, how much of an increase in
trouser waist size is associated with a given increase in height, holding weight
constant.
With two variables predicting a third, we reach the limit of visual imagination. But the principle of multiple regression can be extended to any
number of variables. Income, for example, may be related, not just to education, but also to age, family background, IQ, personality, business conditions,
region of the country, and so on. The mathematical procedures will yield
coefficients for each of them, indicating again how much of a change in
income can be anticipated for a given change in any particular variable, with
all the others held constant.
APPENDIX 2
CONSTRUCTION OF
THE INVENTORIES AND
THE EMINENCE INDEX
Here as in the main text, I use the word inventory to refer to a collection
of persons who qualified as significant figures. This appendix describes
how and why those collections were determined. To avoid confusion, I will
use the word roster to refer to the entire list of persons mentioned by any
source. Category refers to the twenty types of accomplishment (e.g., chemistry, literature) for which inventories were prepared.
TIME FRAME
The period covered by the rosters of persons is –800 to 1950. The cutoff at
1950 included all persons who had reached the age of 40 by 1950. Persons
born after 1910 were included if their biographies included a major accomplishment that occurred prior to 1950.
ELIGIBILITY FOR AN INVENTORY
The rosters were compiled by listing everyone mentioned in a set of sources
selected for each category. The table on the next page shows the total
numbers of sources used to compile the inventories and the total number of
persons who were identified in any of the sources.
476 • APPENDIX 2
Total Sources and Persons by Category
Inventory Sources Persons
The Sciences
Astronomy 22 767
Biology 22 1,638
Chemistry 22 812
Earth Sciences 22 597
Physics 22 700
Mathematics 28 906
Medicine 20 1,080
Technology 19 1,139
Other* 22 137
Philosophy
China 13 136
India 13 313
The West 14 885
Music (Western since 1200) 17 2,508
Visual Arts
China 20 421
Japan 16 318
The West 13 2,248
Literature
Arab world 15 209
China 15 548
India 12 353
Japan 12 258
The West 20 3,821
Total 183† 19,794
* Persons classified as “other” in the scientific categories could
qualify as a significant figures, with an index score, for use in
analyses where the scientific categories were aggregated.
† Some sources were used for more than one category.
The roster includes many people whose contributions were peripheral.
Further, such people tended to be concentrated in the country of the source’s
author. For example, a history of literature prepared by an American is likely
to mention more peripheral American writers than, say, peripheral German
writers. The task was to develop selection rules for establishing a subset of
persons who plausibly belonged in the analysis and had roughly equal probability of being identified regardless of their nationality.
An encyclopedic source was defined as one containing more than 50
percent of all the names in the roster. The parent population was defined as all
APPENDIX 2 • 477
persons in the roster who were mentioned in at least two sources, one of
which had to be a non-encyclopedic source. The parent population was used
to determine qualifying sources, defined as sources that (1) purported to contain
broad and representative coverage of the field in question, and (2) contained
a large enough number of names so that it would not artificially constrict the
number of persons who might qualify as significant figures.
An examination of the distribution of coverage in the sources revealed
that the lower end for well-regarded histories of a field had a cluster of
sources that contained 18–20 percent of the parent population. A qualifying
source was defined as one that contained 18 percent of all the persons in the
parent population. The next table shows the number of qualifying sources
and the size of the parent populations in each inventory.
Qualified Sources and Parent Populations
No. of No. in
Qualified Parent
Inventory Sources Population
The Sciences
Astronomy 15 340
Biology 14 683
Chemistry 14 478
Earth Sciences 9 270
Physics 16 421
Mathematics 16 626
Medicine 13 540
Technology 15 848
Philosophy
China 13 88
India 13 181
The West 14 473
Music (Western since 1200) 13 1,571
Visual Arts
China 10 280
Japan 11 182
The West 12 1,232
Literature
Arab world 15 91
China 12 304
India 12 115
Japan 11 182
The West 13 1,918
Total 10,823
478 • APPENDIX 2
The minimum number of qualifying sources for any inventory was 9,
the maximum was 16, and the median was 13.
CLASSIFYING SIGNIFICANT
AND MAJOR FIGURES
The set of qualifying sources was then used to determine whether a person
was classified as a significant or major figure.
The phrase significant figures is intended to denote those who are important enough to the development of a field that a well-versed student of that
field is likely to be familiar with them. Significant figures are operationally
defined as those mentioned in at least 50 percent of the qualified sources for
which a given person was eligible (i.e., the source in question covered the
period during which, and geographical area in which, the person in question
was active).
Major figures is intended to capture the subset of people who are crucial
to understanding the development of a field. The initial guideline for designating someone as a major figure was that he be mentioned in virtually any
comprehensive history or biographical dictionary about a field. The operational definition of “virtually all” was at least 90 percent of the eligible
sources.
Before implementing these criteria, another choice had to be made:
Should all the qualifying sources be used, or a subset of them? The question
arises because the coverage in the sources varied widely. The encyclopedic
sources included 75 percent and upwards of the population of names, while
even a large and comprehensive history might contain as few as 18 percent of
the population. This variation was in itself useful—the encyclopedic sources
were valuable in identifying the universe, while the more selective sources
were valuable for providing the basis to discriminate between central and
peripheral figures. But while the sources for every inventory represented a
mix, the precise distribution of the mix was unavoidably different across
inventories. Some inventories had several sources bunched in comprehensiveness of their coverage while others had sources that were more evenly
distributed across the range.
It was clear that the persons identified as significant and major could
vary depending on the distribution of the sources, but it was not obvious
a priori how sensitive the results would be to differences in distributions. I
therefore calculated the sets of significant and major figures that would be
APPENDIX 2 • 479
produced according to three alternative rules for including sources. The first
alternative was to use all the qualified sources, which in effect meant sources
with coverage of 18–96 percent of the population. The second alternative
restricted the sources to those with coverage of 18–70 percent of the population, in effect eliminating discrepancies in the distributions caused by differences in the number of encyclopedic sources. The third alternative restricted
the sources to ones with coverage of 18–50 percent of the population,
thereby excluding the most encyclopedic histories and focusing on “normal”
histories with extensive but by no means exhaustive coverage of the persons
in a given field.
The next table shows the results of the exercise. Note that some of the
inventories were augmented with additional sources after the exercise was
conducted, hence the lack of correspondence with final totals of significant
figures presented elsewhere.
Alternative Decision Rules for Selecting Significant Figures
Qualified Sources Used in the Selection
All Those Those
(18% with 18% with 18%
to 96% to 70% to 50%
Inventory Coverage) Coverage Coverage
Science, Worldwide 701 714 653
Mathematics, Worldwide 196 216 164
Medicine, Worldwide 148 160 145
Technology, Worldwide 195 182 182
Philosophy, Chinese and Indian 76 55 49
Philosophy, Western 149 133 118
Literature, Chinese and Indian 107 106 88
Literature, Western 817 664 598
Art, Chinese 100 106 81
Art, Western 482 439 360
Music, Western 523 650 508
Total 3,672 3,365 2,946
A comparison of the first two columns of results shows that the elimination of the encyclopedic sources usually had little effect on the estimate of
significant figures. The table does show a good reason not to use a highly
restricted selection of sources (18–50 percent coverage): as the number of
sources drops, an artifact increases—the artifact being a consequence of
480 • APPENDIX 2
requiring that someone be mentioned in 50 percent of the sources. With, say,
15 sources versus 16 sources, the artifact is small. In the 15-source case, the de
facto requirement for being designated a significant figure is not 50 percent
but 53 percent. But if it is a difference between 7 and 8 sources, the de facto
requirement in the 7-source case is 57 percent.
The next table shows the parallel results for the selection of major
figures.
Alternative Decision Rules for Selecting
Major Figures
Qualified Sources Used in the Selection
All Those Those
(18% with 18% with 18%
to 96% to 70% to 50%
Inventory Coverage) Coverage Coverage
Science, Worldwide
Mathematics, Worldwide
Medicine, Worldwide
Technology, Worldwide
Philosophy, Chinese and Indian
Philosophy, Western
Literature, Chinese and Indian
Literature, Western
Art, Chinese
Art, Western
Music, Western
227
57
32
29
26
40
26
250
59
156
180
227
57
32
29
29
40
14
251
60
188
271
241
59
33
29
37
41
29
255
81
192
274
Total 1,183 1,198 1,271
For the “major figures” category, the differences produced by the three
decision rules are small, with the total of 1,183 for all qualified sources being
fractionally smaller than the largest number (1,271) produced by the most
restrictive decision rule. It is to be expected that the rule using the largest
number of sources would produce the smallest number, given the criterion
(at least all but one). The noteworthy feature of these results is how small the
difference is. The statistical advantages of additional sources meant that,
absent a reason not to, all qualified sources should be included.
APPENDIX 2 • 481
CREATING THE INDEX SCORES
The categorizations of significant and major are based on whether a person is
mentioned in a given source. The index scores are based on a quantitative
measure of the amount of attention accorded to a person in a given source.
Index scores were computed only for significant figures.
THE INDEX SCORES
for the separate scientific disciplines instead of lumping them
SUPPLEMENTAL SOURCES FOR COMPUTING
After the initial round of data collection, an inspection of the inventories revealed the desirability of augmenting the sources to provide
better national or linguistic balance, or simply to permit finer
discrimination within smaller subsets (e.g., computing index scores
together). At this point, however, analysis of the existing datasets had
revealed that they followed the Lotka phenomenon, and that ample
data had already been collected for the basic task of discriminating
significant figures from non-significant ones. It was further clear that
when data for all the names in a major source were entered, most of
that effort was wasted on people who would never enter into the
analysis of significant figures. These later supplemental sources, as I
shall term them, were therefore used to obtain data only on the
persons classified as significant from the initial set of sources. The
supplemental sources were not used to define the parent population
or for any purpose other than to provide additional data for the
computation of index scores.
Index Scores for the Inventories
The metric for scores from individual sources. Three methods were used to
score the attention given to a person, with minor modifications to accommodate the peculiarities of a particular source. For a standard history, the
measure usually consisted of the number of unique pages after a person’s
name in the index. For a chronology of events, the measure consisted of the
total number of events involving that person. For biographical dictionaries,
which are typically laid out in double columns, the measure was the amount
482 • APPENDIX 2
of space devoted to a person’s entry, expressed as the number of columns to
the nearest tenth.
These different scores needed to be converted to a common metric that
fairly represented their relative weights. “Relative weights” raises complicated
issues. To be mentioned in 5 pages of a 400-page history has a different meaning from being mentioned in 5 pages in a multi-volume history totaling
3,000 pages. The first criterion for a scoring metric was therefore that it
express the unusualness of a score relative to the coverage represented by a
given source.
The most straightforward way to deal with this problem is to treat each
source as a distribution that adds up to 1. Suppose, for example, that we are
counting the number of page mentions in the index of a history of science,
and that index includes 200 scientists with a total of 650 page references. The
score of any one of those scientists is his number of mentions divided by 650.
Scientists who are part of the inventory because they are mentioned in other
sources, but not mentioned in this one, get a score of zero.
This procedure provides a natural weight within each source; however,
it also gives a natural way of interpreting the overall index. The summed
scores for the qualified sources used in computing the index scores for,
say, mathematics, may be thought of as the total attention given to the
world’s qualifying mathematicians in that set of sources. Insofar as it may be
demonstrated that those sources provide a representative estimate of the
underlying “real” distribution of attention in the world’s histories and
chronologies for mathematics, it is easy to compute an endless variety of
aggregations—the percentage of the distribution devoted to women mathematicians for example, or Scandinavian mathematicians, or mathematicians
born from 1700 to 1750.
Treatment of missing data. Operationalizing the concept behind the
index scores with a real set of sources means dealing with the problem of
missing data. Data from any given source could be missing if that source
covered a limited time period—1200 to 1930 in one case, nothing after 1900
in another, to take two examples. One option was to throw out all the sources
that did not provide comprehensive coverage, but this would have meant
discarding a great deal of valuable data. The Dictionary of Scientific Biography,
for example, is probably the most authoritative single source of its kind, but it
does not include anyone who was still living when it was compiled in the
latter half of 20C, meaning that dozens of scientists who did important work
in the first half of 20C have no entry in the DoSB. But to throw out the data
for the 5,000+ scientists who were in the DoSB would be extravagant indeed.
APPENDIX 2 • 483
I therefore chose to use sources with truncated chronological coverage,
through the following procedures.
Establishing comparable denominators. The basis of the score for any
person is a ratio: a measure of the attention given to that person divided by
the total attention given to all persons in that volume. For any pair of sources
with comprehensive chronological coverage (i.e., from –800 to 1950), the
fact that the two sources went into different levels of detail, and thus had
different denominators, is not a problem. On the contrary, it provides a natural weighting scheme, as discussed earlier: 5 pages devoted to a person in a
history 400 pages long appropriately results a higher score (5/400=.0125)
than five pages out of 3,000 (5/3,000=.0017).
In contrast, sources with different chronological scope create incomparable scores. Now suppose we are considering two science histories, Source
A and Source B, each exactly 500 pages long. Source A is restricted to the
period from 1885–1950 while Source B covers 1200–1930. Marie Curie is
mentioned on 7 pages in each volume. This time, the fact that the two sources
yield the same score (7/500=.014) is an artifact—one history covered 730
years of science, the other covered only 60. But, further complicating
matters, the level of scientific activity in that particular 60 years was much
higher than the level during the 730 years. How are the two scores to be
made comparable?
In both cases, the objective is to calculate the best estimate of the
denominator that the source would have had if it had covered the entire
period from –800 to 1950. The method I used was first to conduct an analysis of events limited to sources that did have such comprehensive coverage.
That analysis yielded the distribution of the activity in any given span of
years. If, for example, the sources with comprehensive coverage from –800 to
1950 devoted 40 percent of their attention to the period from 1885–1950,
the best estimate is that the 500 pages in Source A equal 40 percent of the
total pages Source A would have had if it had covered the entire period. The
imputed denominator for Source A is thus
500
-------- = 1,250. .4
Imputed scores. Even after comparable denominators have been calculated, a problem remains. For example, Ptolemy had scores from all of the
sources that covered his time period, but was missing data for one source that
covered events from 1200–1930. This time, the task is to ask of the missing
data, “What is the best estimate of the total score person X would have
484 • APPENDIX 2
received if he had no missing scores?” The methods for imputing scores to
missing data can be complex, but after experimenting with alternatives I
chose a simple procedure that is intuitively understandable: Assume that
Ptolemy’s score from the missing source would be equal to the median of the
observed scores (median rather than mean, to minimize the effect of an aberrant very high or very low score). Imputed scores were computed only for
sources that covered a period including more than 75 percent of the total
activity in that field, as determined from sources with universal coverage.
The metric for the index score. A raw score was computed by summing
the comparable scores from the individual sources, then discarding the lowest
and highest score, and taking the mean of the remaining scores. To be easily
interpretable, the raw score needed to be transformed to a familiar range.
One useful conversion is to express the raw score as a percentage of the
total content of that inventory. Thus, for example Nietzsche’s raw score of
.014 may be interpreted as meaning that in the set of sources used for the
Western philosophy inventory, Nietzsche accounted for 1.4 percent of the
discussion of significant figures in Western philosophy. This interpretation is
only roughly accurate, because it is made up of a combination of measures of
actual length of text devoted to a person (in sources such as biographical
dictionaries) and index page citations (in histories), or numbers of events (in
chronologies), which are not based on length of text, but it is a useful rough
approximation for thinking about the results.
While useful for drawing some kinds of comparisons among figures, the
raw score is not a good metric for comparing people across inventories,
however. Philosophy happens to be a field that has been dominated by a few
names. Literature, at the other extreme, is a field in which expert attention
has been much more diffuse. Also, expressing the index score as a percentage
of total expert attention is not directly interpretable. Is 1.4 percent a big
number or a small one? We cannot tell without more information about the
distribution.
In seeking a metric that is comparable across inventories, one consideration is that the raw scores are hyperbolically distributed (see Chapter 6).
Thus metrics based on a normal distribution, such as IQ or SAT scales, are
not appropriate. A second consideration is that any transformation of the raw
scores must express the individual score relative to its distribution within the
inventory, to preserve comparability across inventories. To satisfy both
considerations, I chose a 100-point scale in which the upper bound is the raw
index score of the top-rated person within that inventory, and a score repre-
� — �
APPENDIX 2 • 485
sents the proportion of an individual’s score to that top score. The algorithm
for computing what I will subsequently refer to simply as the index scores is
thus simply
ai . 100
A
where ai is the raw index score of the i
th subject, and A is the largest raw index
score in the inventory.
Inventory-Specific Issues
For a few of the indexes, peculiarities specific to the nature of the inventory
indicated modifications to the procedures described above.
Combining source types for the science and technology inventories. The
science and technology sources consisted of three kinds: chronologies of
important events, histories, and biographical dictionaries. The virtue of the
chronologies is that they generally gave more complete enumerations of an
individual’s accomplishments; the virtue of the histories and biographical
dictionaries was that they gave more space to the most important accomplishments. To prevent one type of source from dominating in the calculation
of the index score, the sources were grouped—the chronological sources in
one set and the history/biographical dictionary sources in the other—and
given equal weight in the calculation of the index scores.
Index scores for the categories within science and technology. When
computing index scores for the categories within the hard sciences (astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth sciences, and physics), it was necessary to add
three steps to the normal procedures. First, sources had to be evaluated
according to their coverage of the category. Thus a source eligible to determine significant figures for biology had to contain references to at least 18
percent of the people in the parent population for biology. Second, it was
necessary to subdivide the events used to compute scores for the event-based
sources. Thus, for example, Christiaan Huygens is represented by 18 events in
the events-based sources. These consisted of 8 under the heading of physics,
2 under mathematics, 5 under engineering, and 3 under astronomy. In
computing index scores for the physics inventory, only the events classified
under physics were used. Third, the results from the events-based sources
were used to weight the results from the biographical and historical sources.
Continuing with the example of Huygens: Given his many interests, the
486 • APPENDIX 2
measures of space devoted to him in the histories and biographical dictionaries were split as well, with part of it devoted to his achievements in astronomy,
part to his achievements in physics, and so on. It was impractical to estimate
the division of this textual discussion directly, given the number of sources
and persons involved. To obtain a proxy measure, it was assumed that the division of textual discussion in the histories and biographical dictionaries was
comparable to the division of attention in the six event-based sources with
comprehensive coverage across time (Hellemans and Bunch 1988, Asimov
1994, Bruno 1997, Mount and List 1994, Adlington 1999, and Ochoa and
Corey 1997). For Huygens, these six sources contained a total of 45 citations
spread among the 18 events. Seventeen of these 45, or 38 percent, involved
the events classified under physics. The scores for the histories and biographical dictionaries were thus multiplied by .38 for purposes of calculating their
contribution to the physics index.
For the categories of mathematics, medicine, and technology, additional
sources were added dealing specifically with those subjects. Procedures for
computing index scores otherwise paralleled those for the categories in the
hard sciences.
Western literature. Histories and biographical dictionaries of Western
literature are much more affected by the language of the author than are
sources for Western music art and visual art, and for an obvious reason. To
repeat the point made in Chapter 5: A German can listen to a work byVivaldi
as easily as he can listen to one by Bach, and an Englishman can look at a
painting by Monet as easily as one by Constable. The same cannot be said of
literature, because of the language barrier. German historians of literature
give markedly more attention to German authors than others, English historians to English authors, and so on. It is not just a matter of national chauvinism. Spanish historians of literature give more attention to New World
literature written in Spanish than do historians of other nationalities.
Even if the sources consisted of one source per language group, a problem would remain: if none of the sources are from, say, Hungary, Hungarian
literature is at a disadvantage compared to literatures written in French,
German, Italian, Spanish, and English, each of which does have its own
“advocate.”The solution was to base the selection of significant figures and
computation of the index scores on sources not written in the language of the
literary figure. Thus Jane Austen’s selection and index score are based exclusively on the attention paid to her in non-English sources, Racine’s in nonFrench sources, and so on.
APPENDIX 2 • 487
HOW MUCH CAN BE MADE OF THE INDEX SCORES?
Any time that social scientists start to attach numbers to qualitative concepts
like eminence, three questions are bound to arise. Could someone assemble
other data that would tell a different story? Couldn’t another scoring system,
apparently just as plausible, produce indexes that would tell a different story?
Is there reason to think that these indexes reflect something important in the
real world? The third question is discussed at length in Chapter 5. Some
comments about the first two follow.
Could someone assemble other data that would tell a different story?
Underlying the question is the statistical concept of reliability. Applying it to
the case of the indexes, think of each individual source as providing an imperfect measure of the construct called eminence. If it is true that any two of
these sources really are imperfect measures of the same construct, they should
be statistically correlated.
Now suppose we have not just two sources, but a dozen, all of which
are tapping imperfectly into the same construct of eminence and all of which
are intercorrelated. At this point we have achieved some safety in numbers—
the average of all dozen of these sources is not much affected by any one of
them, so any particular anomalous datum has little effect on the overall index
score. But this still does not tell us the extent to which the index score is
internally consistent—that it will look pretty much the same even if we had
not happened to pick that exact set of sources.
The statistical measure of reliability that applies to this case is known
as Cronbach’s alpha (_) after its creator, psychometrician Lee Cronbach
(Cronbach,1951). It is technically defined as the square of the correlation
between the index scores and the underlying factor, with factor referring to
the statistical construct employed in factor analysis. To understand the sense
of the statistic, supposing that we randomly select just half of our sources and
compute an index based just on them. Suppose we then compute an index
based on the other half of the sources. Then we compute the correlation
coefficient between the two.The higher the correlation, the more confidence
we can have that our index is reliable. But what if the way we chanced to split
the sources into two just happened to be the split that produced a high correlation? It would be even better if we computed the correlation between every
possible combination of split halves, then took the average of all those correlations. That number is roughly what is represented by _.
488 • APPENDIX 2
The table below shows _ for the inventories in Human Accomplishment.
Reliability Coefficients by Inventory
Inventory Cronbach’s _
The Sciences
Astronomy .92
Biology .88
Chemistry .93
Earth Sciences .81
Physics .95
Mathematics .93
Medicine .87
Technology .84
Philosophy
China .96
India .93
The West .96
Music (Western since 1200) .97
Visual Arts
China .91
Japan .93
The West .95
Literature
Arab world .88
China .89
India .91
Japan .86
The West .95
Median .93
A technical complication arises in computing _ for the inventories in
which imputed scores are used: the reliability coefficients are based in part
not on the actual correlations among the sources, but the correlations after
imputed data have been substituted for missing values. This would create a
problem of interpretation if the use of imputed data inflated the correlations.
Any such effect is so small as to be immaterial, however. Consider the inventory for which imputed data is by far the greatest potential problem,Western
literature. Each source in the Western literature index uses imputed data for
APPENDIX 2 • 489
all the authors who wrote in the language of that source. This creates a situation in which hundreds of the 835 cases used to compute the bivariate correlations use imputed data.
The effects of this may be checked by computing pairwise correlations
based only on cases for which both sources have valid scores (for example, the
pairwise correlation between a French and English source omits all the cases
involving French and English authors). When the pairwise correlation matrix
is prepared for the Western literature sources, the mean correlation is .61. The
mean correlation in the matrix used to calculate the reliability coefficient
(which includes imputed data) is .63. In the other inventories, where imputed
data are involved in many fewer cases than in the Western literature inventory,
the differences (both plus and minus) are even smaller. The reliability coefficients presented in the table on page 448 are not exact for the inventories that
employ imputed data, but there is no reason to think they are more than fractionally different from reliabilities that would have been obtained from
sources with uniformly complete coverage.
The lowest reliability is for the earth sciences inventory (.81). Overall,
13 of the 20 inventories have reliabilities of .90 or higher, with a median
reliability of .93. These very high reliabilities imply that similar results
would be produced by any other set of histories, chronologies, and biographical dictionaries that meet basic criteria of representativeness and
comprehensiveness.
Could another scoring system produce indexes
that would tell a different story?
The choices to be made when creating an index make only a limited amount
of difference in the outcomes. This is not to say that the right choices
aren’t important, but that the data used for these inventories’ analysis are
remarkably robust. The table below illustrates this point by showing what
happens when we take the nine sources for the Western art index that had
comprehensive coverage from –800 to 1950 and create index scores using five
different methods. One (percentage of source total) is the procedure selected for
use in the book. The second (z scores) is based on standard scores computed
directly from the mean and standard deviation of a given source, a procedure
that gives large weights to extreme scores. The third (percentiles) is based on
percentiles, a procedure that gives no extra weight to extreme scores. The
fourth (binary) throws away all the interval data within each measure and
assigns “1” if a source mentions a given person, “0” if it does not, and adds
490 • APPENDIX 2
up the eight 1s or 0s to reach a total. The fifth is the most unrealistic of all.
It simply adds up the raw scores in their original metrics. The table shows
two correlation matrixes: The correlations of the scores produced by the
five methods, and the correlations of the rank orders produced by the five
methods.
Correlations Among Five Different Scoring Methods
for the Western Art Inventory
Correlation matrix for the interval scores (Pearson’s r)
1 2 3 4 5
1 Percentage of source total 1.00 1.00 0.81 0.72 1.00
2 z score 1.00 1.00 0.83 0.74 0.99
3 Percentile 0.81 0.83 1.00 0.97 0.81
4 Binary sum 0.72 0.74 0.97 1.00 0.72
5 Raw sum 1.00 0.99 0.81 0.72 1.00
Correlation matrix for the rank-ordered scores (Spearman’s Rho)
1 2 3 4 5
1 Percentage of source total 1.00 0.99 0.98 0.93 0.99
2 z score 0.99 1.00 0.98 0.93 0.98
3 Percentile 0.98 0.98 1.00 0.96 0.97
4 Binary sum 0.93 0.93 0.96 1.00 0.93
5 Raw sum 0.99 0.98 0.97 0.93 1.00
These five scoring methods, which are extremely different in their
assumptions and in their arithmetic, produced correlations often approaching
unity. Even the binary sum, a method that allows for only nine scores (0
through 8), had a correlation of at least .72 with the other four methods.
Perhaps the most striking results come for the method that simply summed
the raw scores. It had a correlation of .995 (rounding to 1.00 at two decimal
places) with the 100-point score actually used in the book, and a correlation
of .993 with the z-score method. Turning to the rank-order correlations, the
lowest correlation in the matrix (between binary sum and raw sum) is .93.
These results do not mean that all the effort to produce comparable scores
across sources was a waste of time. But if the issue is the overall statistical
results that would be yielded from the different scoring methods, the relevant
observation is that almost any scoring system will produce similar results.
APPENDIX 3
INVENTORY
SOURCES
The first requirement for any source used in an inventory was that it
purport to be a balanced and comprehensive account of the category in
question. Sources that were explicitly selective in their treatment of the
subject were not used.
Sources were sought in the form of histories, chronologies of events,
anthologies, encyclopedias, and biographical dictionaries. Ideally, a source
would be used both to identify significant figures and to compute index
scores, but often a source would be suitable for one of those uses but not
both. For example, an anthology of literature could often be used to identify
significant figures, because it purported to include selections from a comprehensive selection of authors, but it could not be used to compute index
scores, because the length of a passage has no relationship to the eminence of
the author (e.g., representative samples of a poet’s poems tend to take up a lot
less space than a representative sample of a novelist’s prose). Other sources,
often comparatively short histories of a field, were suitable for computing
index scores, but contained such a small proportion of all the potentially
significant figures that using them to identify significant figures would unduly
restrict the population. After the significant figures had been identified, additional sources were used to expand the data for the computation of index
scores. In such cases, data was entered only on those persons who were
already in the inventories.
In the following lists, sources used to identify significant figures have a
Q (for qualifying source) after their entry. Sources used to compute index
scores have an I (for index source) after their entry.
492 • APPENDIX 3
PHILOSOPHY
Separate philosophy inventories were prepared for China, India, and the West.
The Western philosophy inventory included thinkers from the Arab world.
The philosophy inventories include persons who are described in the sources
as philosophers or theologians. In the Chinese and Indian inventories, these
categories include Confucian, Daoist, Hindu, and Buddhist thinkers. In the
Western inventory, they include Christian and Islamic thinkers. People who
were religious leaders, notably Jesus and Muhammad, were excluded, as were
persons who were primarily ecclesiastics rather than theologians. The exception to this rule is Buddha, whose teachings I judge to be primarily philosophical rather than religious in content.
It should be remembered that the sources used to compile the inventory were exclusively ones about philosophy. Thus the attention paid to religious thinkers largely reflects the degree to which their work had impact on
philosophical issues, not their importance to their respective religions.
The philosophy inventory excludes persons whose writings primarily
involve economics, political science (as opposed to political philosophy),
sociology, or psychology. Figures such as Adam Smith and Karl Marx are thus
not part of the philosophy inventory. Political figures are part of the inventory
only insofar as they also had impact on political philosophy. Thus Thomas
Jefferson is part of the philosophy inventory while George Washington is not.
Philosophy sources with worldwide coverage
Encyclopedia Britannica. (China and India: I. Not used for the West)
T. Hayashi. 1971. Tetsugaku Jiten (Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Tokyo: Heibon-sha.
(India and the West: QI. Not used for China)
A. L. Kroeber. 1944. Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. (India and the West: QI. China: Q)
J.-F. Mattei, ed. 1998. Les Oeuvres Philosophiques Dictionnaire. 3 vols. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France. (India and the West: QI. China: Q)
J. C. Plott. 1989. Global History of Philosophy. 5 vols. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
(India and the West: QI. China: Q)
S. Radhakrishnan. 1953. History of Philosophy Western and Eastern. 2 vols. London:
George Allen and Unwin. (QI)
B.-A. Scharfstein. 1998. A Comparative History of World Philosophy: From the
Upanishads to Kant. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. (QI)
N. Smart. 1999. World Philosophies. London: Routledge. (QI)
APPENDIX 3 • 493
Philosophy sources specific to China
W. T. de Bary, W.-T. Chan, and B. Watson, eds. 1963. Sources of Chinese Tradition.
New York: Columbia University Press. (QI)
W.-T. Chan. 1963. A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. (QI)
C. B. Day. 1962. The Philosophers of China: Classical and Contemporary. New York:
Philosophical Library. (QI)
J. M. Koller. 1985. Oriental Philosophies. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. (QI)
K. S. Murty. 1976. Far Eastern Philosophies. Mysore: Prasaranga. (QI)
L. C. Wu. 1986. Fundamentals of Chinese Philosophy. New York: University Press of
America. (QI)
F. Yu-Lan. 1952–1953. A History of Chinese Philosophy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. (QI)
Philosophy sources specific to India
S. Chatterjee and D. Datta. 1968. An Introduction to Indian Philosophy. Calcutta:
University of Calcutta. (QI)
D. Chattopadhyaya. 1964. Indian Philosophy: A Popular Introduction. New Delhi:
People’s Publishing House. (QI)
E. Frauwallner. 1974. History of Indian Philosophy. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. (Q)
R. King. 1999. Indian Philosophy: An Introduction to Hindu and Buddhist Thought.
New York: Georgetown University Press. (QI)
J. M. Koller. 1985. Oriental Philosophies. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. (QI)
K. H. Potter. 1970. The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophy. 8 vols. New Delhi:
American Institute of Indian Studies. (QI)
R. Puligandla. 1975. Fundamentals of Indian Philosophy. New York: Abingdon. (QI)
C. Sharma. 1960. A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy. London: Rider &
Company. (Q)
Philosophy sources specific to the West
M. Buhr and G. Klaus. 1970. Philosophisches Wörterbuch. 2 vols. Berlin. (QI)
F. Copleston. 1975. A History of Philosophy. 8 vols. Westminster, MD: Newman
Press. (QI)
K. Jaspers. 1995. The Great Philosophers. 4 vols. New York: Harcourt, Brace &
World. (Q)
A. Kenny. 1994. The Oxford History of Western Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. (QI)
494 • APPENDIX 3
W. I. Matson. 1987. A New History of Philosophy. 2 vols. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. (QI)
B. Russell. 1945. A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon & Schuster.
(QI)
R. Tarnas. 1991. The Passion of the Western Mind: Understanding the Ideas that Have
Shaped Our World View. New York: Ballantine Books. (QI)
THE LITERATURE INVENTORIES
Separate inventories were prepared for the Arab world, China, India, Japan,
and the West. All the inventories include writers of fiction, drama, poetry, and
nonfiction other than philosophy. Persons could qualify for both the philosophy and literature inventories if their writings included important work
outside philosophy.
In the Arab world, China, and India, genres and styles of literature
exhibited a sharp break between the traditional and modern eras. Many of
the best sources covered only one period or the other. Even among those
sources that covered the entire history, it was dubious that equal weight was
given to both. It was feasible to identify significant figures on both sides of
the break (when the criterion for qualification is based on the mention of an
individual, regardless of length), but not to compute index scores across the
break. Index scores for the Arab world and China are thus limited to significant figures who were active prior to 1800. For India, index scores are computed only for significant figures who were active prior to 1600. Because
sources that covered literatures written in both Arabic and Persian seemed to
indicate a tilt toward the former that was likely to be artifactual (i.e., the
authors were treating Persian literature as secondary for reasons other than
literary merit), I decided to limit index scores to authors who wrote in
Arabic, although significant figures who wrote in Persian are identified.
Literature sources with worldwide coverage
Encyclopedia Britannica. (QI for the Arab world and India, I for China and Japan.
Not used for the West.)
P. Gioan. 1961. Histoire Générale des Littératures. 3 vols. Paris: Librairie Aristide
Quillet. (Q for the Arab world; QI for the others)
R. Goring. 1994. Larousse Dictionary of Writers. Edinburgh: Larousse. (QI for India
and the West; Q for the Arab world and Japan. Not used for China)
APPENDIX 3 • 495
F. J. B. Jansen, H. Stangerup, and O.P.H. Traustedt. 1974. Verdens Litteratur Historie.
12 vols. Copenhagen: Politikens Forlag. (QI for all)
A. L. Kroeber. 1944. Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. (Q for the West. QI for all the others)
R. Queneau. 1958. Histoire des Littératures. 3 vols. Paris: Gallimard. (Q for the
Arab world, I for China and the West, QI for India)
M. de Riquer and J.M. Valverde. 1984. Historia de la Literatura Universal. 10 vols.
(Q for the Arab world. QI for all the others.)
Literature sources specific to the Arab world
J.-M. Abd-el-Jalil. 1943. Histoire de la Littérature Arabe. St.-Germain: G.-P.
Maisonneuve. (QI)
R. Allen. 2000. An Introduction to Arabic Literature. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press. (QI)
F. F. Arbuthnot. 1890. Arabic Authors: A Manual of Arabian History and Literature.
London: Darf Publishers. (Q)
H. A. R. Gibb. 1963. Arabic Literature: An Introduction. London: Oxford University
Press. (QI)
C. Huart. 1903. A History of Arab Literature. London: William Heinemann. (QI)
R. A. Nicholson. 1941. A Literary History of the Arabs. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press. (QI)
J. Vernet. 1967. Literatura Árabe. Barcelona: Editorial Labor, SA. (QI)
G. Wiet. 1966. Introduction a la Littérature Arabe. Paris: G.-P. Maissonneuve et
Larose. (QI)
Literature sources specific to China
C. Birch. 1972. Anthology of Chinese Literature. 2 vols. New York: Grove Press. (Q)
W. Idema and L. Haft. 1997. A Guide to Chinese Literature. Ann Arbor: Center for
Chinese Studies, University of Michigan. (QI)
O. Kaltenmark. 1948. La Littérature Chinoise. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.
W. McNaughton. 1974. Chinese Literature:An Anthology from the Earliest Times to the
Present Day. Rutland,VT: Charles E. Tuttle Co. (Q)
L. Ming. 1964. A History of Chinese Literature. New York: John Day Co. (QI)
S. Owen. 1996. An Anthology of Chinese Literature: Beginnings to 1911. New York:
W. W. Norton & Co. (Q)
C. Shou-Yi. 1961. Chinese Literature: A Historical Introduction. New York: Ronald
Press Co. (QI)
496 • APPENDIX 3
L. Wu-Chi. 1966. An Introduction to Chinese Literature. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press. (QI)
Literature sources specific to India
S. C. Banerji. 1989. A Companion to Sanskrit Literature. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
(QI)
K. Chaitanya. 1975. A New History of Sanskrit Literature. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press. (QI)
H. H. Gowen. 1968. A History of Indian Literature. New York: Greenwood Press.
(QI)
L. Renou. 1951. Les Littératures de l’Inde. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
(QI)
M. Winternitz. 1933. A History of Indian Literature. 2 vols. New York: Russell &
Russell. (QI)
Literature sources specific to Japan
J. I. Bryan. 1970. The Literature of Japan. Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press.
S. Kato. 1997. A History of Japanese Literature from the Man’yoshu to Modern Times.
Richmond, UK: Japan Library.
D. Keene. 1993. Seeds in the Heart: Japanese Literature from Earliest Times to the Late
Sixteenth Century. New York: Henry Holt & Co.
D. Keene. 1976. World Within Walls: Japanese Literature of the Pre-Modern Era,
1600–1867. New York: Grove Press.
D. Keene. 1984. Dawn to the West: Japanese Literature of the Modern Era. New York:
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
J. Konishi. 1991. A History of Japanese Literature. 3 vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
H. Sen’ichi. Japanese Literature: A Historical Outline. Tucson: University of Arizona
Press.
Literature sources specific to the West
W. R. Benét, ed. The Reader’s Encyclopedia. 2nd edition. New York: Thomas Y.
Crowell. (I)
H. Bloom. 1994. The Western Canon:The Books and School of the Ages. New York:
Harcourt Brace & Company. (Q)
A. Burgio. 1963. Storia della Litteratura. 2 vols. Milan:Vallerdi. (QI)
APPENDIX 3 • 497
O. M. Carpeaux. 1982. História da Literatura Ocidental. 8 vols. Rio de Janeiro:
Ediçöes o Cruzeiro. (QI)
G. Díaz-Plaja. 1965. La Litteratura Universal. Barcelona: Editiones Danae. (I)
A. Eggebrecht. 1964. Epochen der Weltliteratur. Gütersloh: C. Bertelsmann Verlag.
(Q)
E. Laaths. 1953. Geschichte der Weltliteratur: Deutscher Bucherbund. (QI)
J. Paxton and S. Fairfield. 1980. Calendar of Creative Man. New York: Facts on File.
(Q)
G. Wilpert. 1963. Lexikon der Weltliteratur. 2 vols. Stuttgart: Alfred Kröner Verlag.
(QI)
THE ART INVENTORIES
The Western art inventory is limited to painters and sculptors. The Chinese
art inventory is limited to painters. The Japanese art inventory includes
painters, sculptors, and potters. As in the case of literature, index scores could
not be computed across the entire time span for some inventories. In the case
of the West, the lack of surviving work artificially limited the attention given
to artists in ancient Greece and Rome. Index scores are limited to artists
active from 1200–1950. In the case of China, the shift in genres and styles
after the decline of classical China made comparisons between traditional and
modern Chinese artists problematic. Index scores are limited to artists active
prior to 1800.
Art sources with worldwide coverage
Encyclopedia Britannica. (QI for Japan, Q for China, not used for the West.)
M. Akiyama. 1985. Shincho Sekai Bijutsu Jiten (Shincho World Art Dictionary). Tokyo:
Shincho-sha. (Q for all three arts inventories.)
H. de la Croix and R.G. Tansey. 1975. Gardner’s Art Through the Ages. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Original edition, 1926. (QI for the West. I for
China and Japan.)
L. Gowing. 1995. Biographical Dictionary of Artists. London: Andromeda Oxford
Ltd. (QI for the West, I for China, Q for Japan)
A. L. Kroeber. 1944. Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. (Q for Japan and the West. Not used for China.)
J. Turner. 1996. Dictionary of Art. 34 vols. New York: Grove. (QI for all three art
inventories.)
498 • APPENDIX 3
Art sources specific to China
L. Ashton and B. Gray. 1953. Chinese Art. New York: Beechhurst Press. (I)
L. Binyon. 1959. Painting in the Far East. New York: Dover. (QI)
J. Burling and A.H. Burling. 1953. Chinese Art. New York: Studio Publications,
Inc. (QI)
J. Cahill. 1960. Chinese Painting. Skira. (QI)
D. O. Carter. Four Thousand Years of China’s Art. New York: Ronald Press Co. (I)
C. Clunas. 1997. Art in China. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (QI)
W. Cohn. 1950. Chinese Painting. New York: Phaidon. (QI)
T. Froncek. 1969. Arts of China. New York: American Heritage Publishers (QI)
M. Loehr. 1980. The Great Painters of China. New York: Harper & Row. (QI)
W. Speiser. 1959. China: Geist und Gesellschaft. Baden-Baden: Holle & Co. (I)
M. Sullivan. 1999. The Arts of China. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
(QI)
W. Willetts. 1965. Foundations of Chinese Art from Neolithic Pottery to Modern
Architecture. New York: McGraw-Hill. (I)
Y. Xin et al., eds. 1997. Three Thousand Years of Chinese Painting. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press. (QI)
Art sources specific to Japan
R. Bird. 1980. General Index. 31 vols. Tokyo: Heibonsha. (QI)
D. Elisseeff and V. Elisseeff. 1985. Art of Japan. New York: Harry N. Abrams. (QI)
M. Ishizawa et al. 1982. The Heritage of Japanese Art. Tokyo: Kodansha International
Ltd. (QI)
J. E. Kidder. 1981. The Art of Japan. New York: Park Lane. (QI)
P. Mason. 1993. History of Japanese Art. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Harry N. Abrams.
(QI)
H. Munsterberg. 1957. The Arts of Japan: An Illustrated History. Rutland, VT:
Charles E. Tuttle Co. (QI)
S. Noma. 1966. The Arts of Japan. 2 vols. Tokyo: Kodansha International Ltd. (QI)
R. T. Paine and A. Soper. 1955. The Art and Architecture of Japan. New York:
Penguin. (QI)
J. Stanley-Baker. 1984. Japanese Art. London: Thames and Hudson. (QI)
P. C. Swann. 1966. The Art of Japan from the Jomon to the Tokugawa Period. New York:
Crown. (QI)
The National Museum. 1952. Pageant of Japanese Art: Painting. 2 vols. Tokyo: Toto
Shuppan. (QI)
APPENDIX 3 • 499
Art sources specific to the West
E. H. Gombrich. 1995. The Story of Art. London: Phaidon. (I)
H. Honour and J. Fleming. 1982. The Visual Arts:A History. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall. (QI)
Instituto Per La Collaborazione Culturale. 1959. Enciclopedia Universale Dell’Arte
(trans.). 17 vols. New York: McGraw Hill. (QI)
H. W. Janson and A. F. Janson. 1997. History of Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams,
Inc. (QI)
J. Marceau. 1998. Art: A World History. New York: DK Publishing. (QI)
S. Sproccati. 1991. A Guide to Art. Milan: Arnoldo Mondadori. (QI)
W. Stadler. 1990. Lexikon der Kunst. 12 vols. Basel: Herder Freiburg. (QI)
M. Stokstad. 1999. Art History. 2 vols. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. (QI)
J. Vinson. 1990. International Dictionary of Art and Artists. London: St. James Press.
(Q)
THE MUSIC INDEX
The music index covers only the West. It includes both composers and musical theorists from 1200 to 1950. Performers who composed are included if
the major portion of their reputation rests on their compositions. The
sources were as follows:
G. Abraham. 1979. The Concise Oxford History of Music. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (QI)
L. Alberti. 1968. Musica Nei Secoli. Milan: CEAM. (I)
M.-C. Beltrando-Patier. 1998. Histoire de la Musique. Paris: Larousse. (QI)
E. Borroff. 1990. Music in Europe and the United States. New York: Ardsley House.
(QI)
C. Dahlhaus and M. Eggebrecht. 1978. Brockhaus Riemann Musiklexikon. 2 vols.
Mainz: F. A. Brockhaus. (QI)
D. J. Grout and C.V. Palisca. 1996. A History of Western Music. New York: W.W.
Norton & Co. (QI)
P. Hamburger. 1966. Musikens Historie. Copenhagen: Aschehoug Dansk Forlag.
(QI)
A. Harman and W. Mellers. 1962. Man and His Music: The Story of Musical
Experience in the West. London: Barrie and Rockliff. (QI)
C. Headington. 1980. The Bodley Head History of Western Music. London: Bodley
Head. (I)
500 • APPENDIX 3
K. Honolka et al. 1976. Weltgeschichte der Musik. Eltville am Rhein, Germany:
Rheingauer Verlagsgesellschaft. (QI)
M. Kennedy. 1994. The Oxford Dictionary of Music. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (I)
A. L. Kroeber. 1944. Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. (Q)
P. H. Lang. 1997. Music in Western Civilization. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Original edition, 1941. (QI)
D. M. Randel. 1996. The Harvard Biographical Dictionary of Music. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. (QI)
L. Rebatet. 1969. Une Histoire de la Musique. Paris: Robert Laffont & Raymond
Bourgine. (QI)
O. Thompson and B. Bohle. 1938. The International Cyclopedia of Music and
Musicians. New York: Dodd, Mead, and Co. (QI)
É. Vuillermoz. 1973. Histoire de la Musique. Paris: Fayard. (I)
THE SCIENTIFIC INVENTORIES
Separate inventories were prepared for astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth
sciences, physics, mathematics, medicine, and technology. The division of
individuals into these categories posed problems. Many physicists and
astronomers also made important original contributions to mathematics;
many scientists directly contributed to applied technology; many of the key
medical discoveries were made by biologists.
Accordingly, a person was eligible for more than one inventory, but he
had to qualify based on accomplishments specific to the field in question. To
minimize double-counting of accomplishments, two steps were taken. For
sources that enumerated events, the count of events was restricted to the field
in question (e.g., only events classified as mathematics were used for the
mathematics inventory). Sources that were scored on length of treatment
(e.g., number of pages in an index, number of columns in a biographical dictionary) were restricted to those that dealt with the field in question (e.g.,
Isaac Newton’s score in the mathematics index is based on references to his
work in mathematics).
The following is a list of all the sources used in preparing the scientific inventories, listed under four headings: (1) general sources that could be
used for several inventories, depending on the specifics of their coverage (a
general source might meet the coverage requirement for physics but not for
APPENDIX 3 • 501
the earth sciences, for example), (2) mathematic sources, (3) medical sources,
and (4) technology sources. These lists are followed by a table showing the
use of each source for each inventory.
General sources
F. Adlington and C. Humphries. 1999. Philip’s Science and Technology: People, Dates,
and Events. London: George Philip Ltd.
I. Asimov. 1994. Asimov’s Chronology of Science and Discovery. New York:
HarperCollins.
L. C. Bruno. 1997. Science and Technology Firsts. Detroit: Gale.
C. C. Gillespie, ed. 1980–1990. Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 18 vols. New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
B. Grun. 1991. The Timetables of History (based on Werner Stein’s Kulturfahrplan).
New York: Touchstone.
A. Hellemans and B. Bunch. 1988. The Timetables of Science: A Chronology of the
Most Important People and Events in the History of Science. New York: Touchstone.
A. L. Kroeber. 1944. Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
F. N. Magill. 1991. Great Events from History II: Science and Technology Series. 5 vols.
Pasadena, CA: Salem Press.
E. Marcorini. 1975. Scienza e tecnica. 2 vols. Milan: Arnoldo Mondadori.
S. F. Mason. 1962. A History of the Sciences. New York: Macmillan.
J. E. I. McClellan and H. Dorn. 1999. Science and Technology in World History: An
Introduction. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
E. Mount and B.A. List. 1994. Milestones in Science and Technology: The Ready
Reference Guide to Discoveries, Inventions, and Facts. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press.
H. Muir. 1994. Larousse Dictionary of Scientists. Edinburgh: Larousse.
G. Ochoa and M. Corey. 1997. The Wilson Chronology of Science and Technology.
New York: H. W. Wilson Company.
C. L. Parkinson. 1986. Breakthroughs: A Chronology of Great Achievements in Science
and Mathematics. Boston: G. K. Hall & Co.
R. Porter and M. Ogilvie, eds. 2000. The Biographical Dictionary of Scientists. 2 vols.
New York: Oxford University Press.
C. A. Ronan. 1983. The Cambridge Illustrated History of the World’s Science.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
M. Serres. 1989. Élements d’Histoire des Science. Paris: Bordas.
R. Taton. 1964. Histoire Générale des Sciences. 4 vols. Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France.
502 • APPENDIX 3
P. Whitfield. 1999. Landmarks in Western Science. New York: Routledge.
H. Wussing. 1983. Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften. Cologne, Germany: Aulis
Verlag Deubner & Co.
Mathematics
G. E. Owen. 1971. The Universe of the Mind. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press.
H. Eves. 1990. An Introduction to the History of Mathematics. Philadelphia: Saunders
College Publishing.
J. Gullberg. 1997. Mathematics from the Birth of Numbers. New York: WW Norton.
L. Hogben. 1960. Mathematics in the Making. London: Macdonald.
M. Kline. 1972. Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times. New York:
Oxford University Press.
C. B. Boyer and U.C. Merzbach. 1989. A History of Mathematics. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
F. J. Swetz. 1994. From Five Fingers to Infinity. Chicago: Open Court.
Medicine
J. Bendiner and E. Bendiner. 1990. Biographical Dictionary of Medicine. New York:
Facts on File.
R. Porter. 1996. The Cambridge Illustrated History of Medicine. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
R. Porter. 1997. The Greatest Benefit to Mankind. New York: W. W. Norton.
L. N. Magner. 1992. A History of Medicine. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
R. E. McGrew. 1985. Encyclopedia of Medical History. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Technology
T. I. Williams. 1987. The History of Invention: From Stone Axes to Silicon Chips.
London: MacDonald.
D. Cardwell. 1995. The Norton History of Technology. New York: W. W. Norton &
Company.
C. J. Singer et al. 1984. A History of Technology. 8 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
B. Gille. 1978. Histoire des Techniques. 2 vols. Paris: Editions Gallimard.
APPENDIX 3 • 503
Sources for the Scientific Inventories
Earth Math- TechAstronomy Biology Chemistry Sciences Physics ematics Medicine nology
Adlington QI QI QI QI QI QI
Asimov QI QI QI QI I QI
Bruno QI QI QI QI QI QI QI QI
Gillespie QI QI QI QI QI QI QI QI
Grun Q Q Q I I QI
Hellemans QI QI QI QI QI QI QI QI
Kroeber Q Q Q
Magill Q Q Q Q Q Q
Marcorini QI QI QI QI QI QI QI QI
Mason I I I I I I
Mount QI QI QI QI QI QI QI
Muir Q Q Q Q Q Q
Ochoa QI QI QI QI QI QI QI QI
Parkinson Q Q Q Q Q QI I I
Porter 2000 QI QI QI QI QI QI I QI
Ronan QI I I QI I
Serres I I QI QI
Taton I I I I I I I I
Whitfield I I I
Wussing QI QI QI I QI QI I
Boyer QI
Eves QI
Gullberg QI
Kline Q
Swetz QI
Bendiner QI
Porter 1996 QI
Porter 1997 QI
Magner QI
McGrew QI
Cardwell QI
Gille QI
Singer QI
Williams QI
Note: Sources used to identify significant figures have a Q (for qualifying source) after their
entry. Sources used to compute index scores have an I (for index source) after their entry.
APPENDIX 4
GEOGRAPHIC AND
POPULATION DATA
Anumber of issues in the text depend on locating the significant figures
geographically and on the estimation of population in various
geographic units during the period 1400–1950. This appendix describes the
procedures used for collecting and coding those data.
LOCATING THE SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
GEOGRAPHICALLY
The first problem is to establish rules for coding geographic location.
Chopin’s father was French, his mother was Polish. He was raised in Warsaw
but spent his professional life in Paris. Shall we assign Chopin to Warsaw or
Paris? A more prosaic example of a type common among the significant
figures is Louis Pasteur, who was born and raised in Dôle, a town in eastern
France, grew up in an even smaller town nearby, and spent his professional
career in Strasbourg, Lille, and Paris, with occasional sojourns elsewhere.
Where shall we place Pasteur?
I dealt with this confusion by recording two locations for each significant figure: origin, defined as the place where he spent his childhood (or the
greater part of it, if he moved), and workplace, defined as the region in which
he spent the most productive part of his career.
Both choices sometimes involved judgment calls. In the case of Pasteur,
his workplace had to be chosen on the basis of both the time that Pasteur
spent in his various homes and the importance of the work done at various
places, with Paris ultimately winning out. In a few cases, a specific origin
506 • APPENDIX 4
could not be assigned, either because data were not available for the more
obscure significant figures, or because they had been born abroad to diplomats or soldiers. In such cases, significant figures were assigned the nationality of their parents.
In the case of immigration, the choice of workplace was based on a
judgment of where the significant figure came to prominence. Thus the
workplace of many of the Jews who fled Nazi Germany remains the German
region where their careers took shape, even if they continued to make major
contributions after emigrating to another country. In contrast, a young scientist who completed his training in Germany and worked there for a few years,
but who made his mark after immigrating, is assigned a workplace in his
adopted country.
Unassignable workplaces arose more frequently than unassignable
origins. A substantial number of significant figures moved around so much
during the course of their careers that it was impossible to assign just one
place to them. A few, mostly composers, were so peripatetic that it was
impossible to assign even a country to their workplace, let alone a region, and
their workplace was defined simply as Europe.
When data were missing (as opposed to unassignable), regions were
imputed based on the observed distribution within a country. For example, if
data were missing for six significant figures of French origin and 31.7 percent
of French significant figures with known origin came from Paris, then the
algorithm for imputing origins would give each of those six figures a probability of .317 of being assigned to Paris, and correspondingly appropriate
probabilities would be given for all other places of origin of the significant
figures with known origins. Imputed codes are (obviously) to be used only
for purposes of statistical analysis, not for discussions of specific cases.
The next consideration was how precisely to define location. Data were
entered using the name of the exact city, town, or village (or nearest one in
the case of significant figures who grew up on farms). After the inventories of
significant figures had been established, I recoded these raw entries into a
more manageable set on the basis of the following guidelines:
If the location was a major city or a well-known place (e.g., Bruges,
Heidelberg), even if small, the precise location was retained.
If the location was an anonymous village, town, or small city, the location was replaced with the name of the region.
European regions were defined on a country-by-country basis—134
of them in all. The choices attempted to conform to units that have well-
APPENDIX 4 • 507
established historical identities. This left many arbitrary choices to be made.
Italy and Germany could have been divided into still smaller pieces based on
the old principalities, for example, but the point of the exercise was to break
Europe into units that enable us to see variation within countries. For
Germany, I used the borders of the current German states and then divided
the lands that are now part of Poland into a reconstruction of the former Silesia, Posen/Pomerania, West Prussia, and East Prussia. For Italy, I followed the
regions shown for preunification Italy in Barraclough 1993: 213. When small
well-established regions had no nontrivial statistical role to play, there was no
point in going to the smallest possible unit. Thus I combined the traditional
Austrian regions of Upper Austria and Styria into a region called Mid-Austria
while the Tyrol, Carinthia, and Salzburg were combined into a region called
Southwest Austria. The regions in Hungary, Norway, Sweden, and Finland
are similarly ad hoc.
The map on the following page shows the approximate boundaries
(they were drawn by hand) for the regions in Western Europe. Inaccuracies in
the boundaries on the map had no effect on the accuracy of the coding of
place names into regions, which was based on their location as shown in standard world atlases. Russia is not shown on the map. The regions used to code
Russian significant figures were Archangel, the Don region, Estonia, Georgia,
Kazan, Kharkov, Kiev region, Kostroma, Latvia, Lithuania, Minsk, Moscow
region, Nizhni Novgorod, Novgorod, Odessa, Orel, Orenbur, Podolia,
Poltava, Pskov, Ryazan, Saratov, Siberia, Smolensk region, Tambov, Tula,
Vitebsk, Vladimir, and Voronezh. Other regions not shown on the map are
North Norway, North Sweden, North and South Finland, Bulgaria, Greece,
Macedonia, and Romania. Luxemburg was coded with Belgium.
508 • APPENDIX 4
EUROPEAN CITIES AND REGIONS
USED FOR CODING ORIGINS AND WORKPLACE
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 8
9 10 11
12
13 14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23 24 25
26
27
28
29 30
31
32
33
34 35
36 37
38
39 40 41 42
45 46
47
48
49 50
44
51
52
53
54
55
56 57
58 59
60
61
62
63
64
66 65
67
69
68
70
71
72
73 74
75
76 77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84 85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
43
1. S Ireland
2. N Ireland
3. Scottish Highlands
4. Scottish Lowlands
5. S Uplands
6. N England
7. NW England
8. Humber
9. Wales
10. W Midlands
11. E Midlands
12. E Anglia
13. SW England
14. SE England
15. SW Norway
16. SE Norway
17. S Sweden
18. E Sweden
19. Denmark
20. Netherlands
21. Belgium
22. Bretagne
23. Basse-Normandie
24. Haute-Normandie
25. Picardie
26. Nord-Pas-de-Calais
27. Pays de la Loire
28. Centre
29. Île-de-France
30. ChampagneArdenne
31. Lorraine
32. Alsace
33. Poitou-Charentes
APPENDIX 4 • 509
34. Limousin 66. Thuringia
35. Auvergne 67. Saxony
36. Bourgogne 68. Silesia
37. Franche-Comté 69. Rhineland-Palatinate
38. Rhône-Alpes 70. Baden-Württemberg
39. Aquitaine 71. Bavaria
40. Midi-Pyrénées 72. Poland
41. Languedoc- 73. Bohemia
Roussillon 74. Moravia
42. Provence-Alpes- 75. Slovakia
Côte d’Azur 76. SW Austria
43. Corsica 77. Mid Austria
44. Portugal 78. Lower Austria
45. Galicia 79. NW Hungary
46. Asturias-Cantabria 80. SW Hungary
47. Basque Country 81. N Central Hungary
48. Navarra 82. E Hungary
49. Aragon 83. Switzerland
50. Catalonia 84. Slovenia
51. Castilla y León 85. Croatia
52. Madrid 86. Bosnia-Herzegovina
53. Extremadura 87. Yugoslavia
54. Castilla-La Mancha 88. Albania
55. Valencia 89. Piedmont
56. Andalusia 90. Lombardy
57. Murcia 91. Venetia
58. Schleswig-Holstein 92. Tuscany
59. Mecklenburg 93. Papal States
60. Brandenburg 94. Sardinia
61. East Prussia 95. Naples
62. Lower Saxony 96. Sicily
63. Saxony-Anhalt 97. Albania
64. N Rhine Westphalia
65. Hesse
510 • APPENDIX 4
The dots on the map indicate the 121 European cities and towns that
qualified for their own code. They were as follow:
• Austria: Graz, Salzburg,Vienna.
• Belgium: Antwerp, Bruges, Brussels, Ghent, Ixelles, Jehay-Bodegnee,
Liège, Louvain, Namur, St.-Amand, Tournai.
• Britain: Birmingham, Bradford, Bristol, Cambridge, Durham, Leeds,
Liverpool, London, Manchester, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Belfast, Dublin.
• Czech Republic: Prague, Brno.
• Denmark: Copenhagen, Åarhus.
• France: Besançon, Bordeaux, Grenoble, Le Havre, Lille, Lyon,
Marseilles, Metz, Montpellier, Nancy, Paris, Rouen, Strasbourg ,
Tours,Valenciennes.
• Finland: Helsinki.
• Germany: Augsburg, Berlin, Bonn, Breslau, Cologne, Danzig, Darmstadt, Dresden, Düsseldorf, Frankfurt, Freiberg, Göttingen, Halle,
Hamburg, Königsberg, Leipzig, Lübeck, Magdeburg, Mannheim,
Munich, Nuremburg, Stuttgart, Tübingen, Wittenberg, Wurzburg.
• Greece: Athens.
• Hungary: Budapest.
• Italy: Bologna, Brescia, Cremona, Ferrara, Naples, Padua, Palermo,
Parma, Piacenza, Pisa, Rome, Siena, Turin,Venice,Verona,Vicenza.
• Norway: Bergen, Oslo.
• Netherlands: Amsterdam, Delft, Haarlem, Hague, Leiden, Rotterdam,
Utrecht.
• Poland: Krakow, Warsaw.
• Portugal: Lisbon.
• Russia: Kiev, Moscow, Riga, St. Petersburg, Tallinn,Vilnius,
Smolensk.
• Sweden: Stockholm, Uppsala.
• Spain: Barcelona, Cordoba, Granada, Madrid, Seville,Valladolid.
• Switzerland: Basel, Geneva, Zurich.
APPENDIX 4 • 511
For the United States, the individual state was the equivalent of the
European region. I also coded 14 cities separately: Baltimore, Boston, Buffalo,
Chicago, Cleveland, Los Angeles, New York, New Orleans, Philadelphia,
Pittsburgh, Princeton, San Francisco, St. Louis, Washington, D.C. Major
American cities that came to prominence after World War II (and hence
mainly after 1950) such as Houston and Phoenix are not given separate codes
because they were not major cities during the period covered by the analysis.
DETERMINING AND ESTIMATING POPULATIONS
For national populations prior to 19C I relied chiefly on McEvedy and Jones
1978, picking up with national census data as reported in Mitchell 1992:
Table A1 as they became available for late 18C and early 19C.
The two base sources for population data on cities were DeVries 1984:
270–77, which contains population data on the 31 largest European cities
from 1500 to 1800, and Mitchell 1992:Table A4, which contains data on 100
major European cities from 1750 to 1950. Three other sources with a variety
of city population data were Hall 1998 and Trager 1994 and the online
version of the Encyclopedia Britannica. Other data were added from histories of
the countries and cities in question, including historical information
provided by the web sites of the cities in question.
For taking the data back to 1400 when no other information was available, I first determined the founding date of the city. If the city began as a
village after 1400, I stipulated that the population in the founding year was
1,000 and extrapolated linearly to the first available data. For cities founded
before 1400, I used McEvedy 1992, which categorizes the population of
cities in 1346 (just before the black death) and 1483 under three categories:
15,000–23,000, 23,000–49,000, and 50,000–125,000. If I could locate qualitative historical descriptions of the city’s size, role, and importance at those
times, I assigned an estimated population within the range. In making these
estimates, I was also often able to make use of known inequalities (e.g., that
Paris was larger than London) in reducing the uncertainty.
APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER
OF SIGNIFICANT
FIGURES
The pages that follow begin with summary information about each
inventory and the correlation matrix for the sources used to prepare the
index scores. For a key to the sources, see Appendix 3. This material is
followed by an alphabetical listing of all the significant figures in each inventory, showing the period in which they were active (fl), national origin, and
index score. Names are repeated for those entered in more than one inventory. For a person with a known birth year, fl is based on the year in which
he turned 40 or the year in which he died, whichever came first. National
origin refers to the country in which the person lived as a child.
Names include only the first name, even for persons (e.g., Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart) who are ordinarily known by their full name, and just the
first element in hyphenated given names (e.g., “Jean” for “Jean-BaptistePierre-François”). Middle initials are included when they are necessary to
distinguish between otherwise identical names. The purpose is to give
enough information for unique identification, not provide definitive names.
In the case of pseudonyms, I tried to list the person under the name by which
he is best known (e.g., Twain instead of Clemens), showing the other last
name in parentheses if it was a close call. Chinese and Japanese names are
shown in their spoken order. For Japanese persons known primarily by a
single name, I list that name alone. When Arabic figures are best known in
the West by their Latinized name, I list them accordingly, with the basics of
the Arabic version in parentheses. Western figures of the medieval period and
early Renaissance are listed by their first name if that is the way their name
was listed in the Encyclopedia Britannica or the most authoritative source in
which they were mentioned. I have not tried to list variant spellings, which
are legion.
514 • APPENDIX 5
THE ASTRONOMY INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 767
Parent population 340
Significant figures 124
Major figures 28
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .92
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=124)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
1 Adlington 1.00 .73 .71 .31 .71 .32 .18 .56 .70 .40 .22 .27 .24 .18
2 Asimov .73 1.00 .64 .36 .71 .42 .29 .72 .77 .42 .33 .39 .33 .33
3 Bruno .71 .64 1.00 .26 .68 .33 .26 .45 .67 .34 .28 .31 .24 .24
4 Gillespie .31 .36 .26 1.00 .62 .78 .52 .52 .57 .45 .55 .70 .47 .65
5 Hellemans .71 .71 .68 .62 1.00 .55 .42 .58 .81 .53 .36 .48 .34 .38
6 Marcorini .32 .42 .33 .78 .55 1.00 .58 .55 .52 .46 .72 .86 .65 .86
7 Mason .18 .29 .26 .52 .42 .58 1.00 .47 .36 .31 .49 .59 .44 .61
8 Mount .56 .72 .45 .52 .58 .55 .47 1.00 .69 .43 .34 .54 .37 .53
9 Ochoa .70 .77 .67 .57 .81 .52 .36 .69 1.00 .49 .36 .46 .35 .38
10 Porter(c) .40 .42 .34 .45 .53 .46 .31 .43 .49 1.00 .42 .44 .53 .38
11 Ronan .22 .33 .28 .55 .36 .72 .49 .34 .36 .42 1.00 .72 .82 .75
12 Taton .27 .39 .31 .70 .48 .86 .59 .54 .46 .44 .72 1.00 .67 .91
13 Whitfield .24 .33 .24 .47 .34 .65 .44 .37 .35 .53 .82 .67 1.00 .71
14 Wussing .18 .33 .24 .65 .38 .86 .61 .53 .38 .38 .75 .91 .71 1.00
Note:The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate subscores from the
chronologies and the history/biographical dictionary sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s
_ based on the correlations in the above matrix.
APPENDIX 5 • 515
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Adams, John 1859 England 16 Goodricke, John 1786 Netherlands 10
Adams, Walter 1916 USA 27 Hale, George 1908 USA 37
Airy, George 1841 England 1 Hall, Asaph 1869 USA 13
Ambartsumian,Viktor 1948 Russia 5 Halley, Edmond 1696 England 57
Anaximander the Elder –571 Greece 9 Helmholtz, Hermann 1861 Germany 12
Apian, Peter Henderson, Thomas 1838 Scotland 12
(Bennewitz) 1535 Germany 9 Heraclides Ponticus –350 Greece 14
Argelander, Friedrich 1839 Germany 8 Herschel, Caroline 1790 Germany 6
Aristarchus of Samos –270 Greece 28 Herschel, John 1832 England 27
Baade, Walter 1933 Germany 47 Herschel, William 1778 Germany 88
Baily, Francis 1814 England 6 Hertzsprung, Ejnar 1913 Denmark 35
Barnard, Edward 1897 USA 26 Hevelius, Johannes 1651 Poland 30
Bayer, Johann 1612 Germany 6 Hipparchus of Nicaea –140 Greece 49
Bessel, Friedrich 1824 Germany 39 Hooke, Robert 1675 England 17
Biermann, Ludwig 1947 Germany 6 Horrocks, Jeremiah 1641 England 8
Bode, Johann 1787 Germany 12 Hubble, Edwin 1929 USA 45
Bond, George 1865 USA 12 Huggins, William 1864 England 37
Bond, William 1829 USA 9 Janssen, Pierre 1864 France 5
Bradley, James 1733 England 14 Jeans, James 1917 England 13
Brahe, Tycho 1586 Denmark 68 Kant, Immanuel 1764 Germany 20
Campbell,William 1902 USA 8 Kapteyn, Jacobus 1891 Netherlands 9
Cannon, Annie 1903 USA 6 Kepler, Johannes 1611 Germany 93
Carrington, Richard 1866 England 11 Kirkwood, Daniel 1854 USA 5
Cassini, Giovanni 1665 Italy 53 Kuiper, Gerard Peter 1945 Netherlands 32
Celsius, Anders 1741 Sweden 4 Lambert, Johann 1768 Germany 10
Chandrasekhar, Laplace, Pierre 1789 France 79
Subrahmaryan 1950 India 9 Lassell, William 1839 England 21
Chang Heng 110 China 4 Le Verrier, Urbain 1851 France 22
Chapman, Sydney 1928 England 6 Leavitt, Henrietta 1908 USA 12
Clairaut, Alexis 1753 France 10 Lemaître, Georges 1934 Belgium 17
Copernicus, Nicolaus 1513 Poland 75 Lindblad, Bertil 1935 Sweden 7
Curtis, Heber 1912 USA 8 Lockyer, Joseph 1876 England 15
De La Rue,Warren 1855 England 11 Lomonosov, Mikhail 1751 Russia 13
Draper, Henry 1877 USA 13 Lowell, Percival 1895 USA 4
Dreyer, John 1892 Denmark 6 Maskelyne, Nevil 1772 England 2
Eddington, Arthur 1922 England 37 Maury, Antonia 1906 USA 10
Encke, Johann 1831 Germany 10 Mayr, Simon 1610 Germany 19
Eudoxus –360 Greece 20 Messier, Charles 1770 France 11
Fabricius, David 1604 Germany 9 Meton of Athens –440 Greece 5
Flamsteed, John 1686 England 23 Michell, John 1764 England 2
Galilei Galileo 1604 Italy 100 Milne, Edward 1936 England 11
Galle, Johann 1852 Germany 14 Mitchell, Maria 1858 USA 6
Gassendi, Pierre 1632 France 17 Moulton, Forest 1912 USA 9
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
516 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Newcomb, Simon 1875 Canada 2
Olbers, Heinrich 1798 Germany 33
Oort, Jan Hendrik 1940 Netherlands 22
Parsons,William 1840 Ireland 14
Perrine, Charles 1907 USA 9
Peurbach, Georg 1461 Austria 13
Philolaus of Crotona –450 Greece 8
Piazzi, Guiseppe 1786 Switzerland 16
Pickering, Edward 1886 USA 17
Pickering,William 1898 USA 9
Plaskett, John 1905 Canada 5
Pons, Jean 1801 France 6
Ptolemy 140 Egypt 73
Regiomantus 1476 Germany 27
Reinhold, Erasmus 1551 Germany 9
Rheticus, Georg 1554 Austria 1
Riccioli, Giambattista 1637 Italy 11
Roche, Edouard 1860 France 8
Russell, Henry 1917 USA 25
Rømer, Ole 1684 Denmark 12
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Scheiner, Christoph 1613 Germany 18
Schiaparelli, Giovanni 1875 Italy 21
Schwabe, Samuel 1829 Germany 12
Schwarzschild, Karl 1913 Germany 19
Secchi, Pietro 1858 Italy 19
Shapley, Harlow 1925 USA 22
Sitter, Willem de 1912 Netherlands 6
Sosigenes 50 Rome 9
Struve, Wilhelm von 1833 Germany 7
Titius, Johann 1769 Germany 9
Tombaugh, Clyde 1946 USA 11
Trumpler, Robert 1926 Switzerland 6
Ulugh-Beg 1434 Central Asia 11
Vogel, Hermann 1882 Germany 12
Whipple, Fred 1946 USA 11
Wolf, Maximilian 1903 Germany 11
Wright, Thomas 1751 England 4
Zwicky, Fritz 1938 Bulgaria 24
al-Zarqali (Arzachel) 1070 Spain 7
ibn Yunus 1009 Egypt 8
APPENDIX 5 • 517
THE BIOLOGY INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 1,638
Parent population 683
Significant figures 193
Major figures 34
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .88
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=193)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
1 Adlington 1.00 .45 .39 .17 .37 .09 .13 .42 .29 .01 .22 .21 .11 .12 .02
2 Asimov .45 1.00 .39 .20 .46 .14 .26 .54 .47 .16 .22 .34 .11 .15 .08
3 Bruno .39 .39 1.00 .29 .54 .28 .35 .42 .45 .16 .47 .31 .35 .31 .26
4 Gillespie .17 .20 .29 1.00 .40 .51 .38 .30 .37 .39 .47 .23 .44 .51 .50
5 Hellemans .37 .46 .54 .40 1.00 .45 .55 .50 .62 .25 .55 .41 .50 .49 .40
6 Marcorini .09 .14 .28 .51 .45 1.00 .50 .33 .29 .32 .52 .16 .69 .50 .81
7 Mason .13 .26 .35 .38 .55 .50 1.00 .28 .56 .30 .55 .39 .54 .59 .47
8 Mount .42 .54 .42 .30 .50 .33 .28 1.00 .41 .11 .29 .30 .27 .19 .33
9 Ochoa .29 .47 .45 .37 .62 .29 .56 .41 1.00 .28 .53 .42 .38 .40 .25
10 Porter(c) .01 .16 .16 .39 .25 .32 .30 .11 .28 1.00 .29 .17 .25 .36 .26
11 Ronan .22 .22 .47 .47 .55 .52 .55 .29 .53 .29 1.00 .31 .60 .65 .59
12 Serres .21 .34 .31 .23 .41 .16 .39 .30 .42 .17 .31 1.00 .25 .37 .19
13 Taton .11 .11 .35 .44 .50 .69 .54 .27 .38 .25 .60 .25 1.00 .56 .71
14 Whitfield .12 .15 .31 .51 .49 .50 .59 .19 .40 .36 .65 .37 .56 1.00 .53
15 Wussing .02 .08 .26 .50 .40 .81 .47 .33 .25 .26 .59 .19 .71 .53 1.00
Note: The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate subscores from the
chronologies and the history/biographical dictionary sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s _
based on the correlations in the above matrix.
518 • APPENDIX 5
ROSTER OF THE SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Abel, John 1897 USA 27 Cuvier, Georges 1809 France 83
Alpini, Prospero 1593 Italy 7 Dam, Peter 1935 Denmark 1
Amici, Giovanni 1826 Italy 3 Dart, Raymond 1933 Australia 7
Aristotle –344 Greece 93 Darwin, Charles 1849 England 100
Audubon, James 1825 USA 8 Delbrück, Max 1946 Germany 12
Avery, Oswald 1917 Canada 22 Descartes, René 1636 France 26
Baer, Karl von 1832 Germany 44 Dobzhansky, Theo. 1940 Ukraine 14
Bateson,William 1901 England 24 Doisy, Edward 1933 USA 15
Bauhin, Gaspard 1600 Switzerland 5 Du Bois-Reymond,
Bawden, Frederick 1948 England 9 Emil 1858 Germany 12
Bayliss, William 1900 England 17 Dubos, René 1941 France 1
Beadle, George 1943 USA 15 Duggar, Benjamin 1912 USA 1
Beaumont,William 1825 USA 11 Dutrochet, René 1816 France 10
Beijerinck, Martinus 1891 Netherlands 17 Eberth, Karl 1875 Germany 1
Belon, Pierre 1557 France 16 Egas Moniz, Antonio 1914 Portugal 1
Beneden, Edouard 1886 Belgium 21 Einthoven, Willem 1900 Netherlands 1
Bernard, Claude 1853 France 45 Empedocles –452 Greece 32
Bichat, Marie 1802 France 15 Erasistratus –280 Greece 20
Bonnet, Charles 1760 Switzerland 19 Eustachio, Bartolomeo 1560 Italy 11
Bordet, Jules 1910 Belgium 2 Evans, Herbert 1922 USA 18
Borelli, Giovanni 1648 Italy 18 Fabrici, Girolamo 1573 Italy 15
Boveri, Theodor 1902 Germany 17 Fabricius, Johan 1785 Denmark 3
Bridges, Calvin 1929 USA 23 Falloppio, Gabriele 1562 Italy 14
Brown, Robert 1813 Scotland 23 Fisher, Ronald 1930 England 3
Brunfels, Otto 1529 Germany 9 Flemming, Walther 1883 Germany 29
Buckland, William 1824 England 11 Forbes, Edward Jr. 1854 England 18
Buffon 1747 France 20 Francis,Thomas Jr. 1940 USA 1
Burdach, Karl 1816 Germany 12 Frisch, Karl von 1926 Austria 18
Butenandt, Adolf 1943 Germany 37 Fuchs, Leonhart 1541 Germany 16
Bèkèsy, Georg von 1939 Hungary 3 Gall, Franz 1798 Germany 9
Calmette, Albert 1903 France 1 Galton, Francis 1862 England 27
Camerarius, Rudolph 1705 Germany 13 Galvani, Luigi 1777 Italy 25
Candolle, Augustin de 1818 Switzerland 10 Gesner, Konrad 1556 Switzerland 32
Cannon,Walter 1911 USA 4 Goethe, Johann von 1789 Germany 18
Carlisle, Anthony 1808 England 16 Golgi, Camillo 1883 Italy 25
Carson, Rachel 1947 USA 1 Gram, Hans 1893 Denmark 12
Cesalpino, Andrea 1559 Italy 14 Gray, Asa 1850 USA 5
Claude, Albert 1938 Belgium 9 Grew, Nehemiah 1681 England 29
Cohn, Ferdinand 1868 Germany 15 Haeckel, Ernst 1874 Germany 41
Colombo, Realdo 1550 Italy 14 Haldane, John 1900 Scotland 1
Cope, Edward 1880 USA 11 Hales, Stephen 1717 England 48
Cori, Gerty 1936 Bohemia 1 Haller, Albrecht von 1747 Switzerland 37
Correns, Karl 1904 Germany 15 Harden, Arthur 1905 England 12
APPENDIX 5 • 519
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Harrison, Ross 1910 USA 15 Monod, Jacques 1950 France 15
Harvey,William 1618 England 51 Morgan,Thomas 1906 USA 75
Helmholtz, Hermann 1861 Germany 27 Müller, Hermann 1930 USA 34
Herophilus Müller, Johannes 1841 Germany 13
of Alexandria –315 Greece 26 Müller, Otto 1770 Denmark 8
Hershey, Alfred Day 1948 USA 13 Northrop, John 1931 USA 13
Hertwig, Wilhelm 1889 Germany 15 Ochoa, Severo 1945 Spain 7
Hopkins, Frederick 1901 England 21 Oparin, Alexander 1934 Russia 8
Humboldt, Owen, Richard 1844 England 23
Alexander von 1809 Germany 23 Papanicolaou, George 1923 Greece 1
Huxley, Thomas 1865 England 22 Pfeffer, Wilhelm 1885 Germany 11
Hérelle, Felix d’ 1913 Canada 12 Pincus, Gregory 1943 USA 1
Ingenhousz, Jan 1770 Netherlands 16 Pirie, Norman 1948 Britain 9
Ivanovsky, Dmitri 1904 Russia 12 Pliny the Elder 63 Rome 37
Johannsen, Wilhelm 1897 Denmark 23 Prout, William 1825 England 16
Jussieu, Antoine de 1788 France 11 Purkyne, Johannes 1827 Bohemia 16
Jussieu, Bernard de 1739 France 2 Ray, John 1667 England 42
Keilin, David 1927 Poland 18 Redi, Francesco 1666 Italy 1
Kendall, Edward Calvin1926 USA 27 Remak, Robert 1855 Poland 9
Krebs, Hans 1940 Germany 22 Richet, Charles 1890 France 13
Kölliker, Rudolf von 1857 Switzerland 23 Rudbeck, Olof 1670 Sweden 10
Kölreuter, Joseph 1773 Germany 9 Sabin, Albert 1946 Poland 1
Lamarck, Jean 1784 France 88 Sachs, Julius von 1872 Germany 25
Landsteiner, Karl 1908 Austria 26 Saussure, Nicholas de 1807 Switzerland 6
Lartet, Edouard 1841 France 10 Schleiden, Matthias 1844 Germany 36
Laveran, Charles 1885 France 1 Schoenheimer, Rudolf 1938 Germany 10
Leonardo da Vinci 1492 Italy 34 Schwann, Theodor 1850 Germany 48
Levene, Phoebus 1909 Russia 17 Servetus, Michael 1551 Spain 26
Levi-Montalcini, Rita 1949 Italy 9 Sherrington, Charles 1897 England 18
Levine, Philip 1940 Russia 1 Spallanzani 1769 Italy 38
Linnaeus, Carlolus 1747 Sweden 59 Spemann, Hans 1909 Germany 18
Lipmann, Fritz 1939 Germany 15 Sprengel, Conrad 1790 Germany 6
Lister, Joseph J. 1826 England 1 Spurzheim, Johann 1816 Germany 6
Lorenz, Konrad 1943 Austria 13 Stanley, Wendell 1944 USA 17
Ludwig, Karl 1856 Germany 3 Starling, Ernest 1906 England 21
Lwoff, André 1942 France 5 Steenbock, Harry 1926 USA 7
MacLeod, Colin 1949 Canada 15 Stensen, Niels (Steno) 1678 Denmark 29
MacLeod, John 1916 Scotland 1 Stevens, Nettie 1901 USA 7
Malpighi, Marcello 1668 Italy 45 Strasburger, Eduard 1884 Germany 12
Martin, Archer 1950 England 14 Sturtevant, Alfred 1931 USA 34
McClintock, Barbara 1942 USA 1 Sumner, James 1927 USA 14
Mendel, Johann 1862 Bohemia 38 Sutton,Walter 1916 USA 12
Meyerhof, Otto 1924 Germany 6 Swammerdam, Jan 1677 Netherlands 47
Mohl, Hugo von 1845 Germany 9 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 1933 Hungary 1
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
520 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Tatum, Edward 1949 USA 17
Theophrastus –331 Greece 26
Tiselius, Arne 1942 Sweden 12
Tournefort, Joseph de 1696 France 6
Trefouel, Jacques 1937 France 1
Trembley, Abraham 1740 Switzerland 22
Treviranus, Goffried 1816 Germany 13
Tschermak, Erich 1911 Austria 13
Tsvet, Mikhail 1912 Russia 15
Twort, Frederick 1917 England 13
Tyndall, John 1860 Ireland 1
Vigneaud,Vincent du 1941 USA 1
Vries, Hugo de 1888 Netherlands 44
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Waldeyer-Hartz,
Wilhelm von 1876 Germany 15
Wallace, Alfred 1863 England 34
Warburg, Otto 1923 Germany 22
Wassermann,
August von 1906 Germany 1
Weiner, Alexander 1947 USA 1
Weismann, August 1874 Germany 26
Wilson, Edmund 1896 USA 10
Wolff, Caspar 1774 Germany 15
Yersin, Alexandre 1903 Switzerland 1
APPENDIX 5 • 521
THE CHEMISTRY INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 812
Parent population 478
Significant figures 204
Major figures 48
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .93
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=204)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
1 Adlington 1.00 .56 .65 .23 .70 .24 .27 .59 .63 .32 .16 .35 .30 .27
2 Asimov .56 1.00 .75 .37 .74 .37 .46 .83 .87 .41 .44 .57 .58 .41
3 Bruno .65 .75 1.00 .37 .77 .33 .47 .74 .80 .32 .44 .55 .50 .41
4 Gillespie .23 .37 .37 1.00 .47 .57 .52 .38 .43 .51 .59 .51 .67 .69
5 Hellemans .70 .74 .77 .47 1.00 .46 .59 .77 .84 .41 .49 .64 .66 .52
6 Marcorini .24 .37 .33 .57 .46 1.00 .45 .40 .37 .49 .54 .46 .68 .60
7 Mason .27 .46 .47 .52 .59 .45 1.00 .52 .53 .39 .80 .67 .68 .62
8 Mount .59 .83 .74 .38 .77 .40 .52 1.00 .83 .35 .51 .62 .57 .44
9 Ochoa .63 .87 .80 .43 .84 .37 .53 .83 1.00 .41 .48 .62 .63 .45
10 Porter .32 .41 .32 .51 .41 .49 .39 .35 .41 1.00 .36 .34 .49 .56
11 Ronan .16 .44 .44 .59 .49 .54 .80 .51 .48 .36 1.00 .59 .66 .63
12 Serres .35 .57 .55 .51 .64 .46 .67 .62 .62 .34 .59 1.00 .70 .59
13 Taton .30 .58 .50 .67 .66 .68 .68 .57 .63 .49 .66 .70 1.00 .68
14 Wussing .27 .41 .41 .69 .52 .60 .62 .44 .45 .56 .63 .59 .68 1.00
Note: The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate subscores from the
chronologies and the history/biographical dictionary sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s _
based on the correlations in the above matrix.
522 • APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Abel, Frederic 1867 England 1 Daniell, John 1830 England 1
Albertus Magnus, St. 1240 Germany 17 Davy, Edmund 1825 England 1
Alder, Kurt 1942 Germany 6 Davy, Humphrey 1818 England 46
Andrews, Thomas 1853 Ireland 7 Debierne, André 1914 France 5
Arfvedson, Johann 1832 Sweden 5 Debye, Peter 1924 Netherlands 15
Arrhenius, Svante 1899 Sweden 14 Demarcay, Eugène 1892 France 5
Aston, Francis 1917 England 20 Derosne, Charles 1820 France 4
Auer, Karl 1898 Austria 8 Dewar, James 1882 Scotland 14
Baekeland, Leo 1903 Belgium 1 Diels, Otto 1916 Germany 7
Baeyer, Johann von 1875 Germany 8 Dorn, Friedrich 1888 Germany 4
Balard, Antoine 1842 France 6 Draper, John 1851 England 2
Becher, Johann 1675 Germany 11 Dulong, Pierre 1825 France 9
Beguin, Jean 1590 France 3 Dumas, Jean 1840 France 17
Bergius, Friedrich 1924 Germany 1 Döbereiner, Johann 1820 Germany 5
Bergmann,Torbern 1775 Sweden 15 Elhuyar, Fausto d’ 1795 Spain 4
Bernal, John 1941 Ireland 5 Fahlberg, Constantin 1890 Germany 4
Berthelot, Pierre 1867 France 12 Fajans, Kasimir 1927 Poland 14
Berthollet, Claude 1788 France 29 Fischer, Emil 1892 Germany 16
Berzelius, Jöns 1819 Sweden 67 Fischer, Hans 1921 Germany 4
Biringuccio,Vanuccio 1520 Italy 1 Fleck, Alexander 1929 Scotland 3
Black, Joseph 1768 Scotland 33 Fourcroy, Antoine de 1795 France 12
Boisbaudran, Paul de 1878 France 13 Fox Talbot, William 1840 England 1
Boltwood, Bertram 1910 USA 6 Frankland, Edward 1865 England 3
Boussingault, Jean 1842 France 4 Gay-Lussac, Joseph 1818 France 37
Boyle, Robert 1667 Germany 42 Geber (Jabir ibn
Brand, Hennig 1650 Germany 5 Hayyan) 800 Persia 14
Brønsted, Johannes 1919 Denmark 5 Giauque, William 1935 Canada 10
Bunn, C.W. 1944 England 3 Glauber, Johann 1644 Germany 10
Bunsen, Robert 1851 Germany 22 Goldschmidt,Victor 1928 Switzerland 5
Butlerov, Aleksandr 1868 Russia 3 Gomberg, Moses 1906 Ukraine 4
Büchner, Eduard 1900 Germany 10 Graham, Thomas 1845 Scotland 13
Cannizzaro, Stanislao 1866 Italy 15 Gregor, William 1801 England 4
Carothers, Wallace 1936 USA 1 Grignard, F.A. 1911 France 5
Chardonnet, Louis de 1879 France 1 Grove, William 1851 England 1
Chevreul, Michel 1826 France 6 Guldberg, Cato 1876 Norway 5
Couper, Archibald 1871 Scotland 5 Guthrie, Samuel 1822 USA 1
Courtois, Bernard 1817 France 5 Guyton de Morveau,
Cranston, John 1917 Scotland 3 Louis 1777 France 12
Crawford, Adair 1788 Ireland 3 Haber, Fritz 1908 Germany 1
Crookes, William 1872 England 30 Hahn, Otto 1919 Germany 18
Cross, Charles 1895 England 1 Hall, Charles 1903 USA 1
Cullen,William 1750 Scotland 1 Hare, Robert 1821 USA 1
Dalton, John 1806 England 38 Hatchett, Charles 1805 England 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
APPENDIX 5 • 523
1923 England 8
1783 England 9
1619 25
1814 England 5
1842 Switzerland 3
1925
1930 Bohemia 6
1806 6
1950 England 8
7
1946 Switzerland 5
1692 3
1865 7
1929 Switzerland 12
1869
. 1941 USA 4
1903 England 3
1783
1858 5
1893 4
1940 1
1877 5
1921 USA 10
1847 France 8
1783 France 100
1887 8
1890 France 3
1782 France 4
1759 1
1915 USA 15
1580 7
1948 USA 7
1843
1861 Bohemia 5
1843 4
1806 Scotland 1
1758 France 1
1749 6
1857 Switzerland 8
Russia 3
1679 England 12
1874 Russia 25
1870
1888 5
1929 USA 1
1884 Switzerland 5
1846 6
1892 France 5
1878 USA 13
1780 Romania 5
1939 Switzerland 1
1943 Italy 1
1904
1877 England 7
1918 1
1880 5
1873 1
1933 5
1893 Russia 14
1927 7
1921 Romania 1
1941 USA 27
1878 England 7
1910 France 15
1909 3
1773 England 49
1794 France 14
1892 Scotland 31
1870 France 4
1839 6
1828 2
1937 11
1886 USA 5
1908 USA 5
5
1810
1926 England 7
1873 England 2
1834 4
1789 Scotland 5
1927 8
1894 France 1
1858 France 1
1782 53
1839 5
1913 England 3
Name fl Index Name fl Index
Haworth, Walter
Haüy, Rene
Helmont, Jan van Belgium
Henry,William
Hess, Germain
Hevesy, György Hungary 14
Heyrovsky, Jaroslav
Hisinger, Wilhelm Sweden
Hodgkin, Dorothy
Hoffmann, August von 1858 Germany
Hofmann, Albert
Homberg, Wilhelm Germany
Hoppe-Seyler, Felix Germany
Karrer, Paul
Kekulé, Friedrich Germany 27
Kennedy, J.W
Kipping, Frederic
Klaproth, Martin Germany 23
Kolbe, Adolf Germany
Kossel, Karl Germany
Kuhn, Richard Austria
Kühne, Wilhelm Germany
Langmuir, Irving
Laurent, Auguste
Lavoisier, Antoine
Le Bel, Joseph Germany
Le Châtelier, Henri
Leblanc, Nicolas
Lehmann, Johann Germany
Lewis, Gilbert
Libavius, Andreas Germany
Libby, Willard
Liebig, Justis von Germany 31
Loschmidt, Johann
Löwig, Carl Germany
Macintosh, Charles
Macquer, Pierre
Marggraf, Andreas Germany
Marignac, Jean de
Markovnikov,Vladimir 1878
Mayow, John
Mendeleyev, Dmitry
Meyer, Julius Germany 12
Meyer,Viktor Germany
Midgley,Thomas, Jr.
Miescher, Johann
Mohr, Carl Germany
Moissan, Ferdinand
Morley, Edward
Müller, Franz
Müller, Paul
Natta, Giulio
Nernst, Hermann Germany 20
Newlands, John
Nieuwland, Julius
Arthur Belgium
Nilson, Lars Fredrik Sweden
Nobel, Alfred Sweden
Noddack, Walter Germany
Ostwald,Wilhelm
Paneth, Friedrich Austria
Paulesco, Nicolas
Pauling, Linus
Perkin, William
Perrin, Jean
Pregl, Fritz Slovenia
Priestley, Joseph
Proust, Joseph
Ramsay,William
Raoult, François
Reich, Ferdinand Germany
Reichenbach, Karl Germany
Reichstein,Tadeus Poland
Remsen, Ira
Richards, Theodore
Richter, Hieronymous 1864 Germany
Ritter, Johann Germany 10
Robinson, Robert
Roscoe, Henry
Runge, Friedlieb Germany
Rutherford, Daniel
Ruzicka, Leopold Croatia
Sabatier, Paul
Sainte-Claire Deville,
Henri
Scheele, Carl Sweden
Schönbein, Christian Germany
Sidgwick, Nevil
Nat’l orgin Nat’l orgin
524 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Sobrero, Ascanio 1852 Italy 1 Urey, Harold 1933 USA 11
Soddy, Frederick 1917 England 25 Van’t Hoff, Jacobus 1892 Netherlands 20
Solvay, Ernest 1878 Belgium 1 Vauquelin, Louis 1803 France 18
Soubeiran, Eugene 1831 France 1 Wallach, Otto 1887 Germany 2
Stas, Jean Servais 1853 Belgium 3 Waterston, John 1851 Scotland 2
Staudinger, Hermann 1921 Germany 7 Werner, Alfred 1906 Germany 7
Stoll, Arthur 1927 Switzerland 6 Wigner, Eugene 1942 Hungary 6
Stromeyer, Friedrich 1816 Germany 5 Williamson, Alexander 1864 England 3
Svedberg,The 1924 Sweden 10 Willstätter, Richard 1912 Germany 14
Swinburne, James 1898 Scotland 1 Windaus, Adolf 1916 Germany 8
Sørensen, Soren 1908 Denmark 3 Winkler, Clemens 1878 Germany 5
Takamine, Jokichi 1894 Japan 5 Wollaston, William 1806 England 22
Tennant, Smithson 1801 England 14 Wurtz, Charles 1857 France 4
Thénard, Louis 1817 France 14 Wöhler, Friedrich 1840 Germany 19
Travers, Morris 1912 England 14 Young, James 1862 Scotland 1
Turner-Jones, A. 1944 England 3 Ziegler, Karl 1938 Germany 1
Unverdorben, Otto 1846 Germany 2 Zsigmondy, Richard 1905 Austria 1
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
APPENDIX 5 • 525
THE EARTH SCIENCES INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 597
Parent population 270
Significant figures 85
Major figures 14
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .81
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=85)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 Bruno 1.00 .24 .39 .11 .28 .27 .30 .08 .44 .24
2 Gillespie .24 1.00 .47 .41 .64 .28 .30 .52 .51 .52
3 Hellemans .39 .47 1.00 .20 .53 .46 .57 .40 .38 .21
4 Marcorini .11 .41 .20 1.00 .19 .04 .26 .27 .39 .34
5 Mason .28 .64 .53 .19 1.00 .37 .38 .28 .40 .43
6 Mount .27 .28 .46 .04 .37 1.00 .35 .15 .07 .12
7 Ochoa .30 .30 .57 .26 .38 .35 1.00 .24 .26 .14
8 Porter .08 .52 .40 .27 .28 .15 .24 1.00 .36 .27
9 Taton .44 .51 .38 .39 .40 .07 .26 .36 1.00 .61
10 Wussing .24 .52 .21 .34 .43 .12 .14 .27 .61 1.00
Note: The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate
subscores from the chronologies and the history/biographical dictionary
sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s _ based on the correlations in the
above matrix.
526 • APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Agassiz, Louis 1847 Switzerland 37
Agricola (Georg Bauer)1534 Germany 51
Alberti, Friedrich von 1835 Germany 8
Beaufort, Francis 1814 Ireland 4
Bjerknes, Jakob 1937 Norway 18
Bjerknes,Vilhelm 1902 Norway 29
Blumenbach, Johann 1792 Germany 2
Bowen, Norman 1927 Canada 4
Brandt, Georg 1734 Sweden 17
Brongniart, Alexandre 1810 France 31
Buch, Leopold von 1814 Germany 25
Bullard, Edward 1947 England 4
Bullen, Keith 1946 N. Zealand 9
Buys-Ballot, C.H.D. 1857 Netherlands 1
Cabeo, Niccolo 1626 Italy 7
Chamberlin,Thomas 1883 USA 29
Cleve, Per 1880 Sweden 29
Cronstedt, Axel 1762 Sweden 24
Dana, James 1853 USA 22
Daubrée, Gabriel 1854 France 11
Davis,W. 1890 USA 12
Desmarest, Nicolas 1765 France 33
Dutton, Clarence 1881 USA 25
Ekeberg, Anders 1807 Sweden 13
Ekman,Vagn 1914 Sweden 1
Elie de Beaumont, Jean 1838 France 16
Eskola 1923 Finland 19
Ewing, James 1895 Scotland 8
Ewing,William 1946 USA 26
Ferrel, William 1857 USA 1
Gadolin, Johan 1800 Finland 11
Gahn, Johan 1785 Sweden 14
Guettard, Jean 1755 France 37
Gutenberg, Beno 1929 Germany 14
Hall, James 1801 Scotland 16
Hess, Harry 1946 USA 18
Holmes, Arthur 1930 England 7
Hooke, Robert 1675 England 17
Hutton, James 1766 Scotland 77
Jeffreys, Harold 1931 England 11
Kipfer, Paul 1931 Switzerland 12
Lacaille, Nicolas de 1753 France 9
Leakey, Louis 1943 Kenya 3
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Lenz, Emil 1844 Russia 14
Love, Augustus 1903 England 4
Lyell, Charles 1837 Scotland 100
Maclure,William 1803 Scotland 6
Mallet, Robert 1850 England 4
Mantell, Gideon 1830 England 13
Maupertuis, Pierre de 1738 France 21
Maury, Matthew 1846 USA 40
Méchain, Pierre 1784 France 9
Milne, John 1899 England 14
Mitscherlich, Eilhard 1834 Germany 29
Mohorovicic, Andrija 1897 Croatia 14
Mohs, Friedrich 1813 Germany 6
Moro, Anton 1727 Italy 12
Mosander, Carl 1837 Sweden 37
Murchison, Roderick 1832 Scotland 40
Nicol,William 1808 Scotland 2
Omalius d’Halloy, Jean 1823 Belgium 8
Palissy, Bernard 1554 France 12
Penck, Albrecht 1898 Germany 7
Powell, John 1874 USA 3
Rennell, James 1782 England 4
Richter, Charles 1940 USA 20
Rio, Andres del 1804 Spain 7
Rossby, Carl 1938 Sweden 5
Sabine, Edward 1828 Ireland 19
Saussure, Horace de 1780 Switzerland 35
Sedgwick, Adam 1825 England 31
Smith,William 1809 England 55
Sorby, Henry 1866 England 4
Strabo of Amasia –24 Greece 18
Suess, Eduard 1871 Germany 24
Taylor, Frank 1900 USA 14
Teisserenc de Bort, Léon1895 France 12
Thomson, Charles 1870 Scotland 5
Urbain, Georges 1912 France 12
Vening Meinesz 1927 Netherlands 15
Waage, Peter 1873 Norway 15
Wegener, Alfred 1920 Germany 33
Werner, Abraham 1789 Germany 46
Wilson, John Tuzo 1948 Canada 3
Woodward, John 1705 England 1
APPENDIX 5 • 527
THE PHYSICS INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 700
Parent population 421
Significant figures 218
Major figures 66
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .95
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=218)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
1 Adlington 1.00 .65 .56 .36 .61 .34 .35 .64 .63 .39 .47 .56 .39 .42 .44
2 Asimov .65 1.00 .61 .44 .72 .48 .40 .78 .85 .51 .51 .69 .43 .47 .55
3 Bruno .56 .61 1.00 .44 .69 .51 .45 .63 .63 .47 .50 .63 .57 .52 .56
4 Gillespie .36 .44 .44 1.00 .51 .72 .55 .51 .54 .55 .62 .55 .69 .62 .70
5 Hellemans .61 .72 .69 .51 1.00 .61 .54 .73 .84 .56 .58 .71 .64 .51 .63
6 Marcorini .34 .48 .51 .72 .61 1.00 .59 .53 .56 .64 .63 .60 .74 .63 .76
7 Mason .35 .40 .45 .55 .54 .59 1.00 .51 .50 .54 .63 .59 .72 .70 .71
8 Mount .64 .78 .63 .51 .73 .53 .51 1.00 .77 .52 .56 .70 .56 .54 .62
9 Ochoa .63 .85 .63 .54 .84 .56 .50 .77 1.00 .56 .58 .72 .60 .53 .61
10 Porter .39 .51 .47 .55 .56 .64 .54 .52 .56 1.00 .51 .53 .56 .53 .63
11 Ronan .47 .51 .50 .62 .58 .63 .63 .56 .58 .51 1.00 .64 .60 .77 .71
12 Serres .56 .69 .63 .55 .71 .60 .59 .70 .72 .53 .64 1.00 .65 .63 .73
13 Taton .39 .43 .57 .69 .64 .74 .72 .56 .60 .56 .60 .65 1.00 .61 .76
14 Whitfield .42 .47 .52 .62 .51 .63 .70 .54 .53 .53 .77 .63 .61 1.00 .76
15 Wussing .44 .55 .56 .70 .63 .76 .71 .62 .61 .63 .71 .73 .76 .76 1.00
Note: The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate subscores from the
chronologies and the history/biographical dictionary sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s _
based on the correlations in the above matrix.
528 • APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Alfvén, Hannes Olof 1948 Sweden 1 Chadwick, James 1931 England 19
Alhazen Charles, Jacques 1786 France 11
(ibn al-Haytham) 1005 Arab world 22 Cherenkov, Pavel 1944 Russia 8
Amontons, Guillaume 1703 France 16 Chladni, Ernst 1796 Germany 2
Ampère, André 1815 France 26 Clausius, Rudolf 1862 Germany 33
Anderson, Carl 1945 USA 23 Cockroft, John 1937 England 17
Angström, Anders 1854 Sweden 2 Compton, Arthur Holly1932 USA 23
Appleton, Edward 1932 England 1 Coolidge,William 1913 USA 6
Arago, Dominique Coriolis, Gaspard de 1832 France 5
Archimedes –247 Greece 20 Coster, Dirk 1929 Netherlands 8
Astbury, William 1939 England 1 Coulomb 1776 France 17
Atanasoff, John 1943 USA 2 Curie, Marie 1907 Poland 41
Avogadro, Amedeo 1816 Italy 23 Curie, Pierre 1899 France 47
Balmer, Johann 1865 Switzerland 9 d’Alembert, Jean 1757 France 10
Bardeen, John 1948 USA 17 Davisson, Clinton 1921 USA 11
Barkla, Charles 1917 England 11 Democritus –420 Greece 26
Bartholin, Erasmus 1665 Denmark 12 Descartes, René 1636 France 27
Becquerel, Alexandre 1860 France 8 Dirac, Paul 1942 England 40
Becquerel, Antoine 1892 France 28 Doppler, Christian 1843 Austria 16
Berg, Otto 1925 Germany 8 Dufay, Charles 1738 France 9
Bethe, Hans 1946 Germany 3 Edlefsen, Nils 1933 USA 8
Bhabha, Homi 1949 India 1 Einstein, Albert 1919 Germany 100
Biot, Jean 1814 France 14 Elster, Johann 1894 Germany 3
Bloch, Felix 1945 Switzerland 15 Eötvös, Roland 1888 Hungary 6
Bohr, Niels 1925 Denmark 52 Fabry, Marie 1907 France 1
Boltzmann, Ludwig 1884 Austria 29 Fahrenheit, Daniel 1726 Germany 4
Born, Max 1922 Germany 20 Faraday, Michael 1831 England 86
Bose, Satyendranath 1934 India 1 Fermi, Enrico 1941 Italy 42
Bothe, Walther 1931 Germany 8 Fitzgerald, George 1891 Ireland 13
Bragg,W. Henry 1902 England 16 Fizeau, Armand 1859 France 29
Bragg,W. Lawrence 1930 Australia 17 Foucault, Jean 1859 France 31
Brattain, Walter 1942 USA 11 Franck, James 1922 Germany 5
Braun, Karl 1890 Germany 10 Frank, Ilya 1948 Russia 8
Brewster, David 1821 Scotland 6 Franklin, Benjamin 1750 USA 21
Bridgman, Percy 1922 USA 4 Fraunhofer, Joseph von 1826 Germany 12
Broglie, Louis de 1932 France 20 Freiberg, Dietrich von 1290 Germany 2
Buridan, Jean 1335 France 13 Fresnel, Augustin 1827 France 16
Cagniard de la Tour, Friedmann, Alexander
Charles 1817 France 8 Frisch, Otto 1944 Austria 3
Cailletet, Louis 1872 France 10 Gabor, Dennis 1940 Hungary 11
Canton, John 1758 England 1 Galileo Galilei 1604 Italy 83
Carnot, Nicolas 1832 France 21 Gamow, George 1944 Ukraine 5
Cavendish, Henry 1771 England 57 Geiger, Johannes 1922 Germany 32
APPENDIX 5 • 529
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Geissler, Johann 1855 Germany 9 London, Heinz 1947 Germany 6
Geitel, Hans 1895 Germany 3 Lorentz, Hendrik 1893 Netherlands 26
Gibbs, Josiah 1879 USA 14 Lyot, Bernard 1937 France 1
Gilbert, William 1584 England 37 Mach, Ernst 1878 Bohemia 18
Goldstein, Eugen 1890 Germany 18 Malus, Etienne 1812 France 15
Goudsmit, Samuel 1942 Netherlands 2 Marsden, Ernst 1929 England 11
Gray, Stephen 1706 England 15 Maxwell, James 1871 Scotland 50
Grimaldi, Francesco 1658 Italy 14 Mayer, Johann 1762 Germany 2
Guericke, Otto von 1642 Germany 24 Mayer, Julius von 1854 Germany 18
Hall, Edwin 1895 USA 1 Mayer, Maria 1946 Poland 8
Hauksbee, Francis 1706 England 14 McMillan, Edwin 1947 USA 17
Heaviside, Oliver 1890 England 1 Meitner, Lise 1918 Austria 16
Heisenberg 1941 Germany 41 Melloni, Macedonio 1838 Italy 1
Heitler,Walter 1944 Germany 3 Michelson, Albert 1892 Germany 26
Helmholtz, Hermann 1861 Germany 16 Millikan, Robert 1908 USA 29
Henry, Joseph 1837 USA 19 Moseley, Henry 1915 England 16
Hero of Alexandria 62 Greece 12 Muller,Walther 1928 Germany 2
Hertz, Heinrich 1894 Germany 30 Musschenbroek,
Hess,Victor 1923 Austria 10 Pieter van 1732 Netherlands 18
Hey, James 1949 England 1 Newton, Isaac 1682 England 100
Hooke, Robert 1675 England 36 Nobili, Leopoldo 1824 Italy 5
Hückel, Erich 1936 Germany 6 Nollet, Jean 1740 France 14
Hull, Albert 1920 USA 11 Ohm, Georg 1829 Germany 16
Huygens, Christiaan 1669 Netherlands 39 Oppenheimer, Robert 1944 USA 5
Jansen, Zacharias 1620 Netherlands 1 Ørsted, Hans 1817 Denmark 30
Jensen, Johannes 1947 Germany 5 Pauli, Wolfgang 1940 Austria 32
Joliot, Frédric 1940 France 17 Pearson, Gerald 1945 USA 1
Joliot-Curie, Irène 1937 France 15 Peltier, Jean 1825 France 6
Jordanus de Nemore Perey, Marguerite 1949 France 8
(Nemorarius) 1220 France 2 Petit, Alexis 1820 France 12
Joule, James 1858 England 40 Piccard, Auguste 1924 Switzerland 1
Kamerlingh-Onnes, Pictet, Raoul 1886 Switzerland 9
Heike 1893 Netherlands 19 Planck, Max 1898 Germany 33
Kapitsa, Pyotr 1934 Russia 5 Popov, Aleksandr 1899 Russia 1
Kirchhoff, Gustave 1864 Germany 43 Powell, Cecil 1943 England 7
Kleist, Ewald von 1740 Germany 10 Prandtl, Ludwig 1915 Germany 3
Laue, Max von 1919 Germany 14 Prevost, Pierre 1791 Switzerland 5
Lawrence, Ernest 1941 USA 13 Röntgen, Wilhelm 1885 Germany 22
Lebedev, Pyotr 1906 Russia 7 Rabi, Isidor Isaac 1938 Slovakia 7
Lenard, Philipp 1902 Germany 19 Raman, Chandrasekhara 1928 India 10
Leonardo da Vinci 1492 Italy 13 Rossi, Bruno 1945 Italy 1
Linde, Carl von 1882 Germany 3 Rowland, Henry 1888 USA 5
Lodge, Oliver 1891 England 1 Ruedenberg, Reinhold 1923 Germany 1
London, Fritz 1940 Germany 9 Rutherford, Ernest 1911 N. Zealand 88
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
530 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Sabine, Wallace 1908 USA 1 Thompson, Benjamin 1793 USA 25
Saha, Meghnad 1934 India 1 Thomson, George 1932 England 11
Sauveur, Joseph 1693 France 6 Thomson, J.J. 1896 England 51
Schaefer,Vincent 1946 USA 1 Thomson, William 1864 Scotland 27
Schmidt, Bernhard 1919 Russia 1 Tomonaga, Sin-Itiro 1946 Japan 8
Schrödinger, Erwin 1927 Austria 27 Torricelli, Evangelista 1647 Italy 24
Schweigger, Johann 1819 Germany 1 Uhlenbeck, George 1940 Netherlands 1
Seebeck, Thomas Van de Graaff, Robert 1941 USA 4
Segrè, Emilio 1945 Italy 23 Van der Waals,
Shockley, William 1950 USA 10 Johannes 1877 Netherlands 15
Snell,Willebrord 1620 Netherlands 12 Veksler,Vladimir 1947 Ukraine 8
Sommerfeld, Arnold 1908 Germany 20 Villard, Paul 1900 France 10
Stark, Johannes 1914 Germany 9 Volta, Alessandro 1785 Italy 18
Stefan, Josef 1875 Slovenia 9 Walton, Ernest 1943 Ireland 12
Stern, Otto 1928 Germany 9 Watson,William 1755 England 1
Stokes, George 1859 Ireland 21 Weber,Wilhelm 1844 Germany 7
Stoney, George 1866 Ireland 11 Wheatstone, Charles 1842 England 10
Strassman, Friedrich 1942 Germany 9 Wien, Wilhelm 1904 Germany 11
Strutt, John William 1882 England 27 Wilcke, Johan 1772 Germany 2
Strutt, Robert John 1915 England 1 Wilson, Charles 1909 Scotland 14
Sturgeon,William 1823 England 8 Young, Thomas 1813 England 37
Szilard, Leo 1938 Hungary 7 Yukawa, Hideki 1947 Japan 14
Tacke, Ida (Noddack) 1936 Germany 8 Zeeman, Pieter 1905 Netherlands 13
Tamm, Igor 1935 Russia 10 Zernike, Frits 1928 Netherlands 1
Thales –585 Greece 12 Zinn, Walter 1946 Canada 11
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
APPENDIX 5 • 531
THE MATHEMATICS INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 906
Parent population 626
Significant figures 191
Major figures 48
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .93
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=191)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
1 Boyer 1.00 0.43 0.45 0.68 0.44 0.75 0.54 0.64 0.55 0.56 0.35 0.56 0.66 0.38 0.79 0.78 0.79
2 Bruno 0.43 1.00 0.35 0.24 0.36 0.41 0.46 0.26 0.29 0.47 0.12 0.33 0.27 0.22 0.50 0.41 0.38
3 Eves 0.45 0.35 1.00 0.29 0.41 0.54 0.52 0.22 0.31 0.55 0.18 0.49 0.29 0.33 0.47 0.43 0.43
4 Gilles. 0.68 0.24 0.29 1.00 0.44 0.46 0.38 0.61 0.32 0.42 0.42 0.49 0.62 0.27 0.51 0.62 0.68
5 Grun 0.44 0.36 0.41 0.44 1.00 0.50 0.43 0.28 0.32 0.50 0.23 0.40 0.40 0.33 0.47 0.44 0.49
6 Gull. 0.75 0.41 0.54 0.46 0.50 1.00 0.70 0.49 0.52 0.67 0.30 0.64 0.50 0.53 0.71 0.68 0.70
7 Hell. 0.54 0.46 0.52 0.38 0.43 0.70 1.00 0.45 0.32 0.69 0.40 0.75 0.23 0.61 0.57 0.60 0.55
8 Marc. 0.64 0.26 0.22 0.61 0.28 0.49 0.45 1.00 0.28 0.47 0.41 0.57 0.44 0.44 0.51 0.66 0.67
9 Mason0.55 0.29 0.31 0.32 0.32 0.52 0.32 0.28 1.00 0.37 0.18 0.10 0.50 0.22 0.71 0.52 0.55
10 Ochoa0.56 0.47 0.55 0.42 0.50 0.67 0.69 0.47 0.37 1.00 0.37 0.63 0.34 0.52 0.62 0.58 0.56
11 Porter 0.35 0.12 0.18 0.42 0.23 0.30 0.40 0.41 0.18 0.37 1.00 0.46 0.05 0.43 0.34 0.49 0.30
12 Park. 0.56 0.33 0.49 0.49 0.40 0.64 0.75 0.57 0.10 0.63 0.46 1.00 0.26 0.56 0.49 0.62 0.53
13 Ronan0.66 0.27 0.29 0.62 0.40 0.50 0.23 0.44 0.50 0.34 0.05 0.26 1.00 0.12 0.59 0.50 0.66
14 Serres 0.38 0.22 0.33 0.27 0.33 0.53 0.61 0.44 0.22 0.52 0.43 0.56 0.12 1.00 0.37 0.44 0.34
15 Swetz 0.79 0.50 0.47 0.51 0.47 0.71 0.57 0.51 0.71 0.62 0.34 0.49 0.59 0.37 1.00 0.72 0.71
16 Taton 0.78 0.41 0.43 0.62 0.44 0.68 0.60 0.66 0.52 0.58 0.49 0.62 0.50 0.44 0.72 1.00 0.74
17 Wuss. 0.79 0.38 0.43 0.68 0.49 0.70 0.55 0.67 0.55 0.56 0.30 0.53 0.66 0.34 0.71 0.74 1.00
Note: The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate subscores from the chronologies
and the history/biographical dictionary sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s _ based on the
correlations in the above matrix.
532 • APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Abül Wafa (Qafa) 980 Persia 7 Chuquet, Nicolas 1485 France 8
Abel, Niels 1829 Norway 24 Clavius, Christoph 1577 Germany 5
Adelhard of Bath 1125 England 9 Clifford,William 1879 England 2
Albategnius (al-Battani) 898 Persia 4 Cotes, Roger 1716 England 8
al-Khwarizmi, Cramer, Gabriel 1744 Switzerland 6
Abu Ja’far 840 Arab world 23 d’Alembert, Jean 1757 France 8
Apollonius of Perga –240 Greece 29 De Morgan, Augustus 1846 England 7
Archimedes –247 Greece 33 Dedekind, Richard 1871 Germany 23
Archytas of Tarentum –390 Greece 8 Desargues, Girard 1631 France 19
Argand, Jean 1808 Switzerland 7 Descartes, René 1636 France 54
Artin, Emil 1938 Bohemia 2 Dickson, Leonard 1914 USA 2
Aryabhata I 500 India 16 Dinostratos –350 Greece 5
Banach, Stefan 1932 Poland 8 Diophantus
Barrow, Isaac 1670 England 16 of Alexandria 250 Rome 39
Beltrami, Eugenio 1875 Italy 6 Dirichlet, Gustav 1845 Germany 13
Bernoulli, Daniel 1740 Switzerland 6 Eratosthenes –236 Greece 8
Bernoulli, Jakob I 1694 Switzerland 41 Euclid of Alexandria –230 Greece 83
Bernoulli, Johann I 1707 Switzerland 19 Euler, Leonhard 1747 Switzerland 100
Bernoulli, Nikolaus I 1727 Switzerland 5 Fermat, Pierre de 1641 France 72
Bhaskara II 1154 India 12 Ferrari, Ludovico 1562 Italy 5
Birkhoff, George 1924 USA 6 Ferro, Scipione 1505 Italy 6
Bolyai, János 1842 Slovakia 15 Fibonacci, Leonardo 1210 Italy 34
Bolzano, Bernardus 1821 Bohemia 14 Fourier, Jean 1808 France 24
Bombelli, Rafael 1566 Italy 12 Fréchet, Rene 1918 France 15
Boole, George 1855 England 20 Frege, Friedrich 1888 Germany 7
Borel, Felix 1911 France 8 Frobenius, Georg 1889 Germany 3
Bourbaki, Galois, Evariste 1832 France 15
Nicolas (pseud.) 1950 France 6 Gauss, Carl 1817 Germany 81
Bradwardine, Thomas 1330 England 1 Gelfond, Aleksander 1946 Russia 7
Brahmagupta 638 India 13 Gergonne, Joseph 1811 France 14
Briggs, Henry 1601 England 15 Germain, Sophie 1816 France 4
Brouncker,William 1660 England 3 Girard, Albert 1632 France 9
Brouwer, Luitzen 1921 Netherlands 18 Gödel, Kurt 1946 Bohemia 18
Bürgi, Justus 1592 Austria 13 Goldbach, Christian 1730 Germany 3
Cantor, Georg 1885 Germany 50 Grassmann, Hermann 1849 Germany 20
Cardano, Girolamo 1541 Italy 37 Green, George 1833 England 1
Carnot, Lazare Nicolas 1793 France 17 Gregory, James 1675 Scotland 23
Cataldi, Pietro 1592 Italy 8 Guldin, Paul 1617 Switzerland 6
Cauchy, Augustin 1829 France 34 Gunter, Edmund 1621 England 1
Cavalieri, Francesco 1638 Italy 22 Hadamard, Jacques 1905 France 11
Cayley, Arthur 1861 England 32 Hamilton, William 1845 Ireland 28
Ceulen, Ludolf van 1580 Netherlands 6 Hankel, Hermann 1873 Germany 3
Chasles, Michel 1833 France 8 Hardy, Godfrey 1917 England 7
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
APPENDIX 5 • 533
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Harriot,Thomas 1600 England 2 Mises, Richard von 1923 Austria 1
Hartmann, Georg 1529 Germany 1 Möbius, August 1830 Germany 10
Hausdorff, Felix 1908 Germany 6 Moivre, Abraham de 1707 France 18
Heine, Heinrich E. 1852 Germany 4 Monge, Gaspard 1786 France 27
Hermite, Charles 1862 France 7 Morgenstern, Oskar 1944 USA 7
Hero of Alexandria 62 Greece 17 Napier, John 1590 Scotland 19
Hilbert, David 1902 Germany 40 Newton, Isaac 1682 England 89
Hippias of Elis –400 Greece 7 Nicomachus of Gerasa 100 Rome 5
Hippocrates of Chios –430 Greece 10 Noether, Emmy 1922 Germany 10
Hudde, Jan 1668 Netherlands 5 Oresme, Nicole 1360 France 26
Huygens, Christiaan 1669 Netherlands 21 Oughtred,William 1615 England 13
Hypatia of Alexandria 410 Rome 3 Pacioli, Luca 1485 Italy 21
Jacobi, Carl 1844 Germany 17 Pappus of Alexandria 350 Greece 16
Jordan, Marie 1878 France 11 Pascal, Blaise 1662 France 47
Khayyam, Omar Pasch, Moritz 1883 Germany 3
(al-Khayyami) 1088 Persia 13 Peacock, George 1831 England 8
Klein, Christian 1889 Germany 22 Peano, Giuseppe 1898 Italy 24
Kolmogorov, Andrey 1943 Russia 4 Pearson, Karl 1897 England 8
Kovalevskaya, Sonya 1890 Russia 8 Pitiscus, Bartholomew 1601 Germany 8
Kronecker, Leopold 1863 Germany 10 Plücker, Julius 1841 Germany 11
Kummer, Ernst 1850 Germany 7 Poincaré, Jules 1894 France 28
L’Hospital, Poisson, Siméon 1821 France 12
Guillaume de 1701 France 9 Poncelet, Jean 1828 France 26
Lagrange, Joseph 1776 Italy 30 Ptolemy 140 Rome 28
Lambert, Johann 1768 Germany 15 Pythagoras of Samos –520 Greece 23
Laplace, Pierre 1789 France 17 Quetelet, Adolphe 1836 Belgium 1
Lebesgue, Henri 1915 France 10 Ramanujan, Srinivasa 1920 India 7
Legendre, Adrien 1792 France 36 Recorde, Robert 1550 England 17
Leibniz, Gottfried 1686 Germany 72 Riemann, Bernhard 1866 Germany 47
Levi-Civita,Tullio 1913 Italy 4 Rolle, Michel 1692 France 3
Lie, Marius 1882 Norway 10 Rudolff, Christoff 1540 Germany 9
Lindemann, Carl von 1892 Germany 11 Ruffini, Paolo 1805 Italy 7
Liouville, Joseph 1849 France 13 Russell, Bertrand 1912 England 15
Liu Hui 250 China 5 Saccheri, Girolamo 1707 Italy 11
Lobachevsky, Nikolay 1832 Russia 19 Saint Vincent,
Maclaurin, Colin 1738 Scotland 27 Gregorius 1624 Belgium 2
Markov, Andrei 1896 Russia 7 Simpson, Thomas 1750 England 3
Menaechmus –350 Greece 11 Steiner, Jakob 1836 Switzerland 8
Menelaus Stevin, Simon 1588 Belgium 20
of Alexandria 98 Rome 14 Stifel, Michael 1527 Germany 10
Meray, Hagues 1875 France 3 Stirling, James 1732 Scotland 3
Mercator, Nicolaus 1659 Belgium 6 Sylvester, James 1854 England 9
Mersenne, Marin 1628 France 6 Tartaglia (Fontana) 1539 Italy 32
Minkowski, Hermann 1904 Germany 11 Taylor, Brook 1725 England 16
534 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Tchebycheff, Pafnuty 1861 Russia 4 Waerden, B.L. van der 1943 Netherlands 4
Theaetetus of Athens –377 Greece 3 Wallis, John 1656 England 36
Theodorus of Cyrene –425 Greece 5 Wedderburn, Joseph 1922 Scotland 1
Theon of Smyrna 130 Greece 5 Weierstrass, Karl 1855 Germany 20
Tschirnhaus, Ehrenfried1691 Germany 2 Wessel, Caspar 1785 Norway 9
Vallée-Poussin, Weyl, Hermann 1925 Germany 7
Charles de la 1906 Belgium 6 Whitehead, Alfred 1901 England 11
Vandermonde, Widman, Johannes 1498 Bohemia 8
Alexandre 1775 France 1 Wiener, Norbert 1934 USA 1
Venn, John 1874 England 1 Zeno of Elea –450 Greece 2
Viéte, Francois 1580 France 36 Zermelo, Ernst 1911 Germany 6
Volterra,Vito 1900 Italy 5 Zhu Shijie 1290 China 5
Von Neumann, John 1943 Hungary 19 Zu Chongzhi 479 China 5
APPENDIX 5 • 535
THE MEDICINE INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 1,080
Parent population 540
Significant figures 160
Major figures 31
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .87
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=160)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
1 Adling.1.00 .45 –.01 .33 .11 .29 .45 .19 .02 .11 .31 .33 .44 .04 .13 .16 –.02
2 Asimov .45 1.00 .13 .39 .25 .34 .61 .19 .07 .05 .52 .29 .51 –.01 .18 .27 .07
3 Bendin.–.01 .13 1.00 .08 .32 .16 .11 .41 .17 .39 .04 .17 .13 .47 .49 .29 .30
4 Bruno .33 .39 .08 1.00 .35 .24 .37 .31 .08 .16 .34 .29 .43 .10 .21 .18 .13
5 Gilles. .11 .25 .32 .35 1.00 .25 .37 .53 .29 .40 .30 .31 .30 .35 .44 .37 .42
6 Grun .29 .34 .16 .24 .25 1.00 .40 .25 .07 .17 .35 .26 .30 .12 .28 .31 .11
7 Hellem..45 .61 .11 .37 .37 .40 1.00 .23 .06 .11 .43 .29 .51 .09 .23 .27 .15
8 Magner .19 .19 .41 .31 .53 .25 .23 1.00 .31 .85 .21 .35 .29 .84 .74 .34 .35
9 Marc. .02 .07 .17 .08 .29 .07 .06 .31 1.00 .37 .02 .03 –.01 .26 .32 .45 .52
10 McGr. .11 .05 .39 .16 .40 .17 .11 .85 .37 1.00 .08 .37 .22 .83 .67 .29 .49
11 Mount .31 .52 .04 .34 .30 .35 .43 .21 .02 .08 1.00 .39 .38 .03 .15 .20 .15
12 Ochoa .33 .29 .17 .29 .31 .26 .29 .35 .03 .37 .39 1.00 .41 .24 .32 .24 .24
13 Park. .44 .51 .13 .43 .30 .30 .51 .29 –.01 .22 .38 .41 1.00 .16 .19 .27 .18
14 Port(a) .04 –.01 .47 .10 .35 .12 .09 .84 .26 .83 .03 .24 .16 1.00 .79 .25 .34
15 Port(b) .13 .18 .49 .21 .44 .28 .23 .74 .32 .67 .15 .32 .19 .79 1.00 .47 .35
16 Port(c) .16 .27 .29 .18 .37 .31 .27 .34 .45 .29 .20 .24 .27 .25 .47 1.00 .37
17 Taton –.02 .07 .30 .13 .42 .11 .15 .35 .52 .49 .15 .24 .18 .34 .35 .37 1.00
Note: The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate subscores from the
chronologies and the history/biographical dictionary sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s _
based on the correlations in the above matrix.
536 • APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Addison, Thomas 1833 England 22 Dick, Gladys 1921 USA 7
Alcmaeon 520 Greece 4 Dioskourides, Pedanius 80 Rome 32
Allbutt, Thomas 1876 Britain 10 Domagk, Gerhard 1935 Germany 36
Aselli, Gasparo 1621 Italy 2 Donders, Franciscus 1858 Netherlands 6
Auenbrugger, Leopold 1762 Austria 20 Drinker, Philip 1934 USA 8
Banting, Frederick 1931 Canada 27 Ehrlich, Paul 1894 Germany 59
Beddoes, Thomas 1800 England 17 Eijkman, Christiaan 1898 Netherlands 18
Behring, Emil von 1894 Germany 44 Einhorn, Alfred 1904 Germany 12
Bell, Charles 1814 Scotland 16 Enders, John 1937 USA 9
Bernard, Claude 1853 France 24 Euler, Ulf von 1945 Sweden 2
Best, Charles 1939 USA 19 Evans, Herbert 1922 USA 11
Billroth, Christian 1869 Germany 14 Fauchard, Pierre 1718 France 17
Blalock, Alfred 1939 USA 10 Fernel, François 1537 France 15
Böerhaave, Hermann 1708 Netherlands 29 Fibiger, Johannes 1907 Denmark 5
Bovet, Daniel 1947 Switzerland 21 Finlay, Carlos 1873 Cuba 9
Bretonneau, Pierre 1818 France 10 Finsen, Niels 1900 Denmark 6
Breuer, Josef 1882 Austria 25 Fleming, Alexander 1921 Scotland 47
Bright, Richard 1829 England 21 Flexner, Simon 1903 USA 3
Broca, Pierre 1864 France 3 Florey, Howard 1938 Australia 28
Brunschwig, Forssmann, Werner 1944 Germany 17
Hieronymus 1490 Germany 1 Fracastoro, Girolamo 1518 Italy 33
Burnet, Frank 1939 Australia 11 Freud, Sigmund 1896 Bohemia 34
Cannon,Walter 1911 USA 16 Funk, Casimir 1924 Poland 23
Carrel, Alexis 1913 France 36 Galen of Pergamum 170 Greece 74
Caventou, Joseph 1835 France 18 Garrod, Archibald 1897 England 3
Celsus, Aulus 20 Rome 22 Gibbon, John H. 1943 USA 14
Cerletti, Ugo 1917 Italy 5 Glisson, Francis 1637 England 8
Chain, Ernst 1946 Germany 27 Goldberger, Joseph 1914 Slovakia 17
Charcot, Jean 1865 France 25 Gorgas, William 1894 USA 5
Chauliac, Guy de 1330 France 16 Graaf, Regnier de 1673 Netherlands 2
Claus, Carl 1836 Russia 1 Hahnemann,
Cohnheim, Julius 1879 Germany 6 Christian 1795 Germany 14
Collip, James 1932 Canada 19 Halsted, William 1892 USA 21
Constantine of Africa 1055 No Africa 5 Hata, Sahachiro 1912 Japan 15
Cordus,Valerius 1544 Germany 4 Hench, Philip 1936 USA 11
Cournand, André 1935 France 10 Henle, Friedrich 1849 Germany 15
Crile, George 1904 USA 4 Henry of Mondeville 1300 France 8
Cushing, Harvey 1909 USA 20 Hinshaw, Corwin 1942 USA 8
Dale, Henry 1915 England 6 Hippocrates of Cos –420 Greece 93
Darwin, Erasmus 1771 England 6 Hodgkin, Thomas 1838 England 10
Davis, Marguerite 1914 USA 16 Holmes, Oliver 1849 USA 16
Denis, Jean 1680 France 11 Huggins, Charles 1941 Canada 5
Dick, George 1921 USA 7 Hunter, John 1768 Scotland 34
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
APPENDIX 5 • 537
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
ibn an-Nafis Ramazzini, Bernardino 1673 Italy 10
(al-Qarashi) 1250 Syria 4 Ramón y Cajal,
Jackson, John 1875 England 13 Santiago 1892 Spain 4
Jenner, Edward 1789 England 32 Reed, Walter 1891 USA 14
King, Charles 1936 USA 16 Rhazes (al-Razi) 894 Persia 26
Kitasato, Shibasaburo 1892 Japan 42 Rice-Wray, Edris 1944 USA 1
Klebs, Edwin 1873 Germany 27 Richards, Dickinson 1935 USA 10
Koch, Robert 1883 Germany 89 Ricketts, Howard 1910 USA 19
Koller, Carl 1897 Austria 12 Riva-Rocci, Scipione 1903 Italy 10
Kuhn, Richard 1940 Austria 8 Rock, John 1930 USA 13
Laënnec, René 1821 France 54 Ross, Ronald 1897 England 20
Lind, James 1756 Scotland 23 Roux, Pierre 1893 France 25
Lister, Joseph 1867 England 43 Rush, Benjamin 1786 USA 15
Loewi, Otto 1913 Germany 2 Santorio, Santorio 1601 Italy 16
Löffler, Friedrich 1892 Germany 21 Semmelweiss, Ignaz 1858 Hungary 34
Lower, Richard 1671 England 18 Sertürner, Friedrich 1823 Bohemia 3
Magendie, François 1823 France 8 Sharpey-Schäfer,
Manson, Patrick 1884 Scotland 14 Edward 1890 England 2
McCollum, Elmer 1919 USA 51 Shaw, Louis 1926 USA 8
Mellanby, Edward 1924 Scotland 15 Simpson, James 1851 Scotland 19
Minot, George 1925 USA 14 Snow, John 1853 England 28
Morgagni, Giovanni 1722 Italy 21 Soranus of Ephesus 120 Rome 13
Morton,William 1859 USA 23 Stahl, Georg 1700 Germany 11
Murphy, William 1932 USA 10 Sydenham, Thomas 1664 England 39
Neisser, Albert 1895 Germany 7 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 1933 Hungary 30
Nicolle, Charles 1906 France 11 Taussig, Helen 1938 USA 8
Oribasios of Pergamon 365 Greece 5 Theiler, Max 1939 So Africa 13
Paracelsus 1533 Switzerland 68 Vesalius, Andreas 1554 Belgium 19
Paré, Ambroise 1550 France 46 Virchow, Rudolph 1861 Germany 27
Parkinson, James 1795 England 10 Wagner von Jauregg,
Pasteur, Louis 1862 France 100 Julius 1897 Austria 9
Pelletier, Pierre 1828 France 22 Waksman, Selman 1928 Russia 22
Petit, Jean 1714 France 7 Watson,Thomas 1832 England 2
Pettenkofer, Max von 1858 Germany 8 Wells, Horace 1848 USA 11
Pincus, Gregory 1943 USA 16 Whipple, George Hoyt 1918 USA 2
Pinel, Philippe 1785 France 22 Whytt, Robert 1754 Scotland 6
Pirquet, Clemens von 1914 Austria 7 Wilkins, Robert 1946 USA 10
Pott, Percival 1754 England 7 Willis, Thomas 1661 England 26
Praxagoras of Cos –310 Greece 3 Withering, William 1781 England 22
Pringle, John 1747 Scotland 6 Wright, Almroth 1901 England 1
538 • APPENDIX 5
THE TECHNOLOGY INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 1,139
Parent population 848
Significant figures 239
Major figures 40
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .84
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=239)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
1 Adling.1.00 .27 .50 .09 .08 .05 .41 .47 .15 .48 .26 .40 .16 .27 .16 .20 .02
2 Asimov .27 1.00 .55 .20 –.01 .00 .34 .48 .13 .54 .58 .41 .25 .14 .10 .29 .05
3 Bruno .50 .55 1.00 .25 .02 .01 .45 .55 .24 .58 .47 .42 .28 .22 .17 .37 .11
4 Card .09 .20 .25 1.00 .26 .15 .18 .22 .32 .31 .05 .20 .35 .52 .19 .54 .25
5 Gille .08 –.01 .02 .26 1.00 .56 .03 .27 .42 .20 –.03 .09 .09 .65 .47 .41 .49
6 Gilles. .05 .00 .01 .15 .56 1.00 .07 .33 .47 .09 .00 .19 .04 .44 .66 .11 .51
7 Grun .41 .34 .45 .18 .03 .07 1.00 .52 .12 .39 .31 .49 .25 .27 .15 .26 .06
8 Hellem..47 .48 .55 .22 .27 .33 .52 1.00 .32 .52 .35 .43 .18 .43 .34 .34 .22
9 Marc. .15 .13 .24 .32 .42 .47 .12 .32 1.00 .28 .08 .16 .17 .44 .50 .28 .58
10 Mount .48 .54 .58 .31 .20 .09 .39 .52 .28 1.00 .39 .42 .31 .35 .13 .32 .16
11 Ochoa .26 .58 .47 .05 –.03 .00 .31 .35 .08 .39 1.00 .32 .23 .02 .05 .18 –.01
12 Park. .40 .41 .42 .20 .09 .19 .49 .43 .16 .42 .32 1.00 .11 .26 .25 .24 .18
13 Porter .16 .25 .28 .35 .09 .04 .25 .18 .17 .31 .23 .11 1.00 .28 .06 .45 .07
14 Singer .27 .14 .22 .52 .65 .44 .27 .43 .44 .35 .02 .26 .28 1.00 .32 .55 .38
15 Taton .16 .10 .17 .19 .47 .66 .15 .34 .50 .13 .05 .25 .06 .32 1.00 .18 .57
16 Will. .20 .29 .37 .54 .41 .11 .26 .34 .28 .32 .18 .24 .45 .55 .18 1.00 .28
17 Wuss. .02 .05 .11 .25 .49 .51 .06 .22 .58 .16 –.01 .18 .07 .38 .57 .28 1.00
Note: The index scores for the scientific inventories combined separate subscores from the
chronologies and the history/biographical dictionary sources. The reliability refers to Cronbach’s _
based on the correlations in the above matrix.
APPENDIX 5 • 539
ROSTER OF THE SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Adams, Ansel 1942 USA 1
Aiken, Howard 1940 USA 12
Alberti, Leon Battista 1444 Italy 20
Amici, Giovanni
Battista 1826 Italy 1
Anschutz-Kämpfer,
Hermann 1912 Germany 8
Appert, Nicolas 1790 France 23
Archimedes –247 Greece 51
Arkwright, Richard 1772 England 27
Armstrong, Edwin 1930 USA 26
Armstrong, William 1850 England 10
Aspdin, Joseph 1839 England 11
Auer, Karl 1898 Austria 9
Babbage, Charles 1832 England 33
Baekeland, Leo 1903 Belgium 16
Baird, John 1928 Scotland 13
Beebe, Charles 1917 USA 1
Bell, Alexander 1887 Scotland 25
Bell, Patrick 1839 Scotland 11
Benz, Carl 1884 Germany 18
Bessemer, Henry 1853 England 34
Birdseye, Clarence 1926 USA 8
Biro Brothers 1938 Hungary 10
Blanchard, Jean 1793 France 15
Blériot, Louis 1912 France 12
Booth, Herbert 1911 England 7
Bosch, Carl 1914 Germany 14
Boulton, Matthew 1768 England 17
Boyle, Robert 1667 Germany 4
Bramah, Joseph 1788 England 16
Branly, Edouard 1884 France 11
Braun, Karl 1890 Germany 8
Brunel, Isambard 1846 England 23
Brunel, Marc 1809 France 11
Brunelleschi, Filippo 1417 Italy 1
Bunsen, Robert 1851 Germany 13
Bush,Vannevar 1930 USA 16
Böttger, Johann 1719 Germany 10
Cardano, Girolamo 1541 Italy 2
Carlson, Chester 1946 USA 14
Cartwright, Edmund 1783 England 10
Cayley, George 1813 England 24
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Chappe, Claude 1803 France 11
Cierva, Juan de la 1935 Spain 8
Claude, Georges 1910 France 10
Colt, Samuel 1854 USA 15
Cooke,William 1846 England 13
Cort, Henry 1780 England 14
Crompton, Samuel 1793 England 7
Crookes, William 1872 England 1
Cross, Charles 1895 England 12
Ctesibius –270 Greece 20
Cugnot, Nicholas 1768 France 12
Daguerre, Louis 1827 France 16
Daimler, Gottlieb 1874 Germany 16
Darby, Abraham 1717 England 18
Darby, Abraham III 1790 England 11
Davy, Humphrey 1818 England 18
De Forest, Lee 1913 USA 23
Deslandres, Henri 1893 France 1
Dewar, James 1882 Scotland 13
Diesel, Rudolf 1898 Germany 28
Dollond, John 1746 England 1
Dornberger, Walter 1935 Germany 7
Drake, Edwin 1859 USA 10
Drebbel, Cornelius 1612 Netherlands 10
Duhamel du
Monceau, Henri 1740 France 1
Dunlop, John 1880 England 10
Eastman, George 1894 USA 15
Edison, Thomas 1887 USA 100
Eiffel, Alexandre 1872 France 6
Ericsson, John 1843 Sweden 10
Evans, Oliver 1795 USA 23
Fahrenheit, Daniel 1726 Germany 1
Faraday, Michael 1831 England 31
Fessenden, Reginald 1906 Canada 14
Field, Cyrus 1859 USA 7
Fitch, John 1783 USA 15
Fleming, John 1889 England 17
Ford, Henry 1903 USA 17
Fourneyron, Benoît 1842 France 9
Fox Talbot, William 1840 England 16
Francis, James Bicheno 1855 England 8
Franklin, Benjamin 1750 USA 32
540 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Fresnel, Augustin 1827 France 4 Land, Edwin 1949 USA 19
Fulton, Robert 1805 USA 21 Langley, Samuel 1874 USA 8
Gagnan, Emile 1943 France 2 Laval, Carl de 1885 Sweden 9
Galileo Galilei 1604 Italy 18 Lawes, John 1854 England 16
Gascoigne, William 1644 England 6 Lebon, Philippe 1804 France 12
Gauss, Carl 1817 Germany 9 Leclanché, Georges 1879 France 8
Gay-Lussac, Joseph 1818 France 15 Lee,William 1590 England 8
Giffard, Henri 1865 France 9 Leeuwenhoek,
Goddard, Robert 1922 USA 26 Antoni van 1672 Netherlands 1
Goethals, George 1898 USA 10 Leibniz, Gottfried 1686 Germany 26
Goldmark, Peter 1946 Hungary 15 Lenoir, Jean 1862 Belgium 23
Goodyear, Charles 1840 USA 18 Lenormand, L.S. 1783 France 8
Gramme, Zénobe 1866 Belgium 12 Leonardo da Vinci 1492 Italy 60
Gray, Elisha 1875 USA 14 Lesseps, Ferdinand de 1845 France 9
Groves, Leslie 1936 USA 10 Liebig, Justis von 1843 Germany 5
Gutenberg, Johannes 1430 Germany 23 Lilienthal, Otto 1888 Germany 14
Hadfield, Robert 1898 England 6 Lindbergh, Charles 1942 USA 10
Hadley, John 1722 England 10 Linde, Carl von 1882 Germany 10
Hall, John 1805 USA 7 Lippershey, Hans 1610 Netherlands 1
Hancock,Thomas 1826 England 9 Lodge, Oliver 1891 England 10
Hargreaves, James 1760 England 10 Lumière Brothers 1902 France 14
Harrison, John 1733 England 18 Macmillan, Kirkpatrick 1839 Scotland 7
Henlein, Peter 1502 Germany 2 Marconi, Guglielmo 1914 Italy 50
Henry, Joseph 1837 USA 22 Maskelyne, Nevil 1772 England 6
Hero of Alexandria 62 Greece 27 Mauchly, John 1947 USA 26
Hollerith, Herman 1900 USA 16 Maudslay, Henry 1811 England 15
Hooke, Robert 1675 England 23 Maybach,Wilhelm 1886 Germany 16
Hornblower, Jonathan 1793 England 12 McAdam, John 1796 Scotland 12
Howe, Elias 1859 USA 11 McCormick, Cyrus 1849 USA 15
Hughes, David 1871 England 14 McCune, William 1942 USA 1
Huntsman, Benjamin 1744 England 11 Meikle, Andrew 1783 Scotland 9
Hussey, Obed 1873 USA 11 Mergenthaler, Ottmar 1894 Germany 10
Huygens, Christiaan 1669 Netherlands 51 Midgley,Thomas, Jr. 1929 USA 16
Hyatt, John 1877 USA 15 Moissan, Ferdinand 1892 France 7
Héroult, Paul 1903 France 19 Montgolfier Brothers 1785 France 19
Jacquard, Joseph 1792 France 15 Morse, Samuel 1831 USA 30
Jansky, Karl 1945 USA 1 Murdock, William 1794 Scotland 24
Kay, John 1744 England 15 Nasmyth, James 1848 Scotland 13
Kelly, William 1853 USA 16 Neckam, Alexander 1125 Britain 7
Kennelly, Arthur 1901 Ireland 12 Newcomen, Thomas 1703 England 33
Kettering, Charles 1916 USA 11 Nicholson, William 1793 England 1
Korolev, Sergei 1947 Russia 1 Niépce, Joseph 1805 France 21
Koster, Lauren 1410 Netherlands 11 Nobel, Alfred 1873 Sweden 32
APPENDIX 5 • 541
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Norman, Robert 1590 England 1 Sommeiller, Germain 1855 France 6
Otis, Elisha 1851 USA 10 Sostrastes of Cnidos –270 Greece 8
Otto, Nikolaus 1872 Germany 20 Sperry, Elmer 1900 USA 12
Papin, Denis 1687 France 31 Sprague, Frank 1897 USA 11
Parkes, Alexander 1853 England 17 Steinmetz, Charles 1905 Germany 1
Parsons, Charles 1894 Ireland 21 Stephenson, George 1821 England 30
Pasteur, Louis 1862 France 25 Stevens, John 1893 USA 10
Pi Sheng 1045 China 8 Strutt, Jedediah 1764 England 8
Pixii, Hippolyte 1835 France 6 Swan, Joseph 1868 England 24
Planté, Gaston 1874 France 12 Tesla, Nikola 1896 Croatia 18
Platt, Hugh 1603 England 8 Thomson, James 1862 Scotland 4
Popov, Aleksandr 1899 Russia 19 Thomson, William 1864 Scotland 29
Porta, Giambattista Trevithick, Richard 1811 England 29
della 1575 Italy 8 Tsiolkovsky,
Poulsen,Valdemar 1909 Denmark 12 Konstantin 1897 Russia 5
Prony, Gaspard de 1795 France 6 Cai Lun 100 China 9
Pullman, George 1871 USA 6 Tull, Jethro 1714 England 17
Rankine,William 1860 Scotland 4 Vaucanson, Jacques de 1749 France 10
Reynolds, Osborne 1882 England 1 Vitruvius Pollio –50 Rome 43
Riquet de Benrepos, Von Neumann, John 1943 Hungary 26
Pierre 1664 France 6 Wankel, Felix 1942 Germany 13
Roebling, John 1846 Germany 9 Watson-Watt, Robert 1932 Scotland 16
Roebuck, John 1758 England 14 Watt, James 1776 Scotland 100
Ruhmkorff, Heinrich 1843 Germany 9 Weber,Wilhelm 1844 Germany 13
Ruska, Ernst 1946 Germany 1 Wedgwood, Josiah 1770 England 11
Réaumur, René de 1723 France 23 Westinghouse, George 1886 USA 24
Savery,Thomas 1690 England 28 Wheatstone, Charles 1842 England 32
Schmidt, Paul 1942 Germany 1 Whitney, Eli 1805 USA 24
Seguin, Marc 1826 France 13 Whittle, Frank 1947 England 15
Senefelder, Aloys 1811 Bohemia 9 Whitworth, Joseph 1843 England 14
Shockley, William 1950 USA 16 Wilkinson, John 1768 England 32
Sholes, Christopher 1859 USA 7 Winsor, Frederick 1803 Germany 5
Siemens, Charles 1863 Germany 32 Wren, Christopher 1672 England 1
Siemens, Ernst 1856 Germany 25 Wright Brothers 1911 USA 27
Sikorsky, Igor 1929 Ukraine 17 Young, James 1862 Scotland 10
Singer, Isaac 1851 USA 11 Zeppelin, Ferdinand von1878 Germany 16
Smeaton, John 1764 England 37 Zworykin,Vladimir 1929 Russia 22
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
542 • APPENDIX 5
THE CHINESE ART INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 421
Parent population 280
Significant figures 111
Major figures 31
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .91
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=104*)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
1 Ashton 1.00 .46 .37 .30 .44 .39 .34 .44 .43 .24 .49 .33 .44 .38 .34 .19 .41
2 Binyon .46 1.00 .39 .15 .55 .28 .49 .44 .27 .21 .42 .38 .41 .32 .18 .12 .23
3 Burling .37 .39 1.00 .38 .43 .50 .47 .45 .31 .23 .43 .43 .49 .44 .41 .38 .39
4 Cahill .30 .15 .38 1.00 .31 .51 .20 .45 .37 .42 .58 .57 .30 .58 .69 .33 .63
5 Carter .44 .55 .43 .31 1.00 .32 .52 .56 .45 .36 .48 .47 .42 .55 .28 .30 .43
6 Clunas .39 .28 .50 .51 .32 1.00 .26 .32 .27 .28 .54 .42 .34 .54 .48 .21 .63
7 Cohn .34 .49 .47 .20 .52 .26 1.00 .30 .24 .13 .29 .46 .53 .40 .35 .23 .37
8 Croix .44 .44 .45 .45 .56 .32 .30 1.00 .56 .37 .64 .54 .27 .50 .41 .44 .45
9 Enc. Brit .43 .27 .31 .37 .45 .27 .24 .56 1.00 .31 .49 .44 .30 .37 .43 .41 .32
10 Froncek .24 .21 .23 .42 .36 .28 .13 .37 .31 1.00 .48 .43 .36 .28 .36 .42 .37
11 Gowing .49 .42 .43 .58 .48 .54 .29 .64 .49 .48 1.00 .64 .32 .65 .59 .39 .67
12 Loehr .33 .38 .43 .57 .47 .42 .46 .54 .44 .43 .64 1.00 .43 .62 .68 .32 .63
13 Speiser .44 .41 .49 .30 .42 .34 .53 .27 .30 .36 .32 .43 1.00 .39 .29 .30 .41
14 Sullivan .38 .32 .44 .58 .55 .54 .40 .50 .37 .28 .65 .62 .39 1.00 .62 .39 .60
15 Turner .34 .18 .41 .69 .28 .48 .35 .41 .43 .36 .59 .68 .29 .62 1.00 .28 .68
16 Willetts .19 .12 .38 .33 .30 .21 .23 .44 .41 .42 .39 .32 .30 .39 .28 1.00 .39
17 Xin .41 .23 .39 .63 .43 .63 .37 .45 .32 .37 .67 .63 .41 .60 .68 .39 1.00
* Index scores were not calculated for significant figures who were active after 1799.
APPENDIX 5 • 543
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name
Bada Shanren (Zhu Da)
Bian Wenjin
Cao Buxing
Cao Zhibai
Chen Hongshou
Chen Rong
Cui Bai (Cui Bo)
Dai Jin
Dai Song
Dong Qichang
Dong Yuan
Du Qiong
Fan Kuan
Fu Baoshi
Gao Kegong
Gao Qifeng
Gao Qipei
Gong Xian
Gu Hongzhong
Gu Kaizhi
Guan Tong
Guanxiu
Guo Xi
Han Gan
Hongren (Jiang Tao)
Hua Yan
Huang Binhong
Huang Gongwang
Huang Jucai
Huang Quan
Huang Shen
Huang Tingjian
Huizong
Jin Nong
Jing Hao
Juran
Kuncan (Shiqi)
Li Cheng
Li Gonglin
Li Kan
Li Sixun
Li Song
Li Tang
fl
1666
1420
250
1311
1638
1240
1060
1428
750
1595
940
1436
1030
1944
1288
1929
1700
1658
950
385
910
872
1041
760
1650
1722
1905
1309
973
943
1727
1085
1122
1727
895
970
1652
959
1081
1285
691
1210
1090
Index
39
5
7
6
28
7
10
30
21
80
54
2
42
13
9
10
3
100
13
9
72
34
9
5
76
5
15
5
5
59
9
21
26
11
30
45
7
30
3
17
Name fl Index
Li Zhaodao 715 6
Li Zhen 800 5
Liang Kai 1180 23
Lin Liang 1500 12
Liu Haisu 1936
Liu Songnian 1190 7
Lu Ji 1517 6
Lu Tanwei 450 6
Ma Ben (Fen) 1110 3
Ma Lin 1230 9
Ma Yuan 1200 78
Mi Fu (Mi Fei) 1091 70
Mi Youren 1115 10
Muqi (Muxi) 1240 50
Ni Zan 1341 68
Qi Baishi 1904
Qian Xuan 1275 36
Qiu Ying 1550 35
Ren Renfa 1295 11
Shen Zhou 1467 56
Sheng Mao 1350 5
Shi Ke 900 7
Shitao (Yuanji) 1682 50
Su Shi (Su Dongpo) 1076 54
Tang Yin 1510 41
Wang Fu 1402 2
Wang Hui 1672 28
Wang Jian 1638 16
Wang Meng 1349 48
Wang Mo 790 2
Wang Shimin 1632 18
Wang Wei 739 63
Wang Xizhi 347 26
Wang Yuan 1320 2
Wang Yuanqi 1682 28
Wei Xie 300 2
Wen Jia 1541 5
Wen Shu 1634 3
Wen Tong 1059 11
Wen Zhengming 1510 46
Wu Daoxuan (Wu Daozi) 720 83
Wu Li (Mojing Daoren) 1672 8
Wu Wei 1499 17
544 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl
Wu Zhen 1320
Xia Gui 1220
Xiang Shengmou 1637
Xu Beihong 1935
Xu Daoning 1010
Xu Wei 1521
Xu Xi 960
Yan Hui 1300
Yan Liben 640
Yan Lide 645
Yan Wengui 1007
Yun Shouping 1673
Zhang Daqian 1899
Index
47 Zhang Sengyou
71 Zhang Xuan
3 Zhang Zao
Zhang Zeduan
11 Zhao Boju
13 Zhao Chang
10 Zhao Lingrang (Zhao Danian)
8 Zhao Mengfu
42 Zhou Chen
3 Zhou Fang
7 Zhou Wenzhu
17 Zou Fulei
Name fl Index
520 8
730 16
775 4
1110 4
1150 9
1000 9
1090 5
1294 100
1512 7
770 17
700 8
1350 4
APPENDIX 5 • 545
THE JAPANESE ART INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 318
Parent population 182
Significant figures 81
Major figures 20
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .93
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=81)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
1 Bird 1.00 .44 .48 .37 .66 .40 .63 .49 .47 .55 .46 .54 .46 .62
2 Croix .44 1.00 .43 .48 .51 .46 .49 .48 .44 .45 .33 .38 .45 .54
3 Elisseeff .48 .43 1.00 .67 .68 .70 .41 .60 .51 .53 .43 .51 .69 .47
2 Enc. Brit .37 .48 .67 1.00 .36 .72 .31 .57 .48 .31 .45 .34 .66 .54
3 Ishizawa .66 .51 .68 .36 1.00 .56 .60 .54 .45 .81 .46 .67 .50 .60
6 Kidder .40 .46 .70 .72 .56 1.00 .49 .62 .52 .50 .60 .50 .76 .50
7 Mason .63 .49 .41 .31 .60 .49 1.00 .48 .55 .66 .56 .57 .48 .57
8 Munsterberg .49 .48 .60 .57 .54 .62 .48 1.00 .52 .38 .54 .32 .64 .48
9 Museum .47 .44 .51 .48 .45 .52 .55 .52 1.00 .48 .70 .45 .53 .61
9 Noma .55 .45 .53 .31 .81 .50 .66 .38 .48 1.00 .52 .65 .43 .59
10 Paine .46 .33 .43 .45 .46 .60 .56 .54 .70 .52 1.00 .43 .41 .57
11 Stanley-B. .54 .38 .51 .34 .67 .50 .57 .32 .45 .65 .43 1.00 .37 .52
13 Swann .46 .45 .69 .66 .50 .76 .48 .64 .53 .43 .41 .37 1.00 .47
14 Turner .62 .54 .47 .54 .60 .50 .57 .48 .61 .59 .57 .52 .47 1.00
546 • APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Index Name fl Index
Ando Hiroshige (Ichiryusai) 1837 40 Nonomura Ninsei 1638 19
Aoki Mokubei 1807 11 Ogata Kenzan 1703 43
Asahi Chu 1896 5 Ogata Korin 1698 91
Fujiwara Nobuzane 1216 9 Okumara Masonobu 1731 11
Fujiwara Takanobu 1182 18 Sakai Hoitsu 1801 15
Fujiwara Takayoshi 1150 6 Sakaida Kakiemon 1636 10
Gei-ami (Shingei) 1432 12 Sasaki Chojiro (Tanaka) 1556 11
Goyo Hashiguchi 1920 3 Sesson Shukei 1544 17
Hamada Shoji 1934 15 Shiba Kokan 1787 12
Hasegawa Tohaku Shimomura Kanzan 1913 9
(Kyuroku) 1579 65 Soami (Shinso) 1510 28
Hashimoto Gaho 1875 8 Soga Jasoku (Dasoku) 1470 6
Hishikawa Moronobu 1665 23 Sotan (Oguri Sukeshige) 1438 7
Hon’ami Koetsu 1598 60 Sotaro Yasui 1928 14
Ikeno Taiga (Taigado) 1763 35 Sumiyoshi Jokei 1639 7
Ito Jakuchu 1756 7 Suzuki Harunobu 1760 31
Iwasa Matabei (Shoi) 1608 10 Taiko Jocho 1050 43
Kaiho Yusho 1573 23 Taiko Josetsu 1415 21
Kaikei (Anamidabutsu) 1200 24 Taiso Yoshitoshi 1879 1
Kano Eitoku (Kuninobu) 1583 65 Tani Buncho 1803 18
Kano Masanobu 1474 16 Tankei 1213 10
Kano Motonobu 1516 36 Tanomura Chikuden 1811 8
Kano Naganobu 1617 7 Tawaraya Sotatsu (Nonomura Ietsu)1620 98
Kano Sanraku Kimura Mitsuyori) 1599 35 Tensho Shubun (Ekkei, Soga) 1460 33
Kano Tan’yu (Morinobu) 1642 39 Toba Sojo (Kakayu) 1053 16
Katsukawa Shunsho 1766 11 Tomioka Tessai 1875 6
Katsushika Hokusai 1800 58 Tori Busshi 620 28
Kawase Hasui 1923 6 Torii Kiyomasu 1700 8
Kichisan Mincho (Cho Densu) 1392 19 Torii Kiyonaga 1792 22
Kitagawa Utamaro 1793 34 Torii Kiyonobu 1704 10
Kobayashi Kokei (Shigeru) 1923 16 Tosa Mitsunobu 1474 13
Kokei 1180 9 Toshusai Sharaku (Saito) 1795 22
Kukai (Kobo Daishi) 814 51 Toyo Sesshu 1460 100
Kusumi Morikage 1660 6 Umehara Ryusaburo 1928 14
Maeda Seison 1925 12 Unkei 1210 49
Maruyama Okyo 1773 34 Unkoku Togan 1587 11
Matsumara Goshun (Gekkei) 1792 10 Uragami Gyokudo 1785 20
Miyagawa Choshun 1723 7 Watanabe Kazan 1833 12
Mokuan Reien 1335 11 Yokoyama Taikan 1908 25
Nagasawa Rosetsu 1795 7 Yosa Buson 1756 38
Noami (Nakao Shinno) 1437 17 Yoshida Hiroshi 1916 6
APPENDIX 5 • 547
THE WESTERN ART INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 2,248
Parent population 1,232
Significant figures 479
Major figures 154
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .95
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=455*)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 Croix 1.00 .73 .67 .75 .72 .82 .61 .58 .74 .74 .66
2 Gombrich .73 1.00 .73 .74 .75 .78 .64 .55 .73 .72 .73
3 Gowing .67 .73 1.00 .74 .65 .73 .70 .59 .72 .69 .69
4 Honour .75 .74 .74 1.00 .70 .79 .76 .68 .79 .81 .71
5 Istituto .72 .75 .65 .70 1.00 .74 .55 .56 .67 .62 .76
6 Jansen .82 .78 .73 .79 .74 1.00 .64 .59 .74 .79 .69
7 Marceau .61 .64 .70 .76 .55 .64 1.00 .65 .67 .70 .58
8 Sproccati .58 .55 .59 .68 .56 .59 .65 1.00 .66 .61 .53
9 Stadler .74 .73 .72 .79 .67 .74 .67 .66 1.00 .72 .67
10 Stokstadt .74 .72 .69 .81 .62 .79 .70 .61 .72 1.00 .63
11 Turner .66 .73 .69 .71 .76 .69 .58 .53 .67 .63 1.00
* Index scores were not computed for artists who were active prior to 1200.
548 • APPENDIX 5
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Adam, Robert 1768 Scotland 9 Bernard, Emile 1908 France 4
Aertsen, Pieter 1548 Netherlands 2 Bernini, Gian Lorenzo 1638 Italy 53
Agesander –50 Greece Berruguete, Alonso 1528 Spain 1
Albani, Francesco 1618 Italy 1 Berruguete, Pedro 1490 Spain 2
Albers, Joseph 1928 Germany 3 Bertoldo di Giovanni 1460 Italy 1
Algardi, Alessandro 1629 Italy 2 Bingham, George 1851 USA 4
Altdorfer, Albrecht 1520 Germany 10 Blake, William 1797 England 9
Altichiero da Zevio 1380 Italy 3 Boccioni, Umberto 1916 Italy 12
Ammanati, Böcklin, Arnold 1867 Switzerland 3
Bartolommeo 1551 Italy 3 Bonheur, Rosa 1862 France 1
Andrea del Castagno 1457 Italy 8 Bonnard, Pierre 1907 France 6
Andrea del Sarto 1526 Italy 6 Bosch, Hieronymus 1490 Netherlands 23
Angelico (di Pietro) 1435 Italy 17 Botticelli (Filipepi) 1484 Italy 31
Antonello da Messina 1470 Italy 7 Boucher, François 1743 France 14
Apelles of Kos –350 Greece Boudin, Eugene 1864 France 2
Apollodorus of Athens –450 Greece Bouts, Diedric 1455 Netherlands 4
Archipenko, Alexander 1927 Russia 3 Bramantino (Suardi) 1500 Italy 1
Arnolfo di Cambio 1300 Italy 8 Brancusi, Constantin 1916 Romania 13
Arp, Jean (Hans) 1927 Germany 5 Braque, Georges 1922 France 27
Asam, Cosmas 1726 Germany 2 Broederlam, Melchior 1409 Belgium 6
Athanodorus –50 Greece Bronzino, Agnolo 1543 Italy 8
Bacon, Francis 1949 England 8 Brouwer, Adriaen 1638 Belgium 1
Baldung, Hans (Grien) 1524 Germany 3 Brown, Ford Madox 1861 England 2
Balla, Giacomo 1911 Italy 4 Brueghel, Jan 1608 Netherlands 1
Barlach, Ernst 1910 Germany 5 Brueghel,
Bartolommeo, Fra 1512 Italy 3 Pieter the Elder 1565 Netherlands 30
Barye, Antoine 1836 France 3 Burgkmair,
Bassano, Jacopo 1557 Italy 4 Hans the Elder 1513 Germany 1
Batoni, Pompeo 1748 Italy 2 Burne-Jones, Edward 1873 England 3
Beardsley, Aubrey 1898 England 7 Calder, Alexander 1938 USA 6
Beccafumi, Domenico 1526 Italy 1 Callot, Jacques 1633 France 2
Beckmann, Max 1924 Germany 5 Cambiasio, Luca 1567 Italy 1
Behrens, Peter 1908 Germany 5 Canaletto, Giovanni 1737 Italy 7
Bellini, Gentile 1469 Italy 3 Cano, Alonso 1641 Spain 2
Bellini, Giovanni 1470 Italy 29 Canova, Antonio 1797 Italy 15
Bellini, Jacopo 1440 Italy 3 Caravaggio (Merisi) 1610 Italy 43
Bellotto, Bernardo 1760 Italy 2 Carpaccio,Vittore 1500 Italy 3
Bellows, George 1922 USA 1 Carpeaux, Jean 1867 France 4
Benedetto da Maiano 1482 Italy 1 Carra, Carlo 1921 Italy 4
Benozzo (Gozzoli) 1460 Italy 3 Carracci, Agostino 1597 Italy 2
Benton,Thomas 1929 USA 1 Carracci, Annibale 1600 Italy 26
Berlinghieri, Carracci, Ludovico 1595 Italy 4
Berlinghiero 1240 Italy 3 Cassatt, Mary 1885 USA 3
APPENDIX 5 • 549
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Castiglione, Giuseppe 1656 Italy 2 Degas, Edgar 1874 France 31
Cavallini, Pietro 1280 Italy 7 De Kooning,Willem 1944 Netherlands 9
Cellini, Benvenuto 1540 Italy 9 Delacroix, Eugene 1838 France 36
Cézanne, Paul 1879 France 50 Delaroche, Paul 1837 France 2
Chagall, Marc 1929 Russia 10 Delaunay, Robert 1925 France 7
Champaigne, Delaunay-Terk, Sonia 1925 Ukraine 3
Phillippe de 1642 Belgium 1 Demuth, Charles 1923 USA 1
Chardin, Jean 1739 France 11 Denis, Maurice 1910 France 5
Charonton, Enguerrand Derain, André 1920 France 7
(Quarton) 1450 France 2 Desiderio da Settignano1464 Italy 5
Chasseriau, Theodore 1856 West Indies 1 Dioskourides –25 Greece
Chirico, Giorgio de 1928 Greece 11 Dix, Otto 1931 Germany 3
Christus, Petrus 1450 Belgium 4 Doesburg, Theo van
Cima da Conegliano 1499 Italy 1 (Kupper) 1923 Netherlands 5
Cimabue Domenichino
(Cenni di Pepo) 1280 Italy 13 (Zampieri) 1621 Italy 5
Claude Lorrain (Gelee) 1640 France 17 Domenico Veneziano 1450 Italy 4
Clodion Donatello
(Claude Michel) 1778 France 3 (di Betto Bardi) 1426 Italy 42
Clouet, Francois 1550 France 1 Doré, Gustave 1830 Germany 2
Clouet, Jean 1525 France 2 Dossi, Dosso 1530 Italy 1
Cole, Thomas 1841 England 4 Dubuffet, Jean 1941 France 7
Constable, John 1818 England 27 Duccio di Buoninsegna1297 Italy 17
Copley, John 1778 USA 8 Duccio, Agostino di 1458 Italy 2
Cornelius, Peter 1823 Germany 1 Duchamp, Marcel 1927 France 28
Corot, Jean 1836 France 19 Duchamp-Villon,
Correggio (Allegri) 1529 Italy 26 Raymond 1916 France 4
Cossa, Francesco del 1475 Italy 4 Dufy, Raoul 1917 France 2
Courbet, Gustave 1859 France 31 Duquesnoy, François 1637 Belgium 2
Couture,Thomas 1855 France 2 Dürer, Albrecht 1511 Germany 56
Coypel, Charles 1701 France 1 Dyck, Anthony van 1639 Netherlands 17
Coysevox, Antoine 1680 France 3 Eakins, Thomas 1884 USA 5
Cranach, Lucas 1512 Germany 11 Ensor, James 1900 Belgium 6
Crivelli, Carlo 1470 Italy 2 Epstein, Jacob 1920 USA 1
Cuyp, Aelbert 1660 Netherlands 3 Ernst, Max 1931 Germany 14
Daguerre, Louis 1827 France 3 Euphronios –480 Greece
Dali, Salvador 1944 Spain 12 Euthymides –510 Greece
Daubigny, Charles 1857 France 3 Exekias –540 Greece
Daumier, Honore 1850 France 18 Eyck, Hubert van 1406 Belgium 9
David, Gerard Eyck, Jan van 1430 Belgium 42
(Gheeraert) 1500 Netherlands 1 Fabritius, Carel 1654 Netherlands 1
David, Jacques 1788 France 22 Falconer, Etienne
Davis, Stuart 1934 USA 1 (Falconet) 1756 France 1
550 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Fantin-Latour, Henri 1876 France 1
Fattori, Giovanni 1865 Italy 1
Feininger, Lyonel 1911 USA 4
Fetti, Domenico 1624 Italy 1
Filarete
(Antonio Averlino) 1440 Italy 2
Flaxman, John 1795 England 3
Foppa,Vincenco 1467 Italy 3
Fouquet, Jean 1465 France 10
Fragonard, Jean 1772 France 12
Francia, Francesco 1490 Italy 1
Friedrich, Caspar 1814 Germany 13
Fuseli, Henry 1781 Switzerland 7
Gabo, Naum 1930 Russia 4
Gaddi, Agnolo 1390 Italy 1
Gaddi,Taddeo 1340 Italy 3
Gainsborough, Thomas 1767 England 12
Gauguin, Paul 1888 France 38
Gaulli, Il
(Giovanni Baciccia) 1679 Italy 3
Geertgen tot Sint Jans 1485 Netherlands 2
Gentile da Fabriano 1410 Italy 9
Gentileschi, Artemisia 1637 Italy 3
Gentileschi, Orazio 1603 Italy 1
Géricault,Theodore 1824 France 17
Gérôme, Jean 1864 France 3
Ghiberti, Lorenzo 1418 Italy 24
Ghirlandaio, Domenico1489 Italy 16
Giacometti, Alberto 1941 Switzerland 7
Giordano, Luca 1672 Italy 2
Giorgione
da Castelfranco 1510 Italy 26
Giotto di Bondone 1306 Italy 54
Giovanni da Bologna 1564 Belgium 11
Girardon, Francois 1668 France 3
Girodet-Trioson
(de Roucy) 1807 France 3
Girtin, Thomas 1802 England 1
Gislebertus of Autun 1150 France
Giulio Romano 1539 Italy 13
Goes, Hugo van der 1477 Belgium 11
Gogh,Vincent van 1890 Netherlands 40
Goltzius, Hendrick 1598 Germany 1
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Goncharova, Natalia 1921 Russia 3
Gonzalez, Julio 1916 Spain 3
Gorky, Arshile 1944 Turkey 5
Gossaert, Jan (Mabuse) 1518 Belgium 5
Gottlieb, Adolph 1943 USA 2
Goujon, Jean 1550 France 5
Goya, Francisco 1786 Spain 41
Goyen, Jan van 1636 Netherlands 3
Greco, El
(Theotokopoulos) 1581 Spain 24
Greuze, Jean-Baptiste 1765 France 5
Gris, Juan (Gonzalez) 1927 Spain 5
Gros, Antoine Jean 1811 France 6
Grosz, George 1933 Germany 6
Grünewald, Mathias 1500 Germany 26
Guardi, Francesco 1752 Italy 7
Guercino (Barbieri) 1631 Italy 7
Hals, Frans 1621 Netherlands 18
Hepworth, Barbara 1943 England 2
Hilliard, Nicholas 1587 England 4
Hobbema, Meindert 1678 Netherlands 2
Hodler, Ferdinand 1893 Switzerland 5
Hofmann, Hans 1920 Germany 2
Hogarth,William 1737 England 16
Holbein,
Hans the Younger 1537 Germany 18
Homer,Winslow 1876 USA 4
Honthorst, Gerrit van 1630 Netherlands 3
Hooch, Pieter de 1669 Netherlands 4
Hopper, Edward 1922 USA 4
Houdon, Jean 1781 France 9
Hugo,Victor 1842 France 2
Hunt, William 1867 England 5
Ingres, Jean 1820 France 28
Innes, George 1865 USA 1
Jongkind, Johan 1859 Netherlands 2
Jordaens, Jacob 1633 Belgium 2
Justus of Ghent 1460 Belgium 1
Kalf,Willem 1659 Netherlands 4
Kandinsky,Vasily 1906 Russia 31
Kauffmann, Angelica 1781 Switzerland 2
Kirchner, Ernst 1920 Germany 10
Klee, Paul 1919 Switzerland 19
APPENDIX 5 • 551
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Klimt, Gustav 1902 Austria 8 Marc, Franz 1916 Germany 8
Kline, Franz 1950 USA 5 Marees, Hans von 1877 Germany 1
Klinger, Max 1897 Germany 2 Masaccio (Cassai) 1428 Italy 41
Kneller, Godfrey 1689 Germany 1 Masolino da Panicale 1423 Italy 5
Kokoschka, Oskar 1928 Austria 8 Masson, André 1936 France 3
Kollwitz, Kathe 1907 Germany 7 Massys, Quentin 1505 Netherlands 1
Kritios –480 Greece Master Bertram
Kupka, Frank of Minden 1385 Germany 1
(Frantisek) 1911 Bohemia 3 Master Francke 1420 Germany 1
La Tour, Georges de 1633 France 9 Master of Flemalle 1415 Belgium 9
Lancret, Nicolas 1730 France 1 Matisse, Henri 1909 France 38
Lanfranco, Giovanni 1622 Italy 2 Meidias Painter –410 Greece
Larionoff, Mikhail 1921 Ukraine 2 Melozzo da Forli 1478 Italy 2
Laurana, Francesco 1470 Croatia 1 Memling, Hans 1477 Germany 8
Lawrence, Thomas 1809 England 1 Mengs, Anton Raffael 1768 Bohemia 3
Le Nain Brothers 1635 France 6 Menzel, Adolf 1855 Germany 3
Lebrun, Charles 1659 France 13 Metsu, Gabriel 1667 Netherlands 1
Leger, Fernand 1921 France 13 Meunier, Constantin 1871 Belgium 2
Lehmbruck,Wilhelm 1919 Germany 3 Michelangelo
Leibl, Wilhelm 1884 Germany 2 Buonarroti 1515 Italy 100
Lely, Peter Millais, John 1869 England 3
(van der Faes) 1658 Belgium 1 Millet, Jean 1854 France 14
Leonardo da Vinci 1492 Italy 61 Minne, George 1906 Belgium 1
Limbourg Brothers 1500 France 15 Miro, Joan 1933 Spain 12
Lipchitz, Jacques 1931 Russia 6 Modersohn-Becker,
Lippi, Filippino 1497 Italy 5 Paula 1907 Germany 1
Lippi, Fra Filippo 1446 Italy 6 Modigliani, Amedeo 1920 Italy 6
Lochner, Stephan 1450 Germany 6 Moholy-Nagy, Laszlo 1935 Hungary 6
Longhi, Pietro 1742 Italy 2 Mondrian, Piet 1912 Netherlands 24
Lorenzetti, Ambrogio 1348 Italy 13 Monet, Claude 1880 France 41
Lorenzetti, Pietro 1320 Italy 8 Moore, Henry 1938 England 9
Lotto, Lorenzo 1520 Italy 6 Mor van Dashorst,
Lucas van Leyden 1533 Belgium 2 Anthonis 1560 Netherlands 1
Lysippos –430 Greece Morandi, Giorgio 1930 Italy 4
Maes, Nicolaes (Maas) 1674 Netherlands 1 Moreau, Gustave 1866 France 6
Magnasco, Alessandro 1707 Italy 2 Moretto (Bonvicino) 1538 Italy 2
Magritte, Rene 1938 Belgium 9 Morisot, Berthe 1881 France 4
Maillol, Aristide 1901 France 6 Moroni, Giambattista 1565 Italy 1
Maitani, Lorenzo 1315 Italy 4 Morris, William 1874 England 12
Malevich, Kasimir 1918 Ukraine 13 Moser, Lukas 1431 Germany 1
Malouel, Jean 1400 Netherlands 2 Munch, Edvard 1903 Norway 17
Manet, Edouard 1872 France 34 Murillo, Bartolome 1657 Spain 5
Mantegna, Andrea 1471 Italy 30 Muybridge, Eadweard 1870 England 4
552 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Myron –435 Greece Praxiteles –350 Greece
Nanni di Banco 1415 Italy 4 Primaticcio, Francesco 1544 Italy 6
Newman, Barnett 1945 USA 6 Prud’hon, Pierre-Paul 1798 France 1
Nicholas of Verdun 1200 France Puget, Pierre 1660 France 4
Nicholson, Ben 1934 England 3 Puvis de Chavannes,
Nolde, Emil 1907 Germany 9 Pierre 1864 France 5
O’Keefe, Georgia 1927 USA 3 Quercia, Jacopo della 1407 Italy 7
Orcagna Raeburn, Henry 1796 Scotland 1
(Andrea di Cione) 1348 Italy 2 Raimondi, Marc 1520 Italy 2
Orozco, Jose 1923 Mexico 2 Raphael (Sanzio) 1520 Italy 73
Overbeck, Johann 1829 Germany 3 Ray, Man 1930 USA 6
Ozenfant, Amedee 1926 France 1 Redon, Odilon 1880 France 5
Pacher, Michael 1475 Austria 6 Rembrandt van Rijn 1646 Netherlands 56
Palma il Vecchio 1520 Italy 1 Reni, Guido 1615 Italy 9
Pannini, Giovanni 1732 Italy 5 Renoir, Auguste 1881 France 28
Parmigianino, Francesco1540 Italy 16 Repin, Ilya 1884 Ukraine 2
Parrhasios –425 Greece Reynolds, Joshua 1763 England 17
Patenier, Joachim 1520 Netherlands 2 Ribera, Jusepe de 1631 Spain 7
Pausias –350 Greece Riemenschneider,
Perugino (Vannucci) 1488 Italy 12 Tilman 1500 Germany 6
Pevsner, Antoine 1926 Russia 3 Rigaud, Hyacinthe 1699 France 3
Phidias –430 Greece Rivera, Diego 1926 Mexico 3
Piazzetta, Giovanni 1723 Italy 2 Robbia, Luca della 1440 Italy 9
Picabia, Francis 1919 Switzerland 5 Roberti, Ercole de’ 1490 Italy 3
Picasso, Pablo 1921 Spain 77 Rodchenko, Alexander 1931 Russia 4
Piero della Francesca 1457 Italy 29 Rodin, Auguste 1880 France 27
Piero di Cosimo 1501 Italy 3 Romney, George 1774 England 1
Pigalle, Jean 1754 France 2 Rossellino, Antonio 1467 Italy 3
Pilon, Germain 1565 France 2 Rossellino, Bernardo 1449 Italy 4
Pintoricchio (di Betto) 1494 Italy 2 Rossetti, Dante
Pisanello (Pisano) 1435 Italy 6 Gabriel 1868 England 7
Pisano, Andrea Rosso Fiorentino 1534 Italy 9
(Pontedera) 1330 Italy 7 Rosso, Medardo 1898 Italy 2
Pisano, Giovanni 1285 Italy 13 Rothko, Mark 1943 Russia 9
Pisano, Nicola 1270 Italy 12 Rouault, Georges 1911 France 8
Pissarro, Camille 1870 France 16 Rousseau, Henri 1884 France 10
Pollaiuolo, Antonio del 1471 Italy 15 Rousseau, Theodore 1852 France 6
Polydorus of Rhodes –50 Greece Rubens, Peter Paul 1617 Netherlands 49
Polygnotus –410 Greece Rude, François 1824 France 4
Polykleitos –435 Greece Ruisdael, Jacob van 1668 Netherlands 9
Pontormo, Jacopo 1534 Italy 9 Runge, Philipp 1810 Germany 4
Poussin, Nicolas 1634 France 33 Saenredam, Pieter 1637 Netherlands 1
Pozzo, Andrea 1682 Germany 3 Salviati (de’ Rossi) 1550 Italy 1
APPENDIX 5 • 553
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Sansovino, Andrea 1507 Italy 2 Tiepolo, Giovanni 1736 Italy 17
Sansovino, Il (Tatti) 1526 Italy 5 Tino da Camaino 1335 Italy 2
Sargent, John 1896 USA 1 Tintoretto, Jacopo 1558 Italy 28
Sassetta (di Giovanni) 1432 Italy 2 Titian (Vecellio) 1530 Italy 60
Savoldo, Girolamo 1520 Italy 2 Tobey, Mark 1930 USA 1
Schiele, Egon 1918 Germany 4 Toulouse-Lautrec,
Schlemmer, Oskar 1928 Germany 2 Henri de 1901 France 16
Schmidt-Rottluff, Karl 1924 Germany 3 Traini, Francesco 1361 Italy 3
Schongauer, Martin 1470 Germany 11 Tura, Cosimo 1470 Italy 5
Schwitters, Kurt 1927 Germany 7 Turner, J. M. W. 1815 England 26
Sebastiano del Piombo 1525 Italy 3 Uccello, Paolo 1437 Italy 14
Seghers, Hercules 1629 Netherlands 1 Valdés Leal, Juan de 1662 Spain 1
Seurat, Georges 1891 France 19 Valentin de Boulogne 1632 France 1
Severini, Gino 1923 Italy 3 Vantongerloo, Georges 1926 Belgium 3
Shahn, Ben 1938 Russia 2 Vasari, Giorgio 1551 Italy 14
Signac, Paul 1903 France 4 Velazquez, Diego y 1639 Spain 43
Signorelli, Luca 1481 Italy 6 Vermeer, Jan 1672 Netherlands 24
Simone Martini 1324 Italy 17 Veronese (Caliari) 1568 Italy 15
Siqueiros, David 1938 Mexico 3 Verrocchio (di Cione) 1475 Italy 19
Sisley, Alfred 1879 France 5 Vien, Joseph 1756 France 1
Skopas –310 Greece Vigee-Lebrun, Marie 1795 France 2
Sloan, John 1911 USA 2 Vitale da Bologna
Sluter, Claus 1380 Netherlands 13 (Cavalli) 1369 Italy 3
Smith, David 1946 USA 6 Vivarini Brothers 1480 Italy 1
Snyders, Frans 1619 Belgium 1 Vlaminck, Maurice de 1916 France 4
Sodoma, Il 1517 Italy 1 Vouet, Simon 1630 France 3
Solimena, Francesco 1697 Italy 1 Vries, Adriaen de 1600 Netherlands 1
Soutine, Chaim 1933 Russia 4 Vuillard, Edouard 1908 France 4
Spranger, Watteau, Jean-Antoine 1721 France 18
Bartholomeus 1586 Belgium 3 West, Benjamin 1778 USA 5
Steen, Jan 1666 Netherlands 7 Weyden,
Still, Clyfford 1944 USA 2 Rogier van der 1440 Belgium 18
Stoss,Veit 1485 Germany 6 Whistler, James 1874 USA 16
Stuart, Gilbert 1795 USA 1 Wiligelmo of Modena 1120 Italy
Stubbs, George 1764 England 3 Wilson, Richard 1754 England 1
Sutherland, Graham 1943 England 2 Witte, Emanuel de 1657 Netherlands 1
Tanguy,Yves 1940 France 1 Witz, Konrad 1440 Germany 7
Tatlin,Vladimir 1925 Ukraine 10 Wright of Derby,
Teniers, Joseph 1774 England 1
David the Younger 1650 Belgium 1 Zeuxis –400 Greece
Terbrugghen, Hendrick1628 Netherlands 2 Zuccaro, Federico 1582 Italy 2
Thorvaldsen, Bertel 1810 Denmark 3 Zuccaro,Taddeo 1566 Italy 1
Tiepolo, Giandomenico1767 Italy 3 Zurbaran, Francisco 1638 Spain 8
554 • APPENDIX 5
ARABIC LITERATURE
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 209
Parent population 91
Significant figures 82
Major figures 21
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .88
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=48*)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
1 Allen 1.00 .37 .58 .49 .31 .54 .46 .63 .33 .59 .20 .29 .74 .61
2 Arbuthnot .37 1.00 .19 .04 .25 .27 .29 .34 .14 .33 .13 .39 .37 .35
3 Enc. Brit. .58 .19 1.00 .40 .06 .54 .53 .54 .43 .65 .29 .35 .62 .49
4 Gibb .49 .04 .40 1.00 .23 .58 .34 .42 .45 .37 .20 .16 .50 .56
5 Gioan .31 .25 .06 .23 1.00 .19 .06 .27 .18 .14 .41 .07 .08 .22
6 Huart .54 .27 .54 .58 .19 1.00 .36 .52 .44 .57 .04 .18 .54 .43
7 Jalil .46 .29 .53 .34 .06 .36 1.00 .36 .24 .42 .20 .31 .54 .43
8 Jansen(b) .63 .34 .54 .42 .27 .52 .36 1.00 .39 .47 .20 .41 .57 .59
9 Kroeber .33 .14 .43 .45 .18 .44 .24 .39 1.00 .33 -.10 .00 .44 .23
10 Nicholson .59 .33 .65 .37 .14 .57 .42 .47 .33 1.00 .39 .19 .58 .45
11 Queneau .20 .13 .29 .20 .41 .04 .20 .20 -.10 .39 1.00 .25 .10 .36
12 Riquer .29 .39 .35 .16 .07 .18 .31 .41 .00 .19 .25 1.00 .30 .38
13 Vernet .74 .37 .62 .50 .08 .54 .54 .57 .44 .58 .10 .30 1.00 .69
14 Wiet .61 .35 .49 .56 .22 .43 .43 .59 .23 .45 .36 .38 .69 1.00
* Index scores were computed only for writers in the Arabic language, omitting writers in Persian
and Turkish.
APPENDIX 5 • 555
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name
’Adi ibn Zaid
’Amr ibn Kulthum
’Antarah ibn Shaddad
’Aqqad, ’Abbas Mahmud al-
’Umar ibn Abi Rabi’ah
Abd al-Hamid
Abd al-Rahman
Abu Bakr al-Khwarismi
Abu Firas al-Hamdani
Abu Hayyan at-Tawhidi
Abu Ishak (Bushak)
Abu Nuwas
Abu Shafar Ahmad ibn Said
Abu Tammam
Abu al-’Atahiyah
Akhtal
Anwari
Bashshar ibn Burd
Daqiqi (ibn Ahmad)
Dhu Al-Nun Ayybub
Farid od-Din ’Attar
Ferdowsi
Gibran, Khalil
Hafez
Hafiz Ibrahim
Hassan ibn Thabit
Haykal, Muhammed
Hedayat, Sadeq
Ibrahim al-Mazini
Imru’ al-Qays
Jalal al-Din ar-Rumi (Mawlana)
Jami
Jarir
Ka’b
Khaqani
Khayyam, Omar (al-Khayyami)
Khwajah ’Abd Allah al-Ansari
of Herat
Kuthayir
Labid ibn Rabi
Muhammed ibn Hani
Nabighah Adh-Dhubyani
fl Index
630 21
560 14
550 29
1929
683 31
1720 9
1690 11
975 19
967 12
1000 14
1410
800 79
1008
847 54
788 34
680 32
1150
780 19
920
1948
1182
975
1923
1365
1911
603 19
1928
1943
1930
530 60
1247
1454
693 42
580 16
1146
1088
1046
710 15
600 28
972 12
600 46
Name fl Index
Nasiri Khusrau 1044
Nasiru al-Din of Tus 1241
Nezami 1200
Nu’Aymah, Mikhail 1929
Rudaki 899
Sa’di 1253
Sana’i 1130
Shawqi, Ahmad 1908
Ta’abbata Sharran 530 18
Taha Hussein 1929
Tarafah 550 20
Tawfiq al-Hakim 1938
Usama ibn Munqidh 1135 13
Zaydan, Jurji 1901
Zuhayr 560 40
al-Balami 960
al-Busiri 1252 16
al-Hutay’ah 665 11
al-Khansa’ 620 18
al-Muwailihi 1898
al-Rusafi 1915
al-Shanfara 550 15
al-Walid ibn Yazid [II] 730 15
al-A’sha 630 12
al-Buhturi 861 43
al-Farazdaq 681 44
al-Hallaj, Husayn ibn Mansur 898
al-Hamadhani 1007 49
al-Hariri 1022 50
al-Ma’arri 1013 73
al-Mutanabbi 955 100
ibn ’Abd Rabbihi 900 21
ibn Abi ad-Dunya 863 7
ibn Battuta 1344 22
ibn Ishaq 760 19
ibn Nubata al-Misri 983 12
ibn Quzman 1150 13
ibn Zaydun 1060 16
ibn al-Farid 1222 30
ibn al-Mu’tazz 901 19
ibn al-Muqaffa’ 750 27
556 • APPENDIX 5
THE CHINESE LITERATURE INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 548
Parent population 304
Significant figures 83
Major figures 19
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .89
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SCORES (n=70*)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 Ch’en 1.00 .44 .48 .68 .65 .73 .35 .62 .63 .56 .34
2 Enc. Brit .44 1.00 .13 .46 .48 .46 .25 .40 .26 .38 .08
3 Gioan .48 .13 1.00 .32 .38 .45 .24 .46 .53 .62 .30
4 Idema .68 .46 .32 1.00 .56 .63 .24 .41 .54 .41 .11
5 Jansen .65 .48 .38 .56 1.00 .69 .42 .66 .60 .61 .18
6 Kaltenmark .73 .46 .45 .63 .69 1.00 .29 .56 .50 .59 .23
7 Kroeber .35 .25 .24 .24 .42 .29 1.00 .53 .29 .32 .29
8 Lai .62 .40 .46 .41 .66 .56 .53 1.00 .59 .64 .15
9 Liu .63 .26 .53 .54 .60 .50 .29 .59 1.00 .52 .23
10 Queneau .56 .38 .62 .41 .61 .59 .32 .64 .52 1.00 .36
11 Riquer .34 .08 .30 .11 .18 .23 .29 .15 .23 .36 1.00
* Index scores were not computed for figures active after 1800.
APPENDIX 5 • 557
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name
Ai Qing (Jiang Haicheng)
Ba Jin (Li Feigan)
Ban Gu
Bao Zhao
Bing Xin (Xie Wanying)
Bo Juyi (Bo Lotian)
Cao Pi
Cao Xueqin (Cao Zhan)
Cao Yu (Wan Jiabao)
Cao Zhi
Chen Duxiu
Ding Ling (Jiang Weiwen)
Du Fu
Du Guangting
Du Mu
Feng Menglong
Gao Ming
Gao Qi
Guan Hanqing
Guo Moruo
Han Yu
Hong Sheng
Jia Yi
Jiang Kui
Kong Shangren
Lao She (Shu Sheyu)
Li Bo
Li He
Li Qingzhao
Li Ruzhen
Li Shangyin (Li Yishan)
Li Yu (dramatist)
Li Yu (poet)
Liu Xiang
Liu Yong
Liu Zongyuan
Lu Xun (Zhao Shuren)
Lu You
Lu Zhaolin
Luo Guanzhong (Luo Ben)
Ma Zhiyuan
Mao Dun (Shen Yabing)
fl
1949
1944
79
454
1942
812
225
1755
1945
232
1919
1944
752
890
843
1614
1350
1374
1281
1932
808
1685
–168
1195
1688
1939
741
816
1124
1803
853
1651
977
–37
1027
813
1921
1165
700
1330
1266
1936
Index
37
5
86
22
32
27
100
6
9
20
25
10
45
80
14
26
7
14
87
15
16
13
30
26
25
18
17
40
19
12
34
34
Name fl Index
Mei Sheng –160 14
Meng Haoran 729 14
Ouyang Xiu (Feng Yan-Si) 1047 61
Pu Songling 1680 30
Qian Jianyi (Qian Qianyi) 1622 8
Qu Yuan (Lingjun) –295 78
Ruan Ji 259 6
Shen Jiji 780 7
Shen Yue (Shen Yo) 481 15
Shi Naian 1250 16
Sima Qian –114 68
Sima Xiangru –139 41
Song Yu –250 33
Su Dongpo (Su Shi) 1076 83
Tang Xianzu 1590 20
Tao Cian (Tao Yuanming) 405 68
Wang Anshi 1061 29
Wang Chong 67 15
Wang Shifu 1290 34
Wang Shizhen 1566 19
Wang Wei 739 35
Wei Zhuang 876 10
Wen Tingyun 858 18
Wen Yiduo 1939
Wu Chengen 1546 30
Wu Jingzi (Xian Chai Lao Ren) 1741 25
Xie Lingyun 425 14
Xie Tiao 499 6
Xin Qiji 1180 22
Xu Zhimo 1931
Yan Shu 1031 11
Yang Xiong –13 19
Yuan Ji 250 16
Yuan Mei 1755 17
Yuan Zhen 819 49
Zhang Heng 400 8
Zhang Ji 768 13
Zhang Kejiu 1300 7
Zhao Bangyan 1096 17
Zhao Shuli 1945
Zuo Qiuming –300 11
558 • APPENDIX 5
THE INDIAN LITERATURE INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 353
Parent population 115
Significant figures 43
Major figures 9
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .91
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=35*)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
1 Bamerji 1.00 .57 .72 .45 .28 .58 .51 .29 .65 .34 .76 .11
2 Chaitanya .57 1.00 .66 .71 .42 .84 .54 .48 .54 .77 .73 .59
3 Enc. Brit. .72 .66 1.00 .73 .53 .78 .57 .55 .81 .77 .71 .49
4 Gioan .45 .71 .73 1.00 .31 .89 .68 .68 .68 .87 .58 .67
5 Goring .28 .42 .53 .31 1.00 .36 .16 .37 .31 .42 .43 .24
6 Gowen .58 .84 .78 .89 .36 1.00 .64 .58 .63 .84 .70 .74
7 Jansen .51 .54 .57 .68 .16 .64 1.00 .62 .67 .61 .70 .42
8 Kroeber .29 .48 .55 .68 .37 .58 .62 1.00 .56 .60 .50 .38
9 Queneau .65 .54 .81 .68 .31 .63 .67 .56 1.00 .67 .62 .20
10 Renou .34 .77 .77 .87 .42 .84 .61 .60 .67 1.00 .59 .78
11 Riquer .76 .73 .71 .58 .43 .70 .70 .50 .62 .59 1.00 .39
12 Winternitz .11 .59 .49 .67 .24 .74 .42 .38 .20 .78 .39 1.00
* Index scores were not computed for persons active after 1700.
APPENDIX 5 • 559
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Index
Amaru 600 11 Kautilya –300 11
Anand, Mulk Raj 1945 Kumaradasa 520 3
Asvaghosa 160 30 Madhusudana Dutt (Datta),
Aurobindo, Sri (Ghose) 1912 Michael 1864
Banabhatta 630 21 Magha 650 6
Banerji, Bibhutibushan 1934 Mira Bai 1538 13
Bharati, C. Subramania 1921 Naidu, Sarojini 1919
Bharavi 600 8 Namdev 1310 14
Bhartrhari 460 27 Prem Chand 1920
Bhasa 250 23 Rajasekhara 900 5
Bhatti 600 5 Ratnakara 850 3
Bhavabhuti 730 21 Somadeva 1070 14
Bhoja 1025 4 Subandhu 600 7
Bilhana 1080 8 Sudraka 300 11
Dandin 700 23 Surdas 1523 4
Gunadhya 200 6 Tagore, Rabindranath 1901
Haricandra 990 6 Tulsidas 1572 26
Harsa 646 16 Valmiki –300 72
Jayadeva 1200 19 Varahamihira 500 4
Kabir 1480 20 Vatsayana 250 4
Kalhana 1150 8 Visakhadatta 420 7
Kalidasa 490 100 Vyasa –400 77
Name fl Index
560 • APPENDIX 5
THE JAPANESE LITERATURE INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 258
Parent population 182
Significant figures 85
Major figures 16
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .86
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=85)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 Enc. Brit. 1.00 0.20 0.45 0.46 0.37 0.59 0.23 0.28 0.29 0.23
2 Gioan 0.20 1.00 0.49 0.60 0.31 0.45 0.40 0.14 0.21 0.44
3 Jansen 0.45 0.49 1.00 0.55 0.38 0.65 0.47 0.43 0.43 0.24
4 Kato 0.46 0.60 0.55 1.00 0.50 0.66 0.48 0.29 0.23 0.56
5 Keene 0.37 0.31 0.38 0.50 1.00 0.55 0.37 0.34 0.14 0.49
6 Konishi 0.59 0.45 0.65 0.66 0.55 1.00 0.43 0.55 0.48 0.49
7 Kroeber 0.23 0.40 0.47 0.48 0.37 0.43 1.00 0.41 0.34 0.37
8 Queneau 0.28 0.14 0.43 0.29 0.34 0.55 0.41 1.00 0.38 0.27
9 Riquer 0.29 0.21 0.43 0.23 0.14 0.48 0.34 0.38 1.00 0.34
10 Sen’ichi 0.23 0.44 0.24 0.56 0.49 0.49 0.37 0.27 0.34 1.00
APPENDIX 5 • 561
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Index
Abutsu 1275 11
Akiko 1918 29
Akutagawa Ryunosuke 1927 40
Arai Hakuseki 1697 9
Arishima Takeo 1918 27
Ariwara Narihira 866 43
Basho (Matsuo Munefusa) 1684 100
Bin (Ueda Bin) 1914 13
Chikamatsu Hanji 1765 12
Chikamatsu Monzaemon 1693 94
Chomei 1193 37
Dazai Osamu 1948 16
Ejima Kiseki 1707 22
Fujiwara Kinto 1006 15
Fujiwara Teika (Sadaie) 1202 44
Fujiwara Toshinari (Shunzei) 1154 28
Fukuzawa Yukichi 1875 31
Futabatei Shimei 1904 26
Hagiwara Sakutaro 1926 12
Hakucho 1919 24
Hakushu 1925 17
Hattori Ransetsu 1694 5
Higuchi Ichiyo 1896 30
Hino Ashihei 1947 3
Horiguchi Daigaku 1932 6
Izumi Kyoka 1913 21
Izumi Shikibu 1028 20
Jippensha Ikku 1805 27
Kafu (Nagai Kafu) 1919 44
Kakinomoto no Hitomaro 702 46
Kamo no Mabuchi 1737 12
Kawabata Yasunari 1939 57
Kawatake Mokuami 1856 21
Kenko (Yoshida Kaneyoshi) 1323 30
Ki no Tsurayuki 908 67
Kobayashi Issa 1803 32
Kobayashi Takiji 1933 24
Koda Rohan 1907 25
Kukai (Kobo Daishi) 814 30
Kunikida Doppo 1908 15
Miyamoto Yuriko 1939 8
Murasaki Shikibu 1010 86
Mushakoji Saneatsu 1925 22
Name fl Index
Nagatsuka Takashi 1915 13
Nakano Shigeharu 1942 15
Namiki Sosuke (Senru) 1740 7
Nijo Yoshimoto 1360 28
Nishiyama Soin 1645 21
Ogai 1902 75
Ono no Komachi 850 38
Oshikochi Mitsune 950 6
Otomo no Tabito 665 19
Otomo no Yakamochi 775 22
Ozaki Koyo 1903 25
Ryutei Tanehiko 1823 6
Saigyo (Sato Norikiyo) 1158 31
Saikaku 1682 79
Sakurada Jisuke 1774 10
Santo Kyoden 1801 56
Sei Shonagon 1005 52
Shiga Naoya 1923 48
Shiki 1902 64
Shikitei Samba (Kikuchi Hisanori)1815 27
Shoyo 1899 57
Sogi (Iio Sogi) 1461 29
Soseki (Natsume Kinnosuke) 1907 60
Sugawara no Michizane 885 34
Takeda Izume (Idzumo) 1731 23
Takizawa Bakin (Kiokutei) 1807 42
Takuboku 1912 16
Tamenaga Shunsui 1830 10
Tanizaki Jun’ichiro 1926 54
Tayama Katai 1911 27
Tekkan (Yosano Hiroshi) 1913 24
Tokoku (Kitamura Tokoku) 1894 12
Toson (Shimazaki Toson) 1912 57
Tsuruya Namboku 1795 18
Ueda Akinari (Wayaku Taro) 1774 26
Yamabe Akahito 720 12
Yamada Bimyo 1908 3
Yamanoue Okura 700 30
Yamazaki Sokan 1485 14
Yokomitsu Riichi 1938 27
Yosa Buson 1756 41
Zeami Motokiyo 1403 32
562 • APPENDIX 5
THE WESTERN LITERATURE INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 3,821
Parent population 1,918
Significant figures 835
Major figures 236
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .95
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=835)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 Benét 1.00 0.60 0.54 0.62 0.63 0.67 0.52 0.69 0.59 0.61 0.60
2 Carpeaux 0.60 1.00 0.63 0.64 0.61 0.76 0.61 0.74 0.67 0.56 0.57
3 Diaz 0.54 0.63 1.00 0.75 0.58 0.75 0.53 0.67 0.76 0.66 0.43
4 Gioan 0.62 0.64 0.75 1.00 0.63 0.83 0.59 0.79 0.78 0.77 0.47
5 Goring 0.63 0.61 0.58 0.63 1.00 0.74 0.48 0.65 0.65 0.55 0.53
6 Jansen 0.67 0.76 0.75 0.83 0.74 1.00 0.61 0.84 0.82 0.74 0.60
7 Laathes 0.52 0.61 0.53 0.59 0.48 0.61 1.00 0.64 0.57 0.55 0.46
8 Queneau 0.69 0.74 0.67 0.79 0.65 0.84 0.64 1.00 0.74 0.71 0.62
9 Riquer 0.59 0.67 0.76 0.78 0.65 0.82 0.57 0.74 1.00 0.70 0.44
10 Burgio 0.61 0.56 0.66 0.77 0.55 0.74 0.55 0.71 0.70 1.00 0.41
11 Wilpert 0.60 0.57 0.43 0.47 0.53 0.60 0.46 0.62 0.44 0.41 1.00
APPENDIX 5 • 563
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Abelard, Pierre 1119 France 3 Atterbom, Daniel 1830 Sweden 4
Adam of St. Victor 1140 France 2 Aubigné, Théodore d’ 1591 Spain 2
Adams, Henry 1878 USA 2 Auden, W.H. 1947 England 7
Addison, Joseph 1712 England 10 Auerbach, Berthold 1852 Germany 2
Ady, Endre 1917 Hungary 3 Augustine, St. 394 Rome 13
Aeschylus –485 Greece 26 Ausonius, Decius 349 Rome 3
Aesop –550 Greece 6 Austen, Jane 1815 England 9
Akhmatova, Anna 1929 Russia 4 Babel, Isaak 1934 Russia 4
Aksakov, Sergey 1831 Russia 2 Bacchylides of Ceos –484 Greece 3
Alain-Fournier Bacon, Francis 1601 England 11
(Fournier) 1914 France 2 Baggesen, Jens 1804 Denmark 1
Alarcón, Pedro de 1873 Spain 5 Bahr, Hermann 1903 Austria 2
Alberti, Rafael 1942 Spain 2 Balmont, Konstantin 1907 Russia 2
Alcman of Sardes –650 Greece 2 Balzac, Honoré de 1839 France 31
Alcuin 775 England 3 Bandello, Matteo 1525 Italy 4
Alemán, Mateo 1587 Spain 4 Bang, Hermann 1897 Denmark 5
Alfieri,Vittorio 1789 Italy 11 Baratynsky, Evgeny 1840 Russia 2
Almquist, Carl 1833 Sweden 4 Barbey d’Aurevilly,
Ambrose of Milan, St. 379 Rome 3 Jules 1848 France 4
Anacreon of Teos –540 Greece 8 Barbusse, Henri 1913 France 2
Andersen, Hans 1845 Denmark 9 Baroja y Nessi, Pio 1912 Spain 3
Anderson, Sherwood 1916 USA 2 Barres, Maurice 1902 France 5
Andrade, Mario de 1933 Brazil 1 Basile, Giovanni 1615 Italy 3
Andréyev, Leonid 1911 Russia 4 Baudelaire, Charles 1861 France 30
Andric, Ivo 1932 Balkans 2 Beaumarchais,
Andrzejewski, Jerzy 1949 Poland 2 Pierre de 1772 France 9
Angelus Silesius Beaumont, Francis 1616 England 4
(Scheffler) 1664 Germany 3 Beauvoir, Simone de 1948 France 3
Anouilh, Jean 1949 France 6 Beckett, Samuel 1946 Ireland 11
Anzengruber, Karl 1879 Austria 1 Beckford, William 1799 England 2
Apollinaire, Guillaume 1918 Poland 14 Becque, Henri 1877 France 3
Apollonius Bécquer, Gustavo 1870 Spain 4
of Alexandria –250 Greece 6 Bellay, Joachim du 1560 France 7
Apuleius 150 Rome 7 Bellman, Carl 1780 Sweden 6
Aragon, Louis 1937 France 5 Bely, Andréi (Bugayev) 1920 Russia 7
Archilochos of Paros –700 Greece 6 Bembo, Pietro 1510 Italy 3
Aretino, Pietro 1532 Italy 6 Benavente y Martinez,
Ariosto, Ludovico 1514 Italy 24 Jacinto 1906 Spain 3
Aristophanes –408 Greece 18 Benn, Gottfried 1926 Germany 4
Arnaut Daniel 1180 France 3 Bennett, Arnold 1907 England 4
Arnim, Achim von 1821 Germany 6 Beranger, Pierre 1820 France 2
Arnold, Matthew 1862 England 8 Bergengruen,Werner 1932 Germany 2
Asturias, Miguel 1939 Guatemala 2 Bernanos, Georges 1928 France 8
564 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Bernart de Ventadorn 1180 France 4 Byron, George 1824 England 42
Bertrand de Born 1180 France 3 Cabell, James 1919 USA 1
Bibbiena (Dovizi) 1510 Italy 1 Calderon de la Barca,
Bilderdijk, Willem 1796 Netherlands 1 Pedro 1640 Spain 22
Bitzius, Albert 1837 Switzerland 6 Caldwell, Erskine 1943 USA 4
Bjørnson, Bjørnstjerne 1872 Norway 12 Callimachus –265 Greece 7
Blake, William 1797 England 11 Camoens, Luis de 1564 Portugal 13
Blicher, Steen 1822 Denmark 2 Capek, Karel 1930 Czech 3
Blok, Aleksandr 1920 Russia 10 Carducci, Giosue 1875 Italy 7
Boccaccio, Giovanni 1353 Italy 35 Carlyle, Thomas 1835 Scotland 14
Böhme, Jakob 1615 Germany 5 Carossa, Hans 1918 Germany 4
Boiardo, Matteo 1481 Italy 5 Carroll, Lewis 1872 England 1
Boileau-Despreaux, Cary, Joyce 1928 Ireland 1
Nicolas 1676 France 20 Castiglione, Baldassare 1518 Italy 8
Borges, Jorge 1940 Argentina 4 Cather, Willa 1913 USA 2
Boscán, Juan 1530 Spain 2 Cats, Jacob 1617 Netherlands 1
Bossuet, Jacques 1667 France 11 Catullus –54 Rome 13
Bourget, Paul 1892 France 6 Cavafy, Constantine 1903 Balkans 4
Brant, Sebastian 1497 Germany 4 Cavalcanti, Guido 1280 Italy 4
Brantome, Pierre 1580 France 2 Céline, Louis 1934 France 4
Brecht, Bertolt 1938 Germany 17 Cellini, Benvenuto 1540 Italy 3
Brederode, Gerbrand 1618 Netherlands 3 Celsus, Aulus 20 Rome 2
Breitinger, Johann 1740 Switzerland 2 Cendrars, Blaise 1927 Switzerland 4
Brentano, Clemens 1818 Germany 13 Cervantes Saavedra,
Breton, André 1936 France 8 Miguel de 1587 Spain 29
Brezina, Otokar 1908 Czech 2 Chamisso, Adelbert von1821 France 3
Broch, Hermann 1926 Austria 3 Chapman, George 1599 England 3
Brod, Max 1924 Czech 2 Chateaubriand,
Brontë, Charlotte 1855 England 5 François de 1808 France 17
Brontë, Emily 1848 England 5 Chatterton, Thomas 1770 England 2
Browne,Thomas 1645 England 3 Chaucer, Geoffrey 1380 England 18
Browning, Elizabeth 1846 England 4 Chekhov, Anton 1900 Russia 20
Browning, Robert 1852 England 11 Chénier, André 1794 France 10
Bryant, William 1834 USA 1 Chernyshevsky,
Bryussov,Valery 1913 Russia 4 Nikolay 1868 Russia 4
Büchner, Georg 1837 Germany 6 Chesterton, Gilbert 1914 England 6
Bulwer-Lytton, Edward1843 England 2 Chiabrera, Gabriello 1592 Italy 2
Bunin, Ivan 1910 Russia 4 Chrétien de Troyes 1184 France 15
Bunyan, John 1668 England 8 Cicero –66 Rome 30
Bürger, Gottfried 1787 Germany 6 Claudel, Paul 1908 France 16
Burns, Robert 1796 Scotland 7 Claudian 450 Rome 2
Burton, Robert 1616 England 3 Claudius, Matthias 1780 Germany 2
Butler, Samuel 1875 England 7 Cocteau, Jean 1929 France 5
APPENDIX 5 • 565
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Coleridge, Samuel 1812 England 19 Diderot, Denis 1753 France 22
Colette, Sidonie 1913 France 5 Dinesen, Isak 1925 Denmark 2
Collins, Wilkie 1864 England 2 Dionysius
Columella, Lucius 50 Rome 2 of Halicarnassus –50 Greece 2
Commynes, Disraeli, Benjamin 1844 England 5
Philippe de 1487 France 1 Döblin, Alfred 1918 Germany 6
Congreve,William 1710 England 5 Donne, John 1612 England 17
Conrad, Joseph 1897 Poland 11 Dos Passos, John 1936 USA 8
Conscience, Hendrik 1852 Belgium 3 Dostoyevsky, Fyodor 1861 Russia 41
Constant de Doyle, Arthur 1899 Scotland 2
Rebecque, Henri 1807 Switzerland 6 Drachmann, Holger 1886 Denmark 3
Cooper, Anthony Dreiser, Theodore 1911 USA 10
(Shaftesbury) 1711 England 4 Droste-Hulshoff,
Cooper, James 1829 USA 8 Annette 1837 Germany 2
Coppée, François 1882 France 2 Dryden, John 1671 England 15
Corneille, Pierre 1646 France 29 Ducasse, Isidore
Coster, Charles de 1867 Belgium 2 (Lautreamont) 1870 France 6
Cowper,William 1771 England 4 Duhamel, Georges 1924 France 4
Crane, Hart 1932 USA 1 Dumas, Alexandre
Crane, Stephen 1900 USA 3 (père) 1842 France 11
Crashaw, Richard 1649 England 5 Dumas, Alexandre (fils) 1864 France 7
Cratinus of Athens –444 Greece 1 Eça de Queiros, Jose 1885 Portugal 6
Crebillon, Prosper de 1714 France 1 Echegaray
Cummings, e.e. 1934 USA 2 y Eizaguirre, Jose 1873 Spain 3
Cyrano de Bergerac, Eckhart, Johannes 1300 Germany 3
Savinien 1655 France 4 Ehrenberg, Ilya 1931 Russia 4
d’Alembert, Jean 1757 France 4 Eich, Günter 1947 Germany 1
d’Annunzio, Gabriele 1903 Italy 12 Eichendorff,
d’Urfe, Honore 1607 France 6 Joseph von 1828 Germany 6
Dalin, Olaf von 1748 Sweden 2 Eliot, George 1859 England 10
Dante Alighieri 1305 Italy 62 Eliot, T.S. 1928 USA 32
Dario, Rubén 1907 Nicaragua 6 Éluard, Paul (Grindel) 1935 France 7
Daudet, Louis 1880 France 8 Emerson, Ralph 1843 USA 11
De la Mare,Walter 1913 England 2 Eminescu, Mikhail 1889 Balkans 4
De Quincey,Thomas 1825 England 5 Ennius, Quintus –199 Rome 5
Defoe, Daniel 1700 England 15 Erasmus 1506 Netherlands 19
Dehmel, Richard 1903 Germany 4 Espronceda, Jose de 1842 Portugal 3
Dekker,Thomas 1610 England 3 Etherege, George 1675 England 2
Deledda, Grazia 1911 Italy 3 Euripides –444 Greece 35
Demosthenes –344 Greece 9 Ewald, Johannes 1781 Denmark 2
Derzhavin, Gavril 1783 Russia 4 Fallada, Hans (Ditzen) 1933 Germany 1
Dickens, Charles 1852 England 27 Farquhar, George 1707 Ireland 1
Dickinson, Emily 1870 USA 6 Faulkner, William 1937 USA 16
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
566 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Fedin, Konstantine 1932 Russia 2 George, Stefan 1908 Germany 11
Fenelon, François 1691 France 9 Gessner, Salomon 1770 Switzerland 4
Ferreira, Antonio 1568 Portugal 1 Gezelle, Guido 1870 Belgium 3
Fet, Afanasy 1860 Russia 2 Ghelderode, Michel de 1938 Belgium 2
Fielding, Henry 1747 England 14 Gibbon, Edward 1777 England 3
Fischart, Johann 1585 Germany 2 Gide, André 1909 France 23
Fitzgerald, Edward 1849 England 2 Giono, Jean 1935 France 5
Fitzgerald, F. Scott 1936 USA 3 Giraldi, Giambattista 1544 Italy 4
Flaubert, Gustave 1861 France 24 Giraudoux, Jean 1922 France 7
Fleming, Paul 1640 Germany 2 Gleim, Johann 1759 Germany 2
Fletcher, John 1619 England 4 Goethe, Johann 1789 Germany 81
Fogazzaro, Antonio 1882 Italy 6 Gogol, Nikolay 1849 Russia 26
Fontane,Theodor 1859 Germany 7 Goldoni, Carlo 1747 Italy 11
Fontenelle, Bernard de 1697 France 5 Goldsmith, Oliver 1768 Ireland 12
Fonvizin, Denis 1785 Russia 3 Gombrowicz,Witold 1944 Poland 2
Ford, Ford Madox 1913 England 1 Goncharov, Ivan 1852 Russia 6
Ford, John 1626 England 2 Goncourt Brothers 1862 France 9
Forster, Edward 1919 England 5 Gondi, Paul (Retz) 1654 France 2
Foscolo, Ugo 1818 Balkans 8 Gongora y Argote,
Fouque, Friedrich 1817 Germany 3 Luis de 1601 Spain 13
France, Anatole 1884 France 11 Gorky, Maxim 1908 Russia 15
Francis of Assisi, St. 1222 Italy 8 Görres, Johann 1816 Germany 3
Franklin, Benjamin 1750 USA 4 Gottfried
Freud, Sigmund 1896 Austria 9 von Strassburg 1200 Germany 5
Freytag, Gustav 1856 Germany 3 Gozzi, Carlo 1760 Italy 6
Fröding, Gustav 1900 Sweden 5 Grabbe, Christian 1836 Germany 3
Froissart, Jean 1377 France 4 Gracian y Morales,
Fromentin, Eugene 1860 France 2 Baltazar 1641 Spain 4
Frost, Robert 1914 USA 6 Gray, Thomas 1756 England 8
Fry, Christopher 1947 England 3 Greene, Graham 1944 England 5
Galsworthy, John 1907 England 8 Greene, Robert 1592 England 4
Garborg, Arne 1891 Norway 2 Griboyedov, Alexander 1829 Russia 4
Garcia Lorca, Frederico1936 Spain 13 Grieg, Nordahl 1942 Norway 1
Garcilaso de la Vega 1536 Spain 6 Grillparzer, Franz 1831 Austria 6
Garnier, Robert 1574 France 1 Grimm, Brothers 1825 Germany 6
Garshin,Vsevolod 1888 Russia 2 Grimmelshausen,
Gaskell, Elizabeth 1850 England 2 Johann von 1662 Germany 5
Gautier,Theophile 1851 France 12 Grundtvig, Nikolai 1823 Denmark 3
Gay, John 1725 England 2 Gryphius, Andréas 1656 Germany 5
Geijer, Erik 1823 Sweden 4 Guarini, Giovanni 1578 Italy 5
Gellert, Christian 1755 Germany 3 Guicciardini, Francesco 1523 Italy 2
Genet, Jean 1949 France 7 Guilhelm IX, Duke
Geoffrey of Monmouth1140 England 4 of Aquitaine 1111 France 1
APPENDIX 5 • 567
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Guillen, Nicolas 1942 Cuba 1
Guinizelli, Guido 1270 Italy 2
Güiraldes, Ricardo 1926 Argentina 2
Gundulic, Ivan 1629 Balkans 2
Gutzkow, Karl 1851 Germany 2
Hagedorn,
Friedrich von 1748 Germany 2
Halevy, Ludovic 1874 France 2
Haller, Albrecht von 1747 Switzerland 3
Hamsun, Knut 1899 Norway 9
Hardy, Thomas 1880 England 13
Harte, Bret 1876 USA 4
Hartmann von Aue 1210 Germany 3
Hasek, Jaroslav 1923 Czech 2
Hasenclever,Walter 1930 Germany 1
Hauff, Wilhelm 1827 Germany 1
Hauptmann, Gerhart 1902 Germany 12
Hawthorne, Nathaniel 1844 USA 10
Hazlitt,William 1818 England 4
Hebbel, Friedrich 1853 Germany 7
Hebel, Johann 1800 Switzerland 1
Heiberg, Gunnar 1897 Norway 1
Heidenstam,Carl von 1899 Sweden 4
Heine, Heinrich 1837 Germany 22
Heinse, Johann 1786 Germany 1
Heliodorus 390 Greece 4
Hemingway, Ernest 1938 USA 15
Herbert, George 1633 England 5
Heredia, Jose de 1882 Latin Am 5
Herodotus –445 Greece 15
Herrera, Fernando de 1574 Spain 3
Herzen, Aleksandr 1852 Russia 4
Hesiod –700 Greece 11
Hesse, Hermann 1917 Germany 9
Heym, Georg 1912 Germany 2
Heyse, Paul 1870 Germany 1
Heyward, Dubose 1925 USA 1
Heywood, Thomas 1614 England 2
Hoffmann, E. T. A. 1816 Germany 12
Hofmann von
Hofmannswaldau,
Christian 1657 Germany 2
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Hofmannsthal,
Hugo von 1914 Austria 13
Holberg, Ludvig Baron 1724 Denmark 10
Hölderlin, Johann 1810 Germany 20
Hölty, Ludwig C.H. 1776 Germany 2
Homer –700 Greece 54
Hooft, Pieter 1621 Netherlands 4
Hopkins, Gerard 1884 England 6
Horace –25 Rome 35
Howard, Henry 1547 England 4
Howells,William 1877 USA 3
Hrostwitha
of Gandersheim 970 Germany 2
Hugo,Victor 1842 France 40
Huidobro,Vicente 1933 Chile 2
Hutten, Ulrich von 1523 Germany 3
Huxley, Aldous 1934 England 8
Huygens, Constantijn 1636 Netherlands 1
Huysmans, Joris 1888 France 6
Ibsen, Henrik 1868 Norway 32
Immerman, Karl L. 1836 Germany 1
Ingemann, Bernhard 1829 Denmark 2
Irving, Washington 1823 USA 6
Isherwood,
Christopher 1944 England 1
Jacapone da Todi 1270 Italy 3
Jacob, Max 1916 France 3
Jacobsen, Jens Peter 1885 Denmark 6
James, Henry 1883 USA 19
Jammes, Francis 1908 Belgium 5
Jarry, Alfred 1907 France 3
Jaufre Rudel 1175 France 2
Jean Paul (Richter) 1803 Germany 12
Jeffers, John Robinson 1927 USA 2
Jimenez, Juan 1921 Spain 7
Jodelle, Étienne 1572 France 2
Johnson, Samuel 1749 England 12
Joinville, Jean de 1264 France 3
Jonson, Ben 1612 England 15
Joyce, James 1922 Ireland 30
Jozsef, Attila 1937 Hungary 1
Juan de la Cruz, San 1582 Spain 4
Juan Manuel 1322 Spain 1
568 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Julius Caesar –62 Rome 18 Leconte de Lisle,
Jung-Stilling, Johann 1780 Germany 1 Charles 1858 France 6
Juvenal 95 Rome 10 Lenau, Nikolaus 1842 Austria 6
Kafka, Franz 1923 Czech 20 Lenz, Jakob 1791 Russia 4
Kaiser, Georg 1918 Germany 4 Leopardi, Giacomo 1837 Italy 14
Karamzin, Nikolai 1806 Russia 6 Lermontov, Mikhail 1841 Russia 12
Karlfeldt, Erik Axel 1904 Sweden 3 Lesage, Alain Rene 1708 France 10
Katayev,Valentin 1937 Russia 2 Leskov, Nikolay 1871 Russia 6
Kazantzakis, Nikos 1925 Balkans 4 Lessing, Gotthold 1769 Germany 20
Keats, John 1821 England 25 Lewis, Matthew 1815 England 2
Keller, Gottfried 1859 Switzerland 9 Lewis, Sinclair 1925 USA 6
Kellgren, Johann Lie, Jonas Lauritz
Henric 1791 Sweden 1 Idemil 1873 Norway 5
Kielland, Alexander 1886 Norway 4 Liliencron, Detlev von 1884 Germany 4
Kinck, Hans 1905 Norway 2 Lillo, George 1733 England 1
Kipling, Rudyard 1905 England 10 Lima, Jorge de 1933 Brazil 1
Kleist, Heinrich von 1811 Germany 12 Livy (Titus Livius) –19 Rome 10
Klinger, Freidrich von 1792 Germany 4 Lohenstein, Daniel von 1675 Germany 2
Klopstock, Friedrich 1764 Germany 17 Lomonosov, Mikhail 1751 Russia 3
Kochanowski, Jan 1570 Poland 3 London, Jack 1916 USA 4
Koltsov, Alexey 1842 Russia 3 Longfellow, Henry 1847 USA 6
Korolenko,Vladimir 1893 Russia 2 Longus of Lesbos 300 Greece 4
Kotzebue, August von 1801 Germany 2 Lönnrot, Elias 1842 Finland 3
Krasinski, Zygmunt 1852 Poland 4 Lope de Vega 1602 Spain 24
Krezla, Miroslav 1933 Balkans 3 Lorris, Guillaume de 1235 France 5
Krylov, Ivan 1808 Russia 4 Loti, Pierre (Viaud) 1890 France 5
Kyd, Thomas 1594 England 3 Lowell, James Russell 1859 USA 2
La Bruyere, Jean de 1685 France 10 Lucan 65 Rome 9
La Fontaine, Jean de 1661 France 16 Lucian of Samosata 157 Greece 9
La Rochefoucauld, Lucilius –140 Rome 4
Duc de 1653 France 8 Lucretius –55 Rome 11
Labiche, Eugène 1855 France 2 Ludwig, Otto 1853 Germany 2
Laclos, Pierre de 1781 France 4 Luis de Leon, Fray 1568 Spain 3
Lafayette, Marie 1674 France 7 Lyly, John 1594 England 8
Laforgue, Jules 1887 France 6 Macaulay, Thomas 1840 England 4
Lagerkvist, Par 1931 Sweden 4 Machado, Antonio 1915 Spain 7
Lagerlöf, Selma 1899 Sweden 8 Machiavelli, Niccolo 1499 Italy 16
Lamartine, Alphonse de1830 France 14 MacLeish, Archibald 1932 USA 1
Landor,Walter 1815 England 2 Macpherson, James 1776 Scotland 9
Langland,William 1372 England 2 Maeterlinck, Maurice 1902 Belgium 12
Lavater, Johann 1781 Switzerland 2 Maffei, Scipione 1715 Italy 2
Lawrence, D.H. 1925 England 12 Malherbe, François de 1595 France 11
Laxness, Halldor 1942 Iceland 2 Mallarme, Stéphane 1882 France 23
APPENDIX 5 • 569
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Malory, Thomas 1470 England 3 Michaux, Henri 1938 Belgium 2
Malraux, André 1941 France 7 Michelangelo
Mandelstam, Osip 1932 Russia 2 Buonarroti 1515 Italy 6
Mandeville, Bernard 1710 Netherlands 1 Michelet, Jules 1838 France 3
Mann, Heinrich 1911 Germany 4 Mickiewicz, Adam 1838 Poland 12
Mann,Thomas 1915 Germany 16 Middleton, Thomas 1620 England 2
Mansfield, Katherine 1923 New Zealand 3 Miller, Henry 1931 USA 3
Manzoni, Alessandro 1825 Italy 12 Milton, John 1648 England 31
Marcus Aurelius 161 Rome 8 Miranda, Francisco 1521 Portugal 3
Margaret Mistral, Frederic 1870 France 5
of Angouleme 1532 Spain 6 Mistral, Gabriela
Marie de France 1175 France 7 (Alcayaga) 1929 Chile 2
Marinetti, Filippo 1916 Italy 3 Moe, Jørgen 1853 Norway 1
Marino, Giovan 1609 Italy 8 Molière, Jean 1662 France 43
Marivaux, Pierre de 1728 France 14 Molina, Tirso de
Marlowe, Christopher 1593 England 15 (Tellez) 1620 Spain 5
Marmontel, Jean 1763 France 3 Mombert, Alfred 1912 Germany 1
Marot, Clément 1536 France 5 Montaigne, Michel de 1573 France 17
Marquand, John 1933 USA 2 Montale, Eugenio 1936 Italy 4
Martial, Marcus 80 Rome 6 Montemayor, Jorge de 1555 Portugal 6
Martin du Gard, Roger1921 France 6 Montesquieu, Baron de1729 France 18
Marvell, Andréw 1661 England 4 Montherlant, Henri de 1936 France 5
Masefield, John 1918 England 2 Monti,Vincenzo 1794 Italy 3
Massinger, Philip 1623 England 2 Moore, Thomas 1819 Ireland 3
Masters, Edgar 1908 USA 2 Moravia, Alberto
Maturin, Charles 1822 Ireland 2 (Pincherle) 1947 Italy 7
Maugham, Somerset 1914 England 5 More, Thomas 1518 England 7
Maupassant, Guy de 1890 France 14 Moreas, Jean 1896 Balkans 7
Mauriac, François 1925 France 8 Moreto y Cabana,
Mayakovsky,Vladimir 1930 Russia 13 Augustin 1658 Spain 2
Mazzini, Giuseppe 1845 Italy 2 Morgenstern, Christian 1911 Germany 3
Meilhac, Henri 1871 France 2 Mörike, Eduard 1844 Germany 6
Meleager of Gadara –100 Greece 2 Morris, William 1874 England 6
Melo, Francisco de 1648 Portugal 3 Moschus of Syracus –150 Greece 1
Melville, Herman 1859 USA 14 Müller, Friedrich Max 1789 Germany 1
Menander of Athens –303 Greece 9 Multatuli (Dekker) 1860 Netherlands 3
Meredith, George 1868 England 8 Murger, Henri 1861 France 2
Merezhkovski, Dmitri 1905 Russia 5 Murner,Thomas 1515 Germany 1
Mérimée Prosper 1843 France 6 Musaeus 500 Greece 2
Metastasio, Pietro Musil, Robert 1920 Austria 4
(Trapassi) 1738 Italy 6 Musset, Louis de 1850 France 16
Meung, Jean de 1290 France 3 Nabokov,Vladimir 1939 Russia 3
Meyer, Conrad 1865 Switzerland 8 Nashe, Thomas 1601 England 2
570 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Nekrasov, Nikolay 1861 Russia 5 Petronius Arbiter 50 Rome 9
Nemcova, Bozena 1860 Germany 3 Pindar
Nemeth, Laszlo 1941 Hungary 1 of Cynoscephalae –478 Greece 16
Neruda, Jan 1874 Czech 3 Pirandello, Luigi 1907 Italy 14
Neruda, Pablo 1944 Chile 4 Pisemsky, Alexey 1860 Russia 2
Nerval, Gerard de Platen-Hallermünde,
(Labrunie) 1848 France 7 August von 1835 Germany 4
Nestroy, Johann 1841 Austria 2 Plautus –214 Rome 18
Newman, John Henry 1841 England 3 Pliny the Elder 63 Rome 5
Nexø, Martin Pliny the Younger 101 Rome 5
Anderson 1909 Denmark 3 Plutarch (Boeotia) 86 Greece 15
Nievo, Ippolito 1861 Italy 2 Poe, Edgar 1849 USA 26
Njegos, Peter 1851 Balkans 1 Poliziano, Angelo
Norris, Frank 1902 USA 4 (Politien) 1494 Italy 7
Novalis Polybius –160 Greece 6
(von Hardenberg) 1801 Germany 13 Pontoppidan, Henrik 1897 Denmark 4
O’Casey, Sean 1924 Ireland 3 Pope, Alexander 1728 England 22
O’Neill, Eugene 1928 USA 8 Porter, Katherine Anne 1934 USA 1
Odets, Clifford 1946 USA 1 Pound, Ezra 1925 USA 12
Oehlenschlaeger, Adam1819 Denmark 6 Prévert, Jacques 1940 France 3
Olesha,Yuri 1939 Russia 2 Prévost, Antoine 1737 France 8
Opitz, Martin 1637 Germany 5 Propertius, Sextus –15 Rome 6
Orwell, George (Blair) 1943 England 3 Proust, Marcel 1911 France 20
Ostrovsky, Aleksandr 1863 Russia 5 Prudentius, Aurelius 388 Rome 4
Otway,Thomas 1685 England 2 Przybyszewski,
Ovid –3 Rome 29 Stanislaw 1908 Poland 3
Palamas, Kostis 1899 Balkans 2 Pulci, Luigi 1472 Italy 5
Parini, Giuseppe 1769 Italy 4 Pushkin, Aleksander 1837 Russia 30
Pascoli, Giovanni 1895 Italy 4 Quasimodo, Salvatore 1941 Italy 2
Pasternak, Boris 1930 Russia 10 Quevedo y Vallegas,
Patmore, Coventry 1863 England 2 Francisco de 1620 Spain 12
Pavese, Cesare 1948 Italy 4 Raabe,Wilhelm 1871 Germany 5
Peacock,Thomas Love 1825 England 2 Rabelais, François 1534 France 23
Péguy, Charles Pierre 1913 France 6 Racine, Jean 1679 France 34
Pellico, Silvio 1829 Italy 3 Radcliffe, Ann 1804 England 3
Percy, Thomas 1769 England 3 Radiguet, Raymond 1923 France 2
Pereda, Jose Maria de 1873 Spain 3 Radishchev, Alexander 1789 Russia 2
Perez Galdos, Benito 1883 Spain 5 Raimund, Ferdinand 1830 Austria 2
Perrault, Charles 1668 France 6 Ramuz, Charles 1918 Switzerland 4
Persius 62 Rome 3 Regnard, Jean 1695 France 2
Pessoa, Fernando 1928 Portugal 3 Regnier, Mathurin 1613 France 3
Petöfi, Sandor 1849 Hungary 6 Rej, Mikolaj 1545 Poland 1
Petrarch 1344 Italy 40 Remarque, Erich 1938 Germany 4
APPENDIX 5 • 571
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Renan, Joseph 1863 France 5 Sand, George
Reuchlin, Johann 1495 Germany 2 (Dudevant) 1844 France 9
Reuter, Fritz 1850 Germany 1 Sandburg, Carl 1918 USA 3
Reverdy, Pierre 1929 France 3 Sannazzaro, Jacopo 1496 Italy 6
Reymont, Wladislaw 1907 Poland 5 Sappho of Lesbos –600 Greece 10
Ribeiro, Bernardim 1522 Portugal 4 Sardou,Victorien 1871 France 2
Richardson, Samuel 1729 England 16 Saroyan, William 1948 USA 4
Rilke, Rainer 1915 Czech 25 Sartre, Jean-Paul 1945 France 11
Rimbaud, Jean 1891 France 19 Scarron, Paul 1650 France 5
Rodenbach, Georges 1895 Belgium 3 Scève, Maurice 1550 France 3
Rojas, Fernando de 1505 Spain 1 Schiller, Johann 1799 Switzerland 38
Rolland, Romain 1906 France 9 Schlegel, August von 1807 Germany 10
Romains, Jules Schnitzler, Arthur 1902 Austria 3
(Farigoule) 1925 France 9 Schulz, Bruno 1932 Poland 1
Ronsard, Pierre de 1564 France 18 Scott,Walter 1811 Scotland 33
Rossetti, Dante Gabriel1868 England 6 Scribe, Eugene 1831 France 5
Rostand, Edmond 1908 France 5 Scudery, Madelaine de 1648 France 2
Roth, Joseph 1934 Austria 1 Seghers, Anna
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 1752 Switzerland 48 (Radvanyi) 1940 Germany 2
Rückert, Friedrich 1828 Germany 2 Seneca 43 Rome 23
Rueda, Lope de 1550 Spain 3 Sevigné, Marie de 1666 France 5
Ruiz de Alarcon Shakespeare, William 1604 England 100
y Mendoza, Juan 1621 Latin Am 5 Shaw, George 1896 Ireland 18
Ruiz, Juan Shelley, Percy 1822 England 25
(Archpriest of Hita) 1323 Spain 3 Sheridan, Richard 1791 England 5
Runeberg, Johann Sholokhov, Mikhail 1945 Russia 3
Ludvig 1844 Finland 3 Sidney, Philip 1586 England 11
Rutebeuf 1270 France 6 Sienkiewicz, Henryk 1886 Poland 6
Rydberg, Abraham 1868 Sweden 3 Sillanpää, Frans 1928 Finland 3
Sacchetti, Franco 1370 Italy 2 Silone, Ignazio
Sachs, Hans 1534 Germany 4 (Tranquilli) 1940 Italy 3
Sade, Marquis de 1780 France 6 Simonides of Ceos –516 Greece 4
Saint-Exupéry, Sinclair, Upton 1918 USA 4
Antoine de 1940 France 4 Slowacki, Juliusz 1849 Poland 8
Saint-John Perse Smollett,Tobias 1761 Scotland 6
(Léger) 1927 France 5 Sologub, Fedor 1903 Russia 2
Saint-Pierre, Jacques de 1777 France 9 Solomos, Dionysus 1838 Balkans 3
Saint-Simon, Henri de 1800 France 1 Solon of Athens –600 Greece 4
Saint-Simon, Louis 1715 France 2 Sophocles –456 Greece 25
Salluste du Bartas, Sorge, Reinhard 1916 Germany 2
Guillaume de 1584 France 3 Southey, Robert 1814 England 3
Saltykov, Mikhail Spender, Stephen 1949 England 3
(N. Shchedrin) 1866 Russia 5 Spenser, Edmund 1592 England 14
572 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Spielhagen, Friedrich 1869 Germany 1 Toller, Ernst 1933 Germany 2
Stadler, Ernst 1914 Germany 1 Tolstoy, Alexey K. 1857 Russia 2
Staël, Madame de Tolstoy, Alexey N. 1922 Russia 7
(Necker) 1806 France 11 Tolstoy, Leo 1868 Russia 42
Stampa, Gaspara 1554 Italy 2 Tourneur, Cyril 1615 England 2
Steele, Richard 1712 Ireland 5 Trakl, Georg 1914 Austria 5
Stein, Gertrude 1914 USA 3 Trissino, Giovanni 1518 Italy 2
Steinbeck, John 1942 USA 6 Trollope, Anthony 1855 England 6
Stendhal (Beyle) 1823 France 22 Turgenev, Ivan 1853 Russia 24
Sterne, Laurence 1753 England 15 Twain, Mark (Clemens)1875 USA 12
Stevenson, Robert 1890 Scotland 7 Tyrtaeus of Sparta –680 Greece 3
Stiernhielm, Georg 1638 Sweden 2 Tyutchev, Fedor 1843 Russia 3
Stifter, Adalbert 1845 Czech 5 Tzara,Tristan 1936 Balkans 4
Storm, Theodor 1857 Germany 5 Uhland, Johann 1827 Germany 5
Stowe, Harriet 1851 USA 2 Ulrich von
Strindberg August 1889 Sweden 22 Lichtenstein 1240 Austria 1
Sturluson, Snorri 1219 Iceland 6 Unamuno, Miguel de 1904 Spain 12
Sudermann, Hermann 1897 Germany 3 Undset, Sigrid 1922 Norway 5
Suetonius, Gaius 109 Rome 5 Ungaretti, Giuseppe 1928 Italy 4
Svevo, Italo (Schmitz) 1901 Italy 5 Valery, Paul 1911 France 18
Swedenborg, Emanuel 1728 Sweden 8 Vallejo, Cesar 1932 Peru 1
Swift, Jonathan 1707 England 18 Vaughan, Henry 1661 England 2
Swinburne, Algernon 1877 England 9 Vauvenargues, Luc 1747 France 4
Synge, John 1909 Ireland 5 Veldeke, Hendrik van 1180 Belgium 2
Tacitus 95 Rome 13 Verga, Giovanni 1880 Italy 7
Tasso, Torquato 1584 Italy 22 Verhaeren, Emile 1895 Belgium 7
Tassoni, Alessandro 1605 Italy 2 Verlaine, Paul 1884 France 23
Tegner, Esias 1822 Sweden 7 Vicente, Gil 1510 Portugal 7
Tennyson, Alfred 1849 England 12 Vigny, Alfred de 1837 France 10
Terence, Publius –159 Rome 18 Villehardouin,
Teresa de Jesus Geoffroy de 1205 France 1
(Cepeda), Santa 1555 Spain 4 Villiers de l’Isle
Tertullian 200 Rome 4 Adam, Auguste 1878 France 4
Thackeray,William 1851 England 12 Villon, François 1463 France 13
Theocritus of Syracuse –270 Greece 14 Virgil –30 Rome 55
Theognis of Megara –540 Greece 3 Vittorini, Elio 1948 Italy 4
Theophrastus –331 Greece 3 Voiture,Vincent 1638 France 3
Thompson, Francis 1899 England 4 Voltaire, François
Thomson, James (poet) 1740 Scotland 6 (Arouet) 1734 France 47
Thoreau, Henry 1857 USA 6 Vondel, Joost van den 1627 Netherlands 7
Thucydides –420 Greece 15 Vörösmarty, Mihaly 1840
Tibullus –19 Rome 7 Hungary 3
Tieck, Johann 1813 Germany 9 Voss, Johann Heinrich 1791 Germany 3
APPENDIX 5 • 573
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Vrchlicky, Jaroslav Williams,William 1923 USA 1
(Frida) 1893 Czech 3 Winckelmann, Johann 1757 Germany 8
Wackenroder,Wilhelm 1798 Germany 3 Wolfe, Thomas 1938 USA 5
Walpole, Horace 1757 England 4 Wolfram
Walser, Robert 1918 Switzerland 1 von Eschenbach 1220 Switzerland 5
Walther von der Wollstonecraft, Mary
Vogelweide 1210 Austria 5 (Shelley) 1837 England 2
Walton, Izaak 1633 Britain 1 Woolf,Virginia 1922 England 12
Warren, Robert 1945 USA 2 Wordsworth, William 1810 England 21
Wassermann, Jakob 1913 Germany 2 Wright, Richard 1948 USA 1
Waugh, Evelyn 1943 England 3 Wyatt, Thomas 1542 England 3
Webster, John 1620 England 4 Wycherley, William 1680 England 2
Wedekind, Frank 1904 Germany 5 Wyspianski, Stanislaw 1907 Poland 5
Weinheber, Josef 1932 Austria 1 Xenophanes
Wells, H.G. 1906 England 7 of Colophon –540 Greece 1
Werfel, Franz 1930 Czech 4 Xenophon of Athens –395 Greece 7
Wergeland, Henrik 1845 Norway 3 Yeats, William 1905 Ireland 19
Werner, Zacharias 1808 Germany 2 Young, Edward 1723 England 10
West, Nathanael 1940 USA 1 Zamyatin,Yevgeny 1924 Russia 2
Wharton, Edith 1902 USA 2 Zeromski, Stefan 1904 Poland 3
Whitman,Walt 1859 USA 23 Zola, Émile 1880 France 33
Wiechert, Ernst 1927 Germany 4 Zorrilla y Moral, Jose 1857 Spain 5
Wieland, Christoph 1773 Germany 8 Zoshchenko, Mikhail 1935 Russia 3
Wilde, Oscar 1894 Ireland 20 Zuckmayer, Carl 1936 Germany 2
Wilder,Thornton 1937 USA 5 Zweig, Stefan 1921 Austria 3
574 • APPENDIX 5
THE WESTERN MUSIC INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 2,508
Parent population 1,571
Significant figures 522
Major figures 182
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .97
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SCORES (n=522)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6
1 Abraham 1.00 .72 .79 .72 .75 .83 .69 .79 .76 .75 .54 .80 .69 .71 .52 .60
2 Alberti .72 1.00 .74 .77 .86 .83 .60 .85 .86 .89 .69 .85 .83 .90 .69 .75
3 Beltrando .79 .74 1.00 .75 .76 .83 .69 .80 .79 .75 .56 .81 .67 .76 .52 .69
4 Borroff .72 .77 .75 1.00 .78 .83 .66 .78 .77 .77 .58 .79 .70 .75 .55 .60
5 Dahlhaus .75 .86 .76 .78 1.00 .85 .66 .83 .85 .89 .78 .87 .85 .84 .75 .66
6 Grout .83 .83 .83 .83 .85 1.00 .79 .90 .89 .87 .63 .93 .79 .85 .62 .69
7 Hamburg .69 .60 .69 .66 .66 .79 1.00 .73 .71 .69 .42 .78 .53 .64 .40 .50
8 Harman .79 .85 .80 .78 .83 .90 .73 1.00 .92 .90 .65 .92 .74 .87 .65 .71
9 Heading .76 .86 .79 .77 .85 .89 .71 .92 1.00 .89 .69 .91 .76 .90 .69 .77
10 Honolka .75 .89 .75 .77 .89 .87 .69 .90 .89 1.00 .67 .90 .76 .91 .69 .69
11 Kennedy .54 .69 .56 .58 .78 .63 .42 .65 .69 .67 1.00 .64 .80 .64 .82 .52
12 Lang .80 .85 .81 .79 .87 .93 .78 .92 .91 .90 .64 1.00 .77 .88 .64 .72
13 Randel .69 .83 .67 .70 .85 .79 .53 .74 .76 .76 .80 .77 1.00 .76 .74 .64
14 Rebatet .71 .90 .76 .75 .84 .85 .64 .87 .90 .91 .64 .88 .76 1.00 .68 .84
15 Thomps .52 .69 .52 .55 .75 .62 .40 .65 .69 .69 .82 .64 .74 .68 1.00 .58
16 Vuiller .60 .75 .69 .60 .66 .69 .50 .71 .77 .69 .52 .72 .64 .84 .58 1.00
APPENDIX 5 • 575
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Adam de la Halle 1284 France 4 Berwald, Franz Adolf 1836 Sweden 2
Adam von Fulda 1485 Germany 1 Besard, Jean 1607 France 1
Adam, Adolphe 1843 France 3 Biber, Heinrich von 1684 Bohemia 2
Agazzari, Agostino 1618 Italy 1 Binchois, Gilles 1440 Netherlands 6
Agricola, Alexander 1486 Belgium 2 Bizet, Georges 1875 France 10
Albéniz, Isaac 1900 Spain 4 Blacher, Boris 1943 Germany 2
Albert, Heinrich 1644 Germany 2 Bliss, Arthur
Alberti, Domenico 1740 Italy 1 (Drummond) 1931 England 2
Albinoni, Tommaso 1711 Italy 3 Bloch, Ernest 1920 Switzerland 3
Alfano, Franco 1915 Italy 1 Blow, John 1689 England 4
Alfonso X of Castile 1261 Spain 1 Boccherini, Luigi 1783 Italy 4
Anerio, Felice 1600 Italy 2 Boësset, Antoine de 1626 France 1
Anerio, Giovanni 1607 Italy 2 Böhm, Georg 1701 Germany 2
Animuccia, Giovanni 1540 Italy 1 Boieldieu, Adrien 1815 France 5
Arcadelt, Jacques 1545 France 3 Boito, Arrigo 1882 Italy 3
Arensky, Anton 1901 Russia 1 Bononcini, Giovanni 1710 Italy 3
Ariosti, Attilio 1706 Italy 1 Borodin, Alexander 1873 Russia 8
Arne, Thomas 1750 England 3 Bortniansky, Dmitry 1791 Ukraine 1
Auber, Daniel 1822 France 5 Bourgeois, Loys 1550 France 1
Auric, Georges 1939 France 2 Boyce,William 1751 England 2
Bach, C.P.E. 1754 Germany 15 Brahms, Johannes 1873 Germany 35
Bach, J. Christian 1775 Germany 9 Bruch, Max 1878 Germany 2
Bach, J. Christoph 1682 Germany 2 Bruck, Arnold 1540 Belgium 1
Bach, Johann Sebastian 1725 Germany 87 Bruckner, Anton 1864 Austria 19
Bach, Wilhelm 1750 Germany 3 Brumel, Antoine 1500 Netherlands 3
Badings, Henk 1947 Netherlands 1 Bruneau, Alfred 1897 France 2
Balakirev, Mily 1877 Russia 6 Bull, John 1602 England 3
Banchieri, Adriano 1607 Italy 3 Burck, Joachim a 1586 Germany 1
Barber, Samuel 1950 USA 4 Burkhard, Willy 1940 Switzerland 1
Bartók, Béla 1921 Hungary 18 Burney, Charles 1766 England 4
Bax, Arnold (Trevor) 1923 England 3 Busnois, Antoine 1470 Belgium 3
Beck, Conrad 1941 Switzerland 1 Busoni, Ferruccio 1906 Italy 8
Beethoven, Buus, Jacques 1540 Belgium 1
Ludwig van 1810 Germany 100 Buxtehude, Dietrich 1677 Denmark 7
Bellini,Vincenzo 1835 Italy 9 Byrd,William 1583 England 11
Benda, Georg 1762 Bohemia 2 Cabezón, Antonio de 1550 Spain 3
Benevoli, Orazio 1645 Italy 2 Caccini, Giulio 1591 Italy 8
Benoit, Peter 1874 Belgium 1 Caldara, Antonio 1710 Italy 5
Berg, Alban 1925 Austria 14 Cambert, Robert 1668 France 3
Berlin, Irving 1928 Russia 1 Campion, Thomas 1607 England 1
Berlioz, Hector 1843 France 41 Campra, André 1700 France 3
Bernhard, Christoph 1668 Germany 1 Cannabich, Christian 1771 Germany 2
Berton, Henri 1807 France 1 Cara, Marchetto 1510 Italy 1
576 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Carissimi, Giacomo 1645 Italy 9 D’Anglebert, Jean 1675 France 1
Carpentras 1508 France 1 Dalayrac, Nicolas 1793 France 1
Carter, Elliott 1948 USA 4 Dall’Abaco, Evaristo 1715 Italy 1
Casella, Alfredo 1923 Italy 4 Dallapiccola, Luigi 1944 Italy 7
Catel, Charles 1813 France 1 Dandrieu, Jean 1722 France 1
Cavalieri, Emilio deí 1590 Italy 4 Daquin, Louis 1734 France 1
Cavalli, Francesco 1642 Italy 8 Dargomïzhsky,
Cavazzoni, Girolamo 1560 Italy 1 Alexander 1853 Russia 3
Cavazzoni, Marco 1530 Italy 1 David, Félicien 1850 France 1
Cazzati, Maurizio 1660 Italy 1 Debussy, Claude 1902 France 45
Certon, Pierre 1550 France 2 Delibes, Clément 1876 France 2
Cesti, Antonio 1663 Italy 7 Delius, Frederick 1902 Germany 7
Chabrier, Alexis 1881 France 5 Demantius,
Chambonniéres, Christoph 1607 Bohemia 1
Jacques de 1641 France 3 Destouches, André 1712 France 1
Charpentier, Gustave 1900 France 2 Dietrich, Sixt 1533 Germany 1
Charpentier, Marc 1683 France 4 Dittersdorf, Karl von 1779 Austria 4
Chausson, Ernest 1895 France 3 Dohnányi, Ernö 1917 Slovakia 2
Chávez y Ramírez, Donizetti, Gaetano 1837 Italy 9
Carlos 1939 Mexico 2 Dowland, John 1603 England 6
Cherubini, Luigi 1800 Italy 10 Draghi, Antonio 1674 Italy 2
Chopin, Fryderyk 1849 Poland 32 Du Caurroy, Eustache 1589 France 1
Ciconia, Johannes 1375 Belgium 2 Du Mont, Henri 1650 Belgium 1
Cimarosa, Domenico 1789 Italy 3 Ducis, Benedictus 1530 Belgium 1
Clemens, Jacobus 1550 Netherlands 4 Dufay, Guillaume 1440 Netherlands 13
Clementi, Muzio 1792 Italy 5 Dukas, Paul 1905 France 4
Clérambault, Louis 1716 France 1 Duni, Egidio 1749 Italy 1
Coclico, Adrianus 1539 Belgium 1 Dunstable, John 1430 England 7
Compère, Loyset 1490 France 2 Duparc, Henri 1888 France 3
Copland, Aaron 1940 USA 7 Durante, Francesco 1724 Italy 2
Coprario, John 1615 England 1 Durey, Louis 1928 France 1
Cordier, Baude 1420 France 1 Dussek, Jan 1800 Bohemia 2
Corelli, Arcangelo 1693 Italy 12 Dvorák, Antonin 1881 Bohemia 13
Cornelius, C. Peter 1864 Germany 2 Eberlin, Johann 1805 Germany 1
Corsi, Jacopo 1601 Italy 1 Eccard, Johannes 1593 Germany 1
Costelely, Guillaume 1570 France 2 Elgar, Edward 1897 England 8
Couperin, François 1708 France 13 Ellington, Duke 1939 USA 2
Couperin, Louis 1661 France 3 Enescu, George 1921 Romania 2
Cowell, Henry 1937 USA 4 Erlebach, Philipp 1697 Germany 1
Crécquillon,Thomas 1520 Belgium 2 Falla, Manuel de 1916 Spain 9
Croce, Giovanni 1597 Italy 1 Farnaby, Giles 1603 England 1
Crüger, Johannes 1638 Germany 1 Fauré, Gabriel 1885 France 13
Cui, César 1875 Russia 3 Fayrfax, Robert 1504 England 1
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
APPENDIX 5 • 577
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Ferrabosco, Gluck, Christoph 1754 Bohemia 26
Alfonso the Elder 1583 Italy 1 Gombert, Nicolas 1545 Belgium 4
Ferrabosco, Gossec, François 1774 Belgium 4
Alfonso the Younger 1618 England 1 Gottschalk, Louis 1869 USA 1
Ferrari, Benedetto 1637 Italy 1 Goudimel, Claude 1550 France 3
Festa, Costanzo 1530 Italy 2 Gounod, Charles 1858 France 13
Févin, Antoine de 1510 Netherlands 2 Granados, Enrique 1907 Spain 3
Fibich, Zdenek 1890 Bohemia 2 Grandi, Alessandro 1615 Italy 1
Field, John 1822 Ireland 3 Graun, Carl 1743 Germany 3
Fils, Anton 1760 Germany 1 Graupner, Christoph 1723 Germany 1
Finck, Heinrich 1484 Germany 2 Grenon, Nicolas 1420 France 2
Fischer, Johann 1705 Germany 3 Grétry, André 1781 Belgium 6
Flotow, Friedrich von 1852 Germany 2 Grieg, Edvard 1883 Norway 11
Forster, Georg 1550 Germany 1 Guerrero, Francisco 1567 Spain 1
Fortner, Wolfgang 1947 Germany 2 Hába, Alois 1933 Bohemia 2
Foster, Stephen 1864 USA 2 Halévy, Fromental 1839 France 4
Francesco da Milano 1537 Italy 2 Hammerschmidt,
Franck, César 1862 Belgium 15 Andreas 1651 Bohemia 2
Franck, Johann 1679 Germany 1 Handel, George 1725 Germany 46
Franck, Melchior 1619 Germany 1 Harris, Roy 1938 USA 3
Franz, Robert 1855 Germany 1 Hartmann, Karl 1945 Germany 1
Frederick II of Prussia 1752 Germany 3 Hasse, Johann 1739 Germany 8
Fux, Johann Joseph 1700 Austria 6 Hassler, Hans 1604 Germany 4
Gabrieli, Giovanni 1593 Italy 11 Hauer, Josef 1923 Austria 1
Gade, Niels 1857 Denmark 3 Haydn, Franz 1772 Austria 56
Gaffurius, Franchinus 1491 Italy 1 Haydn, Michael 1777 Austria 4
Gagliano, Marco da 1622 Italy 2 Henry VIII of England 1531 England 2
Gallus, Joannes 1550 Belgium 1 Hérold, Louis 1831 France 2
Galuppi, Baldassare 1746 Italy 4 Hiller, Johann 1768 Germany 4
Gassmann, Florian 1769 Bohemia 2 Hindemith, Paul 1935 Germany 19
Gastoldi, Giovanni 1600 Italy 1 Hoffmann, E.T. A. 1816 Germany 6
Gaveaux, Pierre 1800 France 1 Hofhaimer, Paul 1499 Austria 3
Gerhard, Roberto 1936 Spain 1 Holst, Gustav 1914 England 5
Gershwin, George 1937 USA 6 Holzbauer, Ignaz 1751 Austria 2
Gesualdo of Venosa, Honegger, Arthur 1932 France 9
Carlo 1600 Italy 5 Hothby, John 1450 England 1
Gherardello da Firenze 1360 Italy 1 Humfrey, Pelham 1674 England 1
Ghiselin, Johannes 1510 Netherlands 1 Hummel, Johann 1818 Austria 3
Gibbons, Orlando 1623 England 4 Humperdinck,
Giovanni da Cascia 1340 Italy 2 Engelbert 1894 Germany 3
Glazunov, Alexander 1905 Russia 4 Ibert, Jacques 1930 France 2
Glier, Reinhold 1915 Ukraine 1 d’Indy,Vincent 1891 France 9
Glinka, Mikhail 1844 Russia 8 Ingegneri, Marc 1587 Italy 1
578 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Isaac, Heinrich 1490 Belgium 8 Lesueur, Jean 1800 France 4
Isouard, Nicolas 1815 France 1 Liszt, Franz 1851 Hungary 45
Ives, Charles 1914 USA 8 Locatelli, Pietro 1735 Italy 2
Jacopo da Bologna 1350 Italy 2 Locke, Matthew 1670 England 3
Jacopo da Todi 1270 Italy 2 Loewe, Carl 1836 Germany 2
Janácek, Leos 1894 Bohemia 7 Loewe, Frederick 1941 Germany 1
Janequin, Clément 1515 France 5 Logroscino, Nicola 1738 Italy 1
Jenkins, John 1632 England 1 Lortzing, Albert 1841 Germany 4
Jolivet, André 1945 France 3 Lotti, Antonio 1707 Italy 2
Jommelli, Niccolò 1754 Italy 4 Lully, Jean 1672 Italy 24
Josquin des Prez 1480 France 17 Luther, Martin 1523 Germany 9
Kabalevsky, Dmitry 1944 Russia 2 Luzzaschi, Luzzasco 1585 Italy 2
Keiser, Reinhard 1714 Germany 5 MacDowell, Edward 1901 USA 3
Kerll, Johann von 1667 Germany 2 Machaut, Guillaume de1340 France 12
Kern, Jerome 1925 USA 1 Mackenzie, Alexander 1887 Scotland 1
Kjerulf, Halfdan 1855 Norway 1 Mahler, Gustave 1900 Bohemia 23
Kodály, Zoltán 1922 Hungary 7 Malipiero, Gian 1922 Italy 5
Koechlin, Charles 1907 France 2 Manelli, Francesco 1634 Italy 1
Krenek, Ernst 1940 Austria 6 Marazzoli, Marco 1642 Italy 1
Krieger, Adam 1666 Germany 2 Marcello, Benedetto 1726 Italy 3
Krieger, Johann 1689 Germany 2 Marenzio, Luca 1593 Italy 6
Kuhlau, Friedrich 1826 Germany 1 Marini, Biagio 1627 Italy 2
Kuhnau, Johann 1700 Germany 4 Marschner, Heinrich 1835 Germany 4
Kusser, Johann 1700 Austria 2 Martin, Frank 1930 Switzerland 3
La Rue, Pierre de 1517 Netherlands 3 Martinu, Bohuslav 1930 Bohemia 3
Lalo, Edouard 1863 Belgium 3 Mascagni, Pietro 1903 Italy 3
Lambert, Michel 1650 France 1 Massenet, Jules 1882 France 9
Landi, Stefano 1626 Italy 3 Mattheson, Johann 1721 Germany 5
Landini, Francesco 1365 Italy 6 Mauduit, Jacques 1597 France 2
Lanier, Nicholas 1628 England 1 Mayr, Simon 1803 Germany 2
Lanner, Josef 1841 Austria 1 Mazzocchi, Domenico 1632 Italy 2
Lantins, Hugo de 1430 Italy 1 Mazzocchi,Virgilio 1637 Italy 1
Lassus, Orlando 1572 Belgiu 14 Méhul, Etienne 1803 France 5
Lawes, Henry 1636 England 2 Mendelssohn, Felix 1847 Germany 30
Le Jeune, Claude 1568 France 3 Mercadante, Saverio 1835 Italy 1
Le Maistre, Mattheus 1545 Netherlands 1 Merulo, Claudio 1573 Italy 3
Lechner, Leonhard 1573 Austria 2 Messiaen, Olivier 1948 France 13
Lecocq, Charles 1872 France 1 Meyerbeer, Giacomo 1831 Germany 14
Legrenzi, Giovanni 1666 Itay 4 Milán, Luis de 1540 Spain 2
Leo, Leonardo 1734 Italy 3 Milhaud, Darius 1932 France 13
Leoncavallo, Ruggerio 1898 Italy 3 Monn, Matthias 1750 Austria 1
Leoninus 1110 France 5 Monsigny, Pierre 1769 France 3
Leopold I 1680 Austria 1 Monte, Philipp de 1561 Belgium 3
APPENDIX 5 • 579
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Monteverdi, Claudio 1607 Italy 31 Piccinni, Niccolò 1768 Italy 7
Morales, Cristóbal de 1540 Spain 2 Pijper,Willem 1934 Netherlands 1
Morley,Thomas 1597 England 6 Pilkington, Francis 1610 England 1
Mouton, Jean 1499 France 3 Piston, Walter 1934 USA 2
Mozart, Leopold 1759 Germany 6 Pizzetti, Ildebrando 1920 Italy 4
Mozart,Wolfgang 1791 Austria 100 Pleyel, Ignace 1797 Austria 2
Mudarra, Alonso 1548 Spain 1 Pollarolo,
Muffat, Georg 1693 Germany 2 Carlo Francesco 1693 Italy 1
Müller,Wenzel 1807 Bohemia 1 Porpora, Nicola 1726 Italy 4
Mussorgsky, Modest 1879 Russia 16 Poulenc, Francis 1939 France 8
Myaskovsky, Nikolay 1921 Russia 2 Power, Leonel 1430 England 2
Myslivecek, Josef 1777 Bohemia 1 Praetorius, Michael 1611 Germany 4
Nanino, Prokofiev, Sergei 1931 Ukraine 12
Giovanni Maria 1583 Italy 1 Provenzale, Francesco 1666 Italy 2
Narváez, Luys de 1540 Spain 1 Puccini, Giacomo 1898 Italy 10
Neefe, Christian 1788 Germany 2 Pujol, Juan Pablo 1613 Spain 1
Neidhart von Reuental 1220 Germany 1 Purcell, Henry 1695 England 18
Neusidler, Hans 1548 Germany 1 Rachmaninov, Sergei 1913 Russia 7
Nicolai, Otto 1849 Germany 2 Rameau, Jean 1723 France 22
Nielsen, Carl August 1905 Denmark 3 Ravel, Maurice 1915 France 23
Novák,Vitezslav 1910 Bohemia 1 Reger, Max 1913 Germany 7
Obrecht, Jacob 1470 Netherlands 5 Regnart, Jacob 1580 Belgium 2
Ockeghem, Johannes 1450 Belgium 8 Reicha, Antoine 1810 Bohemia 2
Offenbach, Jacques 1859 Germany 6 Reichardt, Johann 1792 Germany 3
Orff, Carl 1925 Germany 5 Reincken, Johann 1663 Germany 2
Orto, Marbrianus 1500 Belgium 1 Respighi, Ottorino 1919 Italy 3
Osiander, Lucas 1574 Germany 1 Reutter, Georg von 1748 Austria 1
Pachelbel, Johann 1693 Germany 4 Reyer, Ernest 1863 France 1
Paër, Ferdinando 1811 Italy 2 Richter, Franz Xaver 1749 Bohemia 2
Paisiello, Giovanni 1780 Italy 4 Rimsky-Korsakov,
Palestrina, Giovanni 1564 Italy 20 Nikolai 1884 Russia 15
Pallavicino, Carlo 1670 Italy 1 Rore, Cypriano de 1555 Belgium 6
Parker, Horatio 1903 USA 2 Rosenmüller, Johann 1659 Germany 2
Pasquini, Bernardo 1677 Italy 2 Rossi, Luigi 1637 Italy 4
Pepusch, Johann 1707 Germany 3 Rossi, Salamone 1610 Italy 1
Pergolesi, Giovanni 1736 Italy 11 Rossini, Gioachino 1832 Italy 22
Peri, Jacopo Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 1752 Switzerland 8
(Zazzerino) 1601 Italy 6 Roussel, Albert 1909 France 5
Pérotin 1130 France 6 Ruggles, Carl 1916 USA 1
Petrassi, Goffredo 1944 Italy 2 Sacchini, Antonio 1770 Italy 2
Pfitzner, Hans 1909 Russia 4 Saint-Saëns, Camille 1875 France 13
Philidor, François 1766 France 3 Salieri, Antonio 1790 Italy 5
Philips, Peter 1600 England 1 Sammartini, Giovanni 1738 Italy 4
580 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Sarti, Giuseppe 1769 Italy 2 Striggi, Alessandro 1580 Italy 1
Satie, Erik 1906 France 7 Sullivan,
Scandello, Antonio 1557 Italy 1 Arthur Seymour 1882 England 5
Scarlatti, Alessandro 1700 Italy 16 Susato, Tylman 1540 Netherlands 1
Scarlatti, Domenico 1725 Italy 10 Sweelinck, Jan 1602 Netherlands 5
Schaeffer, Pierre 1950 France 2 Szymanowski, Karol 1922 Ukraine 4
Scheibe, Johann 1748 Germany 1 Tailleferre, Germaine 1932 France 2
Scheidemann, Heinrich1635 Germany 1 Tallis,Thomas 1545 England 6
Scheidt, Samuel 1627 Germany 6 Taneyev, Sergei 1896 Russia 1
Schein, Johann 1626 Germany 4 Tartini, Giuseppe 1732 Italy 4
Schenk, Johann 1793 Austria 1 Tasso, Torquato 1584 Italy 3
Schmitt, Florent 1910 France 4 Taverner, John 1535 England 3
Schobert, Johann 1767 Germany 3 Tchaikovsky, Piotr 1880 Russia 20
Schoenberg, Arnold 1914 Hungary 39 Telemann, Georg 1721 Germany 11
Schreker, Franz 1918 Austria 2 Theile, Johann 1686 Germany 1
Schubert, Franz 1828 Austria 44 Thibaut
Schulz, Johann 1787 Germany 2 de Champagne 1241 France 1
Schuman, William 1950 USA 2 Thomas, Ambroise 1851 France 3
Schumann, Robert 1850 Germany 42 Thomson,Virgil 1936 USA 3
Schütz, Heinrich 1625 Germany 13 Tinctoris, Johannes 1476 Belgium 3
Schweitzer, Anton 1775 Germany 1 Tippett, Michael 1945 England 5
Scriabin, Alexander 1912 Russia 8 Titelouze, Jean 1603 France 1
Senfl, Ludwig 1526 Switzerland 4 Tomkins,Thomas 1612 England 2
Sermisy, Claudin de 1530 France 3 Torelli, Giuseppe 1698 Italy 3
Sessions, Roger 1936 USA 4 Traëtta, Tommaso 1767 Italy 3
Shostakovich, Dmitri 1946 Russia 12 Tritonius, Petrus 1505 Austria 1
Sibelius, Jean 1905 Finland 10 Tromboncino,
Simpson, Thomas 1622 England 1 Bartolomeo 1510 Italy 2
Sinding, Christian 1896 Norway 1 Tunder, Franz 1654 Germany 1
Smetana, Bedrich 1563 Bohemia 12 Tye, Christopher 1540 England 2
Soler, Antonio 1769 Spain 1 Varèse, Edgard 1923 France 8
Spohr, Louis 1824 Germany 7 Vaughan Williams,
Spontini, Gaspare 1814 Italy 6 Ralph 1912 England 9
Staden, Sigmund 1647 Germany 1 Vecchi, Orazio 1590 Italy 3
Stamitz, Carl 1785 Germany 1 Veracini, Francesco 1730 Italy 1
Stamitz, Johann 1757 Bohemia 8 Verdelot, Philippe 1535 France 3
Stanford, Charles 1892 Ireland 3 Verdi, Giuseppe 1853 Italy 30
Steffani, Agostino 1694 Italy 4 Viadana, Ludovico 1600 Italy 2
Stoltzer, Thomas 1515 Germany 2 Vicentino, Nicola 1551 Italy 2
Stradella, Alessandro 1679 Italy 5 Victoria,Tomás de 1588 Spain 6
Strauss, Johann, Jr. 1865 Austria 5 Villa-Lobos, Heitor 1927 Brazil 4
Strauss, Richard 1904 Germany 26 Vinci, Leonardo 1730 Italy 2
Stravinsky, Igor 1922 Russia 45 Virdung, Sebastian 1505 Germany 1
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
APPENDIX 5 • 581
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Vitali, Giovanni 1672 Italy 2
Vivaldi, Antonio 1715 Italy 15
Vogel,Wladimir 1936 Russia 1
Vogler, Georg Joseph 1789 Germany 2
Vulpius, Melchior 1610 Germany 1
Wagenseil, Georg 1755 Austria 2
Wagner, Richard 1853 Germany 80
Walter, Johann 1536 Germany 4
Walther
von der Vogelweide 1210 Germany 2
Walton, William 1942 England 3
Weber, Carl von 1826 Germany 27
Webern, Anton 1923 Austria 19
Weckmann, Matthias 1659 Germany 2
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Weerbeke, Gaspar van 1485 Belgium 1
Weill, Kurt 1940 Germany 5
Wellesz, Egon 1925 Austria 2
Wert, Giaches de 1575 Belgium 2
Wilbye, John 1614 England 1
Willaert, Adrian 1525 Belgium 10
Wolf, Hugo 1900 Austria 11
Wolf-Ferrari, Ermanno 1916 Italy 2
Zachow, Friedrich 1703 Germany 2
Zelter, Carl Friedrich 1798 Germany 3
Zemlinsky,
Alexander von 1911 Austria 1
Zumsteeg, Johann 1800 Germany 2
582 • APPENDIX 5
THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHY INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 136
Parent population 88
Significant figures 39
Major figures 16
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .96
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=39)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 Chan 1.00 .47 .72 .74 .86 .85 .74 .84 .46 .89 .42
2 Day .47 1.00 .67 .72 .66 .68 .74 .61 .65 .73 .50
3 DeBary .72 .67 1.00 .69 .65 .75 .82 .65 .48 .79 .50
4 Enc. Brit. .74 .72 .69 1.00 .87 .84 .80 .82 .80 .84 .67
5 Fung .86 .66 .65 .87 1.00 .84 .80 .87 .68 .85 .56
6 Koller .85 .68 .75 .84 .84 1.00 .80 .92 .59 .93 .50
7 Murty .74 .74 .82 .80 .80 .80 1.00 .74 .72 .84 .54
8 Radhakrishna .84 .61 .65 .82 .87 .92 .74 1.00 .63 .87 .52
9 Scharfstein .46 .65 .48 .80 .68 .59 .72 .63 1.00 .56 .55
10 Smart .89 .73 .79 .84 .85 .93 .84 .87 .56 1.00 .48
11 Wu .42 .50 .50 .67 .56 .50 .54 .52 .55 .48 1.00
APPENDIX 5 • 583
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl
Cheng Hao 1072
Chengi 1073
Confucius –511
Daizhen 1764
Dong Zhongshu –139
Fazang 683
Feng Yulan 1935
Gongsun Long –270
Gu Yanwu 1653
Guoxiang 261
Hanfei –240
Hanyua 808
Hu Shi –340
Hui Yuan 373
Huineng 678
Kang Yuwei 1898
Laozi –350
Lisi –200
Lu Xiangshan 1180
Mencius –372
Index
15
14
100
9
16
4
13
5
3
4
9
6
3
2
8
10
69
4
8
40
Name fl
Mozi –439
Sengzhao 414
Shaoyong 1051
Shenhui 750
Shenxiu 646
Wang Bi 249
Wang Chong 65
Wang Yangming 1512
Xiong Shili 1925
Xuan Zhuang 642
Xunzi –275
Yang Zhu –310
Yen Si Chai 1675
Zhangzai 1060
Zhiyi 578
Zhou Duni 1057
Zhuangzi –329
Zhuxi 1170
Zou Yan –300
Index
22
4
6
1
1
4
4
24
5
4
29
3
4
8
1
11
39
51
8
584 • APPENDIX 5
THE INDIAN PHILOSOPHY INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 313
Parent population 181
Significant figures 45
Major figures 8
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .93
CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=45)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 Chatterjee 1.00 0.70 0.61 0.46 0.59 0.37 0.32 0.67 0.75 0.72 0.62
2 Chattopadhyaya 0.70 1.00 0.35 0.41 0.64 0.32 0.41 0.43 0.50 0.48 0.34
3 Enc. Brit. 0.61 0.35 1.00 0.56 0.62 0.76 0.43 0.58 0.85 0.76 0.88
4 Hayashi 0.46 0.41 0.56 1.00 0.44 0.40 0.35 0.40 0.46 0.50 0.56
5 King 0.59 0.64 0.62 0.44 1.00 0.62 0.63 0.59 0.72 0.53 0.55
6 Koller 0.37 0.32 0.76 0.40 0.62 1.00 0.44 0.51 0.73 0.57 0.66
7 Mattei 0.32 0.41 0.43 0.35 0.63 0.44 1.00 0.64 0.59 0.45 0.44
8 Potter 0.67 0.43 0.58 0.40 0.59 0.51 0.64 1.00 0.80 0.77 0.64
9 Puligandla 0.75 0.50 0.85 0.46 0.72 0.73 0.59 0.80 1.00 0.85 0.82
10 Radhakrishnan 0.72 0.48 0.76 0.50 0.53 0.57 0.45 0.77 0.85 1.00 0.79
11 Smart 0.62 0.34 0.88 0.56 0.55 0.66 0.44 0.64 0.82 0.79 1.00
APPENDIX 5 • 585
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name
Aryadeva
Asanga
Asvaghosa
Aurobindo, Sri (Ghose)
Badarayana
Bhartrhari
Bhavya
Buddha
Buddhapalita
Candragomin
Carvaka (Lokayata)
Dasgupta
Dharmakirti
Dignaga
Gangesa
Gaudapada
Gautama (Aksapada)
Jaimini
Jayanta Bhatta
Kamasila
Kanada
Kapila
Kumarila
fl
200
310
160
1912
390
460
530
–520
510
925
–600
1925
650
440
1325
640
240
190
890
755
140
–600
660
Index
5
5
6
13
6
10
3
47
1
6
16
9
9
11
6
10
3
3
3
2
6
9
11
Name
Madhva (Anandatirtha)
Mandanamisra
Nagarjuna
Nimbarka
Padmapada
Patanjali (Gonardiya)
Prabhakara
Prasastapada
Ramanuja
Sankara
Santaraksita
Sridhara
Suresvara
Udayana
Uddyotakara
Vacaspatimitra
Vallabha
Vasubandhu
Vatsayana
Vijnana Bhiksu
Vivekananda
Vyasa (the philosopher)
fl Index
1238 28
40 3
150 56
1200 9
750 1
–150 21
690 5
450 5
1056 55
820 100
725 4
40 2
750 2
1015 13
640 4
860 13
1481 12
350 14
390 9
1575 9
1902 15
690 2
586 • APPENDIX 5
THE WESTERN PHILOSOPHY INVENTORY
SUMMARY STATISTICS
Total number of entries 885
Parent population 473
Significant figures 155
Major figures 41
Index reliability (Cronbach’s _) .96
THE CORRELATION MATRIX FOR THE INDEX SOURCES (n=155)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
1 Buhr 1.00 .77 .80 .78 .69 .66 .78 .78 .62 .63 .65 .67
2 Copleston .77 1.00 .73 .85 .70 .62 .78 .74 .63 .64 .73 .72
3 Hayashi .80 .73 1.00 .82 .69 .77 .82 .81 .72 .60 .78 .77
4 Kenny .78 .85 .82 1.00 .79 .68 .87 .80 .76 .69 .72 .81
5 Matson .69 .70 .69 .79 1.00 .54 .76 .76 .78 .74 .66 .81
6 Mattei .66 .62 .77 .68 .54 1.00 .71 .70 .60 .50 .68 .66
7 Plott .78 .78 .82 .87 .76 .71 1.00 .87 .70 .70 .80 .76
8 Radhakrishnan .78 .74 .81 .80 .76 .70 .87 1.00 .75 .71 .84 .76
9 Russell .62 .63 .72 .76 .78 .60 .70 .75 1.00 .63 .68 .85
10 Scharfstein .63 .64 .60 .69 .74 .50 .70 .71 .63 1.00 .65 .68
11 Smart .65 .73 .78 .72 .66 .68 .80 .84 .68 .65 1.00 .74
12 Tarnas .67 .72 .77 .81 .81 .66 .76 .76 .85 .68 .74 1.00
APPENDIX 5 • 587
THE ROSTER OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
Abelard, Pierre 1119 France 4 Chrysippus of Soli –242 Greece 2
Aenesidemos –50 Greece 1 Clement of Alexandria 190 Greece 3
Albertus Magnus, St. 1240 Germany 5 Collingwood, Robin 1929 England 2
Alexander of Hales 1240 England 1 Comte, Isidore 1838 France 5
Ambrose of Milan, St. 379 Rome 3 Condorcet, Marie 1783 France 3
Ammonius Sakkas 215 Rome 2 Cooper, Anthony
Anaxagoras (Shaftesbury) 1711 England 3
of Clazomenae –460 Greece 5 Critias –415 Greece 1
Anaximander Cudworth, Ralph 1657 England 1
of Miletus –571 Greece 4 Democritus –420 Greece 13
Anaximenes Descartes, René 1636 France 51
of Miletus –500 Greece 4 Dewey, John 1899 USA 10
Anselm of Canterbury 1073 Italy 6 Diderot, Denis 1753 France 6
Antiphon of Athens –450 Greece 1 Dilthey, Wilhelm 1873 Germany 3
Antisthenes of Athens –404 Greece 1 Diogenes –372 Greece 2
Apollonius of Tyana –80 Greece 1 Dionysius Areopagita 50 Greece 3
Aquinas, Thomas 1266 Italy 39 Duns Scotus, John 1308 Scotland 9
Arcesilaus of Pitane –276 Greece 1 Eckhart, Johannes 1300 Germany 3
Aristippus of Cyrene –435 Greece 1 Emerson, Ralph 1843 USA 2
Aristotle –344 Greece 100 Empedocles –452 Greece 6
Augustine, St. 394 Rome 30 Epictetus 90 Greece 5
Averroës (ibn Rushd) 1166 Spain 11 Epicurus of Samos –301 Greece 11
Avicebron Erigena, Johannes 850 Ireland 7
(ibn Gabirol) 1058 Spain 2 Feuerbach, Ludwig 1844 Germany 4
Avicenna (ibn Sina) 1020 Persia 15 Fichte, Johann 1802 Germany 17
Ayer, Alfred 1950 England 4 Gassendi, Pierre 1632 France 3
Bacon, Francis 1601 England 12 al-Ghazzali, Algazel 1098 Persia 4
Bacon, Roger 1254 England 4 Geulincx, Arnold 1665 Belgium 1
Bayle, Pierre 1687 France 2 Gorgias –445 Greece 2
Bentham, Jeremy 1788 England 7 Gregory of Nyssa 371 Greece 1
Bergson, Henri 1899 France 9 Grosseteste, Robert 1208 England 2
Berkeley, George 1725 Ireland 21 Hegel, Georg 1810 Germany 46
Bernard of Clairvaux 1131 France 1 Heidegger, Martin 1929 Germany 12
Boehme, Jacob 1615 Germany 2 Helvetius, Claude 1755 France 2
Boethius, Anicius 520 Rome 4 Heraclitus of Ephesus –500 Greece 11
Bonaventura, St. 1261 Italy 7 Herder, Johann 1784 Germany 4
Bradley, Francis 1886 England 4 Hobbes, Thomas 1628 England 19
Bruno, Giordano 1588 Italy 4 Holbach, Paul 1763 Germany 3
Buber, Martin 1918 Austria 2 Hume, David 1751 Scotland 36
Buridan, Jean 1335 France 2 Husserl, Edmund 1899 Bohemia 8
Calvin, John 1549 France 3 James, William 1882 USA 10
Carnap, Rudolf 1931 Germany 8 Kant, Immanuel 1764 Germany 74
Carneades of Cyrene –174 Greece 2 Kierkegaard, Søren 1853 Denmark 10
588 • APPENDIX 5
Name fl Nat’l orgin Index Name fl Nat’l orgin Index
al-Kindi 841 Persia 3 Pyrrho of Elis –327 Greece 3
Leibniz, Gottfried 1686 Germany 27 Pythagoras of Samos –520 Greece 15
Leucippus of Miletus –440 Greece 3 Quine, Willard 1948 USA 2
Locke, John 1672 England 37 Reichenbach, Hans 1931 Germany 2
Lucretius –55 Rome 6 Reid, Thomas 1750 Scotland 3
Luther, Martin 1523 Germany 4 Roscellinus 1090 France 1
Maimonides, Moses 1175 Spain 6 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 1752 Switzerland 17
Manichaeus 256 Rome 5 Russell, Bertrand 1912 England 18
Marcus Aurelius 161 Rome 4 Saíadia ben Joseph
Mendelssohn, Moses 1769 Germany 2 (Gaon) 932 Persia 1
Merleau-Ponty, Santayana, George 1903 Spain 2
Maurice 1948 France 3 Sartre, Jean-Paul 1945 France 12
Mill, James 1813 Scotland 2 Schelling, Friedrich 1815 Germany 14
Mill, John 1846 England 13 Schiller, Ferdinand 1904 Switzerland 4
Montaigne, Michel de 1573 France 3 Schleiermacher,
Montesquieu, Charles 1729 France 4 Friedrich 1808 Bohemia 4
Moore, George 1913 England 4 Schlick, Moritz 1922 Bohemia 4
More, Thomas 1518 England 3 Schopenhauer, Arthur 1828 Germany 24
Neurath, Otto 1922 Austria 2 Seneca 43 Rome 4
Nicholas Sextus Empiricus 200 Greece 3
de Malebranche 1678 France 7 Socrates –429 Greece 26
Nicholas of Cusa 1441 Germany 5 Spencer, Herbert 1860 England 5
Nicholas of Oresme 1365 France 2 Spinoza, Benedict 1672 Netherlands 27
Nietzsche, Friedrich 1884 Germany 20 Tertullian 200 Rome 2
Origen (Adamantius) 225 Greece 5 Thales –585 Greece 6
Panaetius of Rhodes –145 Greece 1 Vico, Giambattista 1708 Italy 2
Parmenides of Elea –475 Greece 13 Voltaire, François 1734 France 9
Pascal, Blaise 1662 France 6 Wittgenstein, Lugwig 1929 Austria 13
Pelagius 400 Rome 2 Whitehead, Alfred 1901 England 6
Philo Judaeus 15 Greece 7 William of Champeaux1110 France 1
Peirce, Charles 1879 USA 8 William of Occam 1325 England 14
Plato –388 Greece 87 Wolff, Christian 1719 Germany 5
Plotinus of Lycopolis 244 Greece 17 Xenocrates
Plutarch (Boeotia) 86 Rome 3 of Chalcedon –355 Greece 1
Porphyrius of Phoenicia 272 Greece 4 Xenophanes
Poseidoios of Apamea –95 Greece 2 of Colophon –540 Greece 3
Proclus 450 Greece 6 Zeno of Citium –295 Greece 5
Protagoras of Abdera –445 Greece 6 Zeno of Elea –450 Greece 4
NOTES
CHAPTER 1: A SENSE OF TIME
1. Technically, we are known as Homo sapiens sapiens, to distinguish us from
Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. The dates I give throughout these opening paragraphs will probably have been pushed backward by the time you read them,
judging from past experience.
2. Wilson 1980.
3. McEvedy and Jones 1978.
4. I base this statement on the current understanding that the size and structure
of the brain was fully evolved well before –8000. It goes without saying that
the expression of wit and ribaldry might have been so different in –8000 that
we wouldn’t get the jokes, but there is no physiological reason to ascribe this
to anything other than environment. See Mithen 1996 for a review of the
evidence that what he calls cognitive fluidity had evolved by about 40,000 years
ago, including not only fully modern language facility but comprehension of
analogies and metaphors. An alternative viewpoint, contested when it was
presented and still a renegade position, was famously expressed in Jaynes 1976,
which argues that consciousness as we think of it didn’t emerge until well
after the invention of writing.
5. The statements about the state of progress as of –8000 in this paragraph are
taken from Rudgley 1999: chapters 2, 11, and 12.
6. As I write, a site in Syria, Jerf el-Ahmar, dating back past –9000, is argued to
have some of Çatal Hüyük’s features. Even more controversially, a site in
France, Viols-le-Fort, shows signs of being an agricultural town, but dating
back to –10,000. These findings are still provisional, so I stick with –8000 in
the text.
7. Rudgley 1999.
8. Rudgley 1999.
CHAPTER 2: A SENSE OF MYSTERY
1. Toynbee puts the artistic and technological peak of Egypt at the Fourth
Dynasty (Toynbee and Somervell 1946: 30), while Quigley dates it a few
centuries later, –2300, placing Sumer’s peak at –1700 (Quigley 1961: 80).
2. The classification of civilizations follows Toynbee and Somervell 1946.
3. The account of the Antikythera Mechanism is drawn from Magill 1991:
1588–92.
590 • NOTES FOR PAGES 17–25
4. A sidereal revolution is a lunar revolution with respect to the stars, while a
lunation is a lunar revolution with respect to the sun.
5. The story popularized by Gibbon that the Muslims used the manuscripts as
fuel to heat the baths of Alexandria is almost certainly a canard.
6. Petrie 1990 quoted in Hancock 1995: 350–51.
7. Petrie 1990 quoted in Hancock 1995: 351.
8. Lehner 1997: 210.
9. Lehner 1997: 214.
10. Edwards 1949: 220.
11. For a review of the alternative theories, see Lehner 1997: 215–17.
12. E.g., Hodges and Keable 1989.
13. R. Porter, discussed in James and Thorpe 1999: 201–12.
14. Lehner 1997: 209.
15. Vega 1961: 233.
16. Hemming 1993: 191.
17. For an example of such an explanation, see Protzen 1986.
18. Carl Jung and Mircea Eliade were among the first to broach the notion of
universal myths, but it was Joseph Campbell who did the pioneering empirical work that established the reality of the monomyth. See for example
Campbell 1949 and Campbell 1974.
19. De Santillana and von Dechend 1969. For any who pick up Hamlet’s Mill with
an eye to reading it, I recommend starting with what the authors call “Intermezzo: A Guide for the Perplexed,” 56 pages into the text.
20. De Santillana and von Dechend 1969: 66, 340.
21. Schoch and McNally 1999: 40.
22. Dobecki and Schoch 1992.
23. Schoch 1992.
24. For the anti-Schoch case, see Harrell 1994b, Harrell 1994a, Gauri et al. 1995,
and Lawton and Ogilvie-Herald 1999.
25. For a summary of Schoch’s responses to the criticisms, see Schoch and
McNally 1999. For an independent geological analysis supporting Schoch’s
position, see Coxill 1998.
26. Schoch 2000.
NOTES FOR PAGES 26–37 • 591
CHAPTER 3: A SENSE OF PLACE
1. Gibbon 1952: 27.
2. Balsdon 1969: 149.
3. Cowell 1961: 167.
4. Quoted in Honour and Fleming 1982: 114.
5. Quoted in Honour and Fleming 1982: 153.
6. Quoted in Honour and Fleming 1982: 139.
7. Honour and Fleming 1982: 153-4.
8. Honour and Fleming 1982: 139.
9. Gibbon 1952: 75.
10. Gibbon 1952: 76.
11. Cowell 1961: 145.
12. Cowell 1961: 161.
13. Balsdon 1969: 151.
14. Cowell 1961: 87.
15. Davis 1962: 161.
16. Casson 1975: 45–6.
17. Cowell 1961: 133.
18. Davis 1962: 160.
19. Balsdon 1969: 88.
20. Balsdon 1969: 139–40.
21. Quoted in Honour and Fleming 1982: 154.
22. Quoted in Honour and Fleming 1982: 154.
23. Gibbon 1952: 84.
24. Gibbon 1952: 64.
25. Gibbon 1952: 65.
26. Reischauer and Fairbank 1958: 321, Boorstin 1983: 190–7.
27. Laurence Binyon, quoted in Reischauer and Fairbank 1958: 183.
28. Gernet 1962: 23.
29. Reischauer and Fairbank 1958: 224.
30. Gernet 1962: 149.
31. Gernet 1962: 123.
32. Quoted in Gernet 1962: 49.
33. As identified by Jean-Anthelme Brillat-Savarin, this first luxury restaurant was
La Grande Taverne de Londres—in his words “the first to combine the four
essentials of an elegant room, smart waiters, a choice cellar, and superior
cooking.” Brillat-Savarin 1826.
34. Quoted in Gernet 1962: 50.
35. Shiba 1970: 6.
592 • NOTES FOR PAGES 37–59
36. Shiba 1970: 92.
37. Shiba 1970: 109.
38. Hartwell 1966 .
39. Shiba 1970: 190 ff.
40. The discussion of Chinese mathematics draws primarily from Ronan 1981:
1–66.
41. The discussion of Chinese astronomy draws primarily from Ronan 1981:
67–221.
42. The discussion of Chinese medicine draws primarily from Kaptchuk
1983.
43. Mair 1994 : 569.
44. Quoted in Gernet 1962: 152–3.
45. Quoted in Bary, Chan, and Watson 1963: 25.
46. Quoted in Bary, Chan, and Watson 1963: 33.
47. Quoted in Bary, Chan, and Watson 1963: 34.
48. Hough 1994: 59. Additional orders to seek out Terra Australis Incognita came
only after the decision to make the voyage had already been taken.
49. Hough 1994: 37.
50. Quoted in Hough 1994: 56.
51. Brewer 1997: 28.
52. Bate 1975: 167.
53. Braudel 1979: 548.
54. Wain 1974: 79.
55. Brewer 1997: 30.
56. Bate 1975: 168.
57. Brewer 1997: 52.
58. Brewer 1997: 641.
59. Braudel 1979: 84.
60. Quoted in Cipolla 1980: 162.
61. Braudel 1979: 79.
62. Brewer 1997: 138.
63. Brewer 1997: 240.
64. Brewer 1997: 326.
65. Brewer 1997: 62, 398.
66. Brewer 1997: 211.
67. Brewer 1997: 399.
68. Barzun 2000: 361.
69. Gay 1966: 4.
NOTES FOR PAGES 60–71 • 593
CHAPTER 5: EXCELLENCE AND ITS IDENTIFICATION
1. James 1987: 572, 573.
2. The book in question was Berkeley’s Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous (1713).
3. Hume 1997: 77–78.
4. Hume 1997: 82.
5. Hume 1997: 80.
6. Hume 1997: 81.
7. The most accessible one-source review is the chapter on the arts in Pinker
2002: 400–420. Other sources outside the technical journals are Jourdain
1997, Benzon 2001, several articles in Barkow et al. 1992, and, from an
anthropological perspective, Maquet 1986.
8. For some of the possibilities involving the double steal, see Will 1990: 68–70.
9. Kant 1997: 113.
10. This last example even lends itself to a quantitative test. Several published
wine critics use numerical scales to rate wines. In the case of two of the bestknown American critics, Robert Parker and Steven Tanzer, the correlation of
their independent ratings of the 1995 vintage of the wines of Bordeaux is
+.84—an extremely high correlation produced by two experts whose
personal preferences (sentiments) are quite different, but who are drawing on
common criteria for making judgments about excellence. Author’s analysis.
11. If a large number of critics fairly represent the distribution of critics in a given
field, then their individual sentiments will work out to random noise by definition. The only way that sentiments would be correlated is if the sample of
critics is skewed toward one perspective. The samples of expert judges represented by the inventories in Human Accomplishment are drawn from a single
(though broad) school, as described on page 69. Within that school, they are
quite various in terms of nationality, backgrounds, and sex.
12. Twain himself attributed this famous line to humorist Bill Nye.
13. This and the following on pre-Platonic Western aesthetics draws from Beardsley’s discussion in Beardsley 1966: 21–28.
14. For Chinese aesthetics, see Zehou 1981: 45–81 and Bush and Shih 1985.
15. Pandey 1950. For a more general discussion of Chinese, Indian, and Japanese
aesthetics, see Munro 1965.
16. The best selling of the many indictments of late 20C academia is Bloom 1987.
For an excellent recent analysis, see Ellis 1997.
17. Their landmark works were Croce 1902 and Dewey 1934.
18. Ogden and Richards 1923.
19. Bloom 1998.
20. On postmodernism and science, see Stove 1998; on postmodernism and art,
see Munson 2000; on postmodernism and history, literature, culture, and
academia, see Himmelfarb 1994, Kimball 2000, Windschuttle 1996, and the
aforementioned Bloom 1987 and Ellis 1997.
594 • NOTES FOR PAGES 72–86
21. The term historiometry was coined in Woods 1911.
22. Quoted in Forrest 1974: 92.
23. E.g., Candolle 1885.
24. Ellis 1904, Cattell 1903.
25. Quetelet 1834.
26. Eisenstadt 1978.
27. Goetzel and Goetzel 1962.
28. Simonton 1992.
29. Cattell 1903.
30. For anyone who is curious enough to check out this ordering and does not
come up with the same result, note that not all of the works listed in the index
are represented in the text (works represented in the text were basis for the
totals).
31. Janson and Janson 1997.
32. See Simonton 1990 for an account of reliability in historiometry.
33. All but a handful of the sources were written in the last 30 years when postmodernism was in the ascendancy. But alongside postmodernism, which
dominated the news, historians and critics in the classical tradition continued
to write major works, and it is from this body of work that the inventories
were prepared.
34. Discount originated with Taagepera and Colby 1979 and epochcentric bias with
Simonton 1984.
35. Spengler 1926.
36. Simonton 1981, Taagepera and Colby 1979.
37. Beethoven used the phrase in letters regarding Bach’s surviving daughter,
Regina Susannah, whom Beethoven proposed to support financially through
benefit concerts or by writing a composition for her (though he never actually got around to either). For an example, see Shedlock 1972: 29.
38. Lang 1997: 513–14, Grout and Palisca 1996: 515–16, 556.
39. Lang 1997: 514.
40. Greater uncertainty attaches to the precise level of development reached in
Precolombian America, Oceania, and Subsaharan Africa, but that is not the
topic of this book. For example, a body of African archaeological work, still
the subject of debate within the profession, argues that traditional Subsaharan
African cultures were more advanced than has been thought, but the technologies under debate were indisputably developed earlier elsewhere—which
is the issue that concerns us.
NOTES FOR PAGES 87–97 • 595
CHAPTER 6: THE LOTKA CURVE
1. The index score is 100 times a ratio in which the numerator is the measure of
attention given to a person divided by the measure of attention given to the
highest scoring person. For the highest scoring person, the ratio equals one,
and the score equals 100, by definition.
2. The number 455 refers to Western artists with index scores, which is limited
to those active from 1200 onward.
3. Lotka 1926.
4. Lotka proposed that the number of authors who had published exactly n
publications could be described by a power function (an exponent is
involved) of the form C/n
a
, in which C is a constant that varies by discipline
and a is often close to two. Lotka then demonstrated that in the case when a
is equal to two, the constant C must equal 6//2, or slightly less than .61, almost
exactly the percentage he had observed in his data.
5. For examples, see Murphy 1973, Voos 1974, Brookstein 1977, Potter 1981,
Pao 1986, Furnham and Bonnett 1992.
6. Price 1963.
7. Price’s Law works perfectly for the Moles’ compilation of the performed classical music repertory (Moles 1958). For another example of an accurate
prediction by Price’s Law, see Zhao and Jiang 1985. For an attempt to derive
Price’s Law from Lotka’s equation, see Allison et al. 1976.
8. Martindale 1995.
9. Simonton 1984a: 81. This view of the decisive nature of the data is endorsed
by Eysenck 1995: 38.
10. In this chapter, I limit myself to explanations specifically directed at the Lotka
curve. In Chapter 21, I take up the question of “winner-take-all” markets,
whereby under some circumstances a few people can monopolize record sales
or command huge salaries in the job market, even though their superiority
over their competitors is small or even non-existent.
11. Dennis 1954. See also Nicholls 1972.
12. Simon 1972. See also Haitun 1983.
13. Galton 1869: 78.
14. Shockley 1957.
15. Merton 1968.
16. Herbert Simon, who refuted the view that scientific productivity is the righthand tail of a normal distribution, was an early proponent of this explanation
(Simon 1955). For later versions, see Price 1976 and Allison et al. 1982
17. Simonton has explicated his model in many publications. A complete early
presentation may be found in Simonton 1988 and a recent version in Simonton 1999.
18. Huber 1998.
19. Martindale 1995: 231.
20. The normal distribution has a mathematical definition. If you know the mean
and variance for any set of data, you can use an equation to generate the
596 • NOTES FOR PAGES 98–109
perfect normal distribution implied by that mean and variance. The lines in
the graphs were generated in this manner.
21. How is it possible for professional golfers to be on the right-hand tail of all
golfers and yet have normal distributions within the population of professional golfers? Because the population of professional golfers is selected
according to a combination of talents. Consider putting as an example. Some
professionals who get onto the tour because they are five standard deviations
above the mean for all golfers in their driving and iron play may be only one
standard deviation above the mean in their putting. Another professional who
can make a living on the tour because of his short game and putting may drive
the ball only as far as a good amateur. Thus when the component skills of
professional golfers are shown separately, normal distributions can emerge.
22. Position on the money list is an alternative measure of excellence, but a clearly
inferior one for two reasons. The money prizes available in professional golf
have increased at a rate that makes comparisons across time complicated
(merely correcting for the Consumer Price Index doesn’t do the job), and
professional golfers themselves treat tournament victories, and especially
victories in the most important tournaments, as their own measure of greatness.
23. Including men with unfinished careers would exaggerate the number of onewin or two-win players, because many top active players who have won only
one or two Majors so far are likely to win more before their careers are
finished. Tiger Woods is the obvious case of someone who is going to be way,
way out on the tail of the curve by the end of his career. As I write, he already
has eight Major championships at the age of 27.
24. The mathematics of the distribution of eminence are complex. It is one thing
to present an explanation of why eminence is distributed in a way that generally resembles a Lotka curve; another to specify the equation you have in mind
and mathematically link that explanation with the equation. The explanation
presented here is more limited, saying merely that difficulty offers good reasons
why the distribution of talents in normal curves shifts to a hyperbolic curve as
the task to be accomplished gets harder. I will leave it to others to spell out
what additional assumptions and factors need to be added to the explanation
to produce a mathematically exact Lotka curve.
CHAPTER 7: THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER I:
SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
1. Gillespie 1980.
2. Mattei 1998.
3. Grout and Palisca 1996. Claude Palisca began his collaboration on the book
in its third edition.
4. The number of composers I list represents the number who qualified for
inclusion in the inventories for Human Accomplishment, not the total number
of composers mentioned in the source (the sources include composers who
were primarily active after 1950, whereas the inventories do not.).
NOTES FOR PAGES 109–154 • 597
5. Rebatet 1969.
6. Music lovers who are familiar with the venerable Grove’s Dictionary of Music
and Musicians (the current version is Sadie 1980) may wonder why it is not
among my sources. The answer is that the music inventory was one of the last
to be assembled. By that time, I knew that the definition of significant figures
would require that a person be mentioned by 50 percent of the sources, and
that entering everyone in the 20-volume Grove’s would entail a great deal of
wasted effort. I therefore began with a very extensive but not quite so
mammoth first source, the Harvard Biographical Dictionary. Had I used Grove as
my first source, the aggregate number of persons added by subsequent sources
would have been even fewer than 236.
CHAPTER 8: THE PEOPLE WHO MATTER II: THE GIANTS
1. This famous remark is translated in different ways by different sources; e.g.,
Grout and Palisca 1996: 566, Schonberg 1997: 298.
2. Note that these high positions in two inventories are not a function of the
same aggregate score applied to both inventories. The scores are based on
inventory-specific ratings (e.g., Galileo’s astronomy score is based on the
attention given to Galileo’s work in astronomy).
3. Gombrich 1995: 308.
4. H. Bloom 1998: xvii–xviii.
5. Lang 1997: 775.
6. Occasionally he could still make out certain low frequencies, such as the
rumble of thunder, and some reports have him able to hear words shouted
into his ear.
7. Solomon 1998: 161–62.
8. Schonberg 1997: 116.
9. Quoted in Durant 1935: 577.
10. Quoted in Mayr 1982: 423.
11. More precisely, it was Copernicus’s only major achievement. In 1497 he had
observed and recorded the occultation of a star by the moon, his only other
accomplishment to find its way into any of the sources for the scientific events
inventory.
12. Note that a high score from the chronologies is not merely a count of the raw
number of different accomplishments. Each mention in a chronology is also
counted, so that a major accomplishment such as the discovery of Uranus,
mentioned in all of the chronologies, counts for much more than an accomplishment mentioned in just one of the chronologies.
13. Quoted in Kanigel 1991: 281.
598 • NOTES FOR PAGES 155–205
CHAPTER 9: THE EVENTS THAT MATTER I:
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1. White 1962.
2. For the importance of the legume, see Eco 1999. For the machine-made
screw, see Rybczynski 1999. The rest of the nominations come from an endof-the-millennium poll of the members of an invitation-only Internet forum
called Edge that includes many prominent scientists among its members.
3. Burke 1975. He followed it with a second volume, Burke 1985.
4. The stirrup controversy is recounted in detail in DeVries 1992.
5. The greater statistical utility of the inventory of persons compared to the
inventory of events is a function of the method. If one were to extract from a
set of histories of science a word count of all the material discussing the events
in the scientific inventories, the resulting data set would probably be as reliable as the data for the inventory of persons. But it would have to be done
through a detailed quantitative breakdown of the text, not by use of the
indexes of those texts.
Indexes just aren’t good enough. The index entry under electron may tell
you the pages on which all of the events involving electrons are located, but
you are going to have to analyze the material on those pages to determine
what the events are. In other cases, the index may not even include an entry
to guide you to events that ought to be part of the inventory. In contrast,
those same indexes are definitely going to include the names of the scientists
involved in the crucial discoveries involving electrons, with numbers of page
references commensurate (over many sources) with the importance of the
discoveries made by those people. Thus my reliance on chronologies rather
than histories to compile the inventory of events, and thus as well the reason
that the data for assessing the importance of specific events is rougher, in a
statistical sense, than the data for assessing the importance of specific people.
Why not get the word counts for specific events? Practical considerations.
The labor required to enter material from indexes is already daunting. To
break down the text of a dozen long histories would require a team of
researchers over a period of years, with the prospect of a small payoff. At the
outset of the work on Human Accomplishment, I thought it possible that the
number of anonymous events that would be missed in an inventory of persons
was large enough that it could affect the interpretation, or that the importance
of certain events might not be adequately reflected in the measures based on
the people associated with those events. In the event, neither expectation was
borne out.
6. I used more latitude in selecting central medical events than in selecting
central events for any of the other indexes. Some chronologies had detailed
coverage of medical events that involved advances in biology or chemistry but
unmistakably sketchier coverage of medical events involving advances in
medical procedures and instruments. I took this into account, but in doing so
introduced more subjective judgment than was applied to choices for the
other inventories.
7. In the text, I refer to the number of times a given work is shown in the nine
sources. The more precise statement is that I counted the number of times a
NOTES FOR PAGES 206–211 • 599
work appeared in any form for eight of the nine sources, and appeared as a
color plate in the 17-volume Istituto: 1959.
8. Lang 1997: 764.
9. Simonton 1998. For a comprehensive study of the cycles of artistic work, see
Martindale 1990.
10. E.g., Farnsworth 1969, Simonton 1991.
11. Simonton 1998: 208.
CHAPTER 10: THE EVENTS THAT MATTER II:
META-INVENTIONS
1. Abbott 1991: Section 18.
2. For the argument that language is in fact a sort of invention and of much
more recent appearance (circa –40,000), see Klein and Blake 2002. As I write,
it is still a distinctly minority view.
3. Dating the first known use of a symbol to stand for a number or word is still
a matter of controversy among archaeologists, but the most conservative estimates put it at somewhere in the vicinity of –8000. The much more difficult
task of assembling symbols into logograms or alphabets that can convey
connected text is believed to have occurred in Sumer sometime between
–3500 and –2800, with expert opinion currently favoring –3100. A minority
argues that a writing system may go back to –4000 and may have originated
in Europe rather than the Near East, throwing a large monkey wrench into
the standard paradigm. For an account of the pre-cuneiform tablets and of the
controversy over the timing of the first use of written language, see Rudgley
1999: chapters 3 and 4. For a concise account of the development of writing
around the world, see Diamond 1997: chapter 12.
4. The nearest misses were monotheism, the personal god (along with heaven
and hell), maps, and encoded information. Monotheism actually predates
–800, so in that sense is not even eligible. But my larger reason for rejecting
monotheism and the personal god is that their effects depend so fundamentally on felt belief, not merely on the idea itself. Thus in Chapter 19 I discuss
what I consider to be the important effects of Christianity on European
accomplishment—but what created that effect was the power of faith in the
truth of Christian doctrine, not familiarity with the idea that a personal god
exists. The invention of maps and similar abstract representations of
geographic spaces (architectural drawings, plans, etc.) also predates –800. Most
of what we know about their development postdates –800, but the concept of
representation of geographic spaces seems to have already been a part of the
human repertoire.
Encoded information—the concept that enables, among other things, the
computer program—offers an interesting case of something that in retrospect
we can call an addition to the cognitive repertoire, but that came about
through a process so gradual that, to my mind, it doesn’t fit the concept of
invention. At first glance, it would seem to have a neatly specific starting point
with the invention of the Jacquard loom in 1800 (borrowed from earlier
600 • NOTES FOR PAGES 212–219
versions by Bouchon and Vaucanson), which used punched cards to control
the creation of patterns in woven cloth. This invention was known to Charles
Babbage, who incorporated the idea into his design for the analytic engine, a
mechanical computer. But Babbage’s ideas were not realized for another
hundred years, and then not because people still remembered anything about
encoded information. By that time, they were working off other traditions.
One of those was the use of punched cards in the American census of 1890—
but it is not clear (stories vary) that Hollerith, the originator of the card-based
tabulating machine, was aware of Jacquard’s work. My interpretation of this
story is that the idea of encoded information never energized progress in the
same way that the 14 meta-inventions did. From our vantage point today, it
looks like a meta-invention. At the time that different events were happening,
it was a useful technical strategy that seems to have occurred to various people
as the need arose, but not something seen as opening new, hitherto unknown
possibilities for doing things.
The decision to leave the scientific method as a single meta-invention was
pragmatic. In discussing the components of the scientific method—replicability, falsifiability, experiment, “blindness” in experimentation, and others that
are individually so important that each could have been treated as a separate
meta-invention—I would have had to write the text in ways that would
constantly point out how each fit into a larger phenomenon called the invention of the scientific method. I decided to simplify the presentation by grouping them under that heading.
5. If we had more surviving works from China in the period surrounding –500,
it might be appropriate to assign this invention jointly to China and Greece.
Elements of artistic realism in painting have appeared on surviving objects
dating to –316, and lifelike lacquer animals survive from –533 or earlier, but
the record is still scattered. See Hung 1997.
6. Gombrich 1995: 81.
7. Kemp 1990: 9.
8. In these statements I rely on Kemp 1990, which incorporates a recently
discovered letter that appears to place Brunelleschi’s key discovery no later
than 1413, compared to the previous dating of the mid 1420s. Dating
Brunelleschi’s demonstration from circa 1413 substantially changes our
understanding of the speed with which perspective was adopted. Under the
old dating, Masaccio painted the Holy Trinity later in the same year that
Brunelleschi painted the baptistery. Under the new dating, about 15 years
elapsed. See Edgerton 1975 and J. White 1987.
9. Quoted in Boorstin 1992: 396.
10. Boorstin 1992: 396.
11. See Abraham 1979: 563.
12. For a discussion of the development of Chinese musicology, see Ronan 1981:
371–87.
13. My primary sources for the discussion of the origins of polyphony are Lang
1997: 125–36 and Grout and Palisca 1996: chapter 3.
14. Aristotle credits Agathon (c. –445 to –400) with the first use of fictional characters in a drama, probably The Flower, but it seems prudent to assume that
NOTES FOR PAGES 220–246 • 601
stories with fictional characters predate Agathon by an unknown number of
centuries.
15. Trilling 1951: 214.
16. Although usually classified as anonymous, Lazarillo is sometimes attributed to
Fernando de Rojas. I follow Barzun 2000: 111 in naming Lazarillo rather than
Don Quixote as the first true novel.
17. In Seldes 1985: 447.
18. Russell 1945: xiii.
19. Boorstin 1998.
20. Quoted in Kaplan 2000.
21. Quoted in Bernstein 1996: 44.
22. Quoted in Bernstein 1996: 43.
23. Quoted in Bernstein 1996: 17.
24. Stigler 1999: 213–14.
25. Ronan 1981: 224.
26. Needham 1981: 13.
27. Quoted in Ronan 1981: 292.
28. Ronan 1981: 293.
29. Needham 1981: 120.
30. Why didn’t the Chinese discover the scientific method? I offer some general
arguments about the role of purpose and autonomy in Chinese culture and
their effects on accomplishment in Chapter 19. For explanations involving
the scientific method specifically, see Joseph Needham’s discussions, most
easily accessible in Ronan 1978: vol. 1, and Needham 1981, especially chapter 5. See also Stark 2003: 50–51.
31. An excellent one-volume compilation of articles on the historiography of the
scientific revolution is Cohen 1994.
32. The classic modern statement of the Principle of Falsification is Popper 1963:
33–39. In recent years, the principle has come under a variety of criticisms
both technical and political. David Stove has led one aspect of the criticism,
arguing that falsification is part of the attempt to undermine the concept of
objective truth in science (e.g., in Stove 1998). As someone who has spent his
career on issues of public policy in which most of the researchers have an
emotional or political commitment to their favored policies, I continue to be
an admirer of the principle. Invoking falsifiability is one of the ways to keep
the discussion honest.
33. Ockham’s name is sometimes Latinized as Occam.
34. The literal translation is “Plurality should not be posited without necessity.”
The more customary translation comes from “Entia non sunt multiplicanda
praeter necessitate,” a variant wrongly attributed to Ockham.
35. Settle 1983: 3–20.
36. Quoted in Shapin 1996: 57.
602 • NOTES FOR PAGES 247–251
CHAPTER 11: COMING TO TERMS WITH THE ROLE
OF MODERN EUROPE
1. I place the figures according to the decade in which they reached the age of
40, the average age at which the significant figures were at the height of their
powers. Forty has consistently been found to be the peak of accomplishment.
For an extensive review of the literature on this issue, see Simonton 1984a:
93–112.
2. To avoid confusing the issue, I omit philosophy. Adding it makes no difference
to the results. More generally, the philosophy inventories get short shrift from
here on out. The number of significant figures in Western philosophy after
1400 is too small (76) to be of much use in the quantitative analyses.
3. This is a conservative estimate. It is based on Hughes 1997, an art history of
typical size and scope. The count of American authors I take from the index
includes only the 77 U.S.-born artists that are mentioned in both American
Visions and in at least one of the sources for the Western art index, thus undercounting the total number of U.S.-born artists mentioned in American Visions.
I then estimated the number of significant figures that would be produced
from a large set of American art histories that have 77 artists as the median
value. This estimate draws from the very high correlation between the median
number of persons mentioned in the sources and the number of significant
figures (the sample was small, only 9 inventories, but the correlation was .99).
The fitted value for a median of 77 is 91.
4. Comparing numbers of artists leaves open the possibility that the picture
would change if only we paid attention to their quality rather than quantity.
That is, suppose that Chinese histories of art are for some reason more selective than Western histories of art, readier to omit minor figures. I raise this
because it is the only way I can imagine that the inflationary effect I invoke
could be misleading, but I also cannot think of any reason why it should be
true nor find any evidence in the sources used to compile the inventories that
it is true. A reading of the histories of literature in China, India, Japan, and the
Arab world and of histories of Chinese and Japanese art indicates that they are
behaving just like historians everywhere as they describe some artists as major,
others minor. The conclusions I draw in the text about the inflation
of non-Western significant figures depend only on a few highly plausible
assumptions about the nature of the qualitative distributions within the various inventories.
The special case of China does raise additional issues, however. Chinese
encyclopedic sources are known to list thousands of painters and poets—
13,000 painters in one encyclopedia of art, for example (Clunas 1997: 13)—
while the Chinese significant figures in art and literature number just 111 and
83 respectively. But encyclopedic rosters are useless as predictors of the
number of significant figures. Imagine, for example, a compilation of all the
people who have ever appeared in the Who’s Who volumes for the arts, literature, music, business, and science that appear annually. Such works have now
appeared in the United States for more than a century. Imagine that we had
several centuries of such compilations to stitch together—that is the nature of
China’s endless lists. No matter how long they may be, they have little influence on who qualifies as a significant figure in any of the inventories,Western
NOTES FOR PAGES 252–256 • 603
or non-Western, because, by design, most of the sources for all the inventories are histories. If it were indeed the case that China had many more important artists than emerge from the histories, one would expect to find some
clues. For example, if a historian is faced with a hundred artists from a given
era who, in his judgment, are all worthy of discussion, and he has space to
discuss only a dozen of them, it seems likely that the text would say something
to that effect. Nothing in the text of the histories of Chinese art used for the
inventories conveys that impression. To the extent that historians of Chinese
art must choose from a large pool of roughly equally wonderful artists, one
would expect a wide degree of difference in the choices actually made by
different historians. No evidence of that emerges from the inventories. The
reliabilities for the Chinese art and literature indexes, .91 and .88, argue
against that view. It seems plausible that a number of Chinese artists from the
earliest centuries would be added if we still had full information on their
work. On the other hand, the Chinese historical records are much better than
comparable records from ancient Greece in recording the reputations of
painters whose work has been lost. Taken as a whole, a prudent conclusion
seems to be that the number of Chinese artists and writers may not be as
inflated relative to all of Europe as other country-specific inventories are estimated to be; hence the extremely conservative conclusion stated in the text.
5. Sivin 1990 quoted in Landes 1998: 348.
6. Landes 1998: 348.
7. Pacey 1998: viii.
8. The Pacey and McClellan and Dorn books could not be used for constructing Human Accomplishment’s inventories. Technology in World Civilization is a
concise work of just 207 pages of text and presents case histories illustrating
Pacey’s thesis, not a history of technology. Science and Technology in World
History, with 373 pages of text, is intended as an introductory college textbook and was not sufficiently comprehensive to meet the 18 percent criterion
for becoming a qualified source. Neither did McClellan and Dorn meet the
10 percent criterion for use as an index source. See Appendix 2 for a discussion of qualified sources and index sources.
9. Pacey 1998: 218–25.
10. Needham 1954. One obvious strategy for protecting against Eurocentrism is
to use sources from non-European countries. I was able to do this for the arts
and philosophy inventories, but not for science and technology. One problem
is lack of translations for works in non-Roman alphabets. Such translations
are common for works on the arts, because Europeans perceive that a book
on Chinese art written by a Chinese fills a role that works on Chinese art by
Europeans cannot fill. Works on science and technology are less likely to be
translated because they are not perceived to fill a similar gap. The results when
I attempted to find such sources in Japanese are instructive. A Japanese graduate student from the University of Chicago spent the better part of a summer
canvassing Japanese library catalogs, over the Internet and with the help of
friends in Japan, seeking histories, bibliographic dictionaries, and chronologies in the fields covered by the various inventories. His work is reflected in
some of the Japanese sources used for the art, literature, and philosophy inventories. But for many weeks he was stymied in his search for sources for science
604 • NOTES FOR PAGES 257–274
and technology, until he finally tracked down a biographical dictionary of
scientists apparently prepared under the aegis of a committee of distinguished
Japanese academicians. We had the book shipped to the United States, opened
it with great anticipation—and it turned out to be a word-for-word translation of Biographical Encyclopedia of Scientists (1981) by J. Daintith, S. Mitchell,
E. Tootill, and D. Gjertsen, a fine work, but a British one. The book was
indeed introduced to its Japanese audience by the committee of distinguished
Japanese academicians, but they had not felt it necessary to augment the text
by adding material on Japanese scientists that the British had omitted.
11. If the focus is proportional differences within categories, the DoSB contains
proportionally fewer entries from the Arab world than does the roster of
people who would have been compiled without the DoSB, but more from
South Asia. The raw numbers are small—e.g., the difference in the proportion
from the Arab world comes from a raw difference of only 9 people in the two
totals, out of samples that number 4,271 for the DoSB and 3,165 for the
entries identified independently of the DoSB.
12. A few such events are in the inventory of accomplishments for European
countries, such as Fibonacci’s reintroduction of material from Euclid’s
Elements and the first European preparation of gunpowder. They amount to
about one-tenth of one percent of the total accomplishments assigned to
European countries. So a more precise statement of the challenge in the text
would require that no more than one-tenth of one percent of the events
added to non-European countries consist of accomplishments originally done
elsewhere.
13. Kroeber 1944: 166.
CHAPTER 12: . . . AND OF DEAD WHITE MALES
1. My information on the pictures in the Columbia mathematics library was
accurate as recently as January, 2003.
2. These percentages refer to significant figures in the hard sciences and mathematics, excluding technology and medicine, which were not comprehensively
covered in the DoSB.
3. For the scientific sources, post-1950 data were collected for all the chronologies and for the DoSB, and the presentation in the text uses all the names
mentioned by any of those sources. For the arts sources, post-1950 data were
not as uniform, so I selected a recent encyclopedic source for each of the
Western arts inventories and based the presentation on them. The sources
were Gowing 1995 for the visual arts, Goring 1994 for literature, and Randel
1996 for music. These data cannot be used to estimate density of accomplishment in the post-1950 period without extensive compensating calculations,
because of the uneven coverage of the sources. Some sources stop in the
1970s, others in the 1980s, still others in the 1990s. But we can use the raw
data to estimate a ratio of men to women for the post-1950 data, because
NOTES FOR PAGES 274–282 • 605
whatever the differences in coverage across sources, the coverage of men and
women within sources is presumably the same (e.g., no source stops covering
men in 1970 but women in 1985, etc.).
4. Philosophy is omitted because of its usual problem with small sample size, plus
the scant attention paid to philosophers in the last half of 20C (scant, for good
reason). The most recent woman philosopher shown in my sources is Simone
Weil (1909–1943).
5. Sarton 1927–48: vol. II, 323–29, 533–41, and 808–18. See also Patai 1977:
317.
6. Vital 1999: 6.
7. American Jewish Historical Society 1999: 5.
8. Patai 1977: 318.
9. Official accounts of parliamentary debate, quoted in Vital 1999: 179.
10. Examples are Jacobs 1886, Lombroso 1889, and Legoyt 1868.
11. The American Jewish population in 1900 is estimated at 938,000–1,058,000,
which has a midpoint value of 998,000 (American Jewish Historical Society
1999: 35). In 1940, the same source puts the number at 4,770,000–4,975,000,
with a midpoint value of 4,873,000. The best discussion of Jewish population
in Europe at the turn of 20C, 9 million, is in Vital 1999: 297 ff. Vital assembled his data from a variety of statistical sources throughout Europe. The outmigration of Jews during the next 40 years meant that the European
population of Jews actually fell, estimated as of 1940 to stand at about 9.24
million (Myron C. Taylor files in the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Library). I
put the combined U.S./European Jewish population at 10.0 million for 1900
and 14.1 million for 1940.
12. I classified a significant figure as a Jew if either his mother or (departing from
Jewish practice) father was identified as a Jew in the sources.
13. The Jewish ratio in the earth sciences would have been higher if anthropology had been classified within earth sciences. Franz Boas and Claude LéviStrauss were both Jews, for example.
14. The larger the denominator for figuring the Jewish contribution per million
Jews in that country, the smaller the resulting ratio. By taking the average for
1900 and 1940, the entire period of 1870–1950 is represented, in effect, by
the Jewish population as of around 1920, considerably larger than any figure
based on the profile of population change over the entire period of
1870–1950. The available data on Jewish populations by country do not
permit a finer-grained analysis. In any case, it is always best to allow for a
margin of error when dealing with dramatic results, as in this instance.
15. For a recent history of the Jewish experience in Germany, see Elon 2002.
16. Persons were counted as Jewish if either parent was Jewish. Gustav Hertz and
Maria Goeppert Mayer, Nobel laureates often identified as Jews, apparently
had just one parent who was half-Jewish and are not included on this list of
606 • NOTES FOR PAGES 283–289
Nobel winners, nor is Christian Anfinsen, born of Gentile parents and subsequently a convert to Orthodox Judaism. Three web sources give lists of Jewish
nobel laureates: www.science.co.il, the Israel Science & Technology web site;
www.us-israel.org, sponsored by the American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise, and www.jinfo.com, a privately sponsored project established and maintained by an American physicist to document Jewish scientific and cultural
achievements. Of these, jinfo.com is without doubt the best source, with
excellent documentation of ambiguous cases, and I have relied on it. The
most widely circulated list, from www.us-israel.org, has several errors of both
inclusion and omission.
17. The discrepancy in proportional increase and raw increase reflects the
substantially larger number of prizes awarded to more than one person in the
second half of the century.
18. If anyone wonders why an analysis using post-1950 data like that conducted
for women was not conducted for Jews, the answer is time. Using everyone,
not just significant figures, born from 1830 onward, means augmenting the
number of individuals by several thousand. For women from Western countries, names alone are a reliable basis for classifying sex in a large proportion
of cases, and the ambiguous cases are a small enough set to be investigated one
by one. In contrast, names are an unreliable basis for classifying Jewishness.
Not only are some names often-but-not-always Jewish, every child of a Jewish
mother married to a Gentile father would be missed if names were the only
basis for classification. Identifying Jewishness for several thousand people,
most of them obscure, would have required months, and still would have left
a large proportion classified as “unknown” at the end of it.
19. Cuban poet Nicolas Guillen, Brazilian poet Jorge de Lima, American poet
Vachel Lindsay, American novelist Richard Wright, and American composer
Duke Ellington.
20. The DoSB contains an entry for just one African scientific figure throughout
this period (Percy Julian, an African-American) that I was able to identify as
such. The other Africans are mentioned exclusively by one source, Porter and
Ogilvie 2000, which in its introduction openly states that it sought to represent minorities and women. Considering these factors plus the small numbers
involved, the safest assumption is that the African trendline in the scientific
domain from the latter part of 19C through about 1980 (when the information in the sources dwindles down) is flat.
21. Russell 1995.
22. Geary 1998 approaches the causes of male-female differences from the
perspective of evolutionary biology, and in that sense is definitely on one side
of the argument, but his treatment of the literature is so encyclopedic that you
can use his book as a basis for exploring the literature on both sides for just
about any specific aspect of male-female differences.
23. Geary 1998 once again offers the best single review of the literature, in
chapter 8.
NOTES FOR PAGES 289–308 • 607
24. Rushton and Ankeny 1997, Kimura 1999.
25. Quoted in Vital 1999: 130.
26. The best summary of studies of Jewish IQ is Storfer 1990: 314–21. Lynn (in
press), estimates American Jewish verbal IQ at 107–108.
27. For discussions of the Ashkenazi/Oriental (Sephardim and Mizrachim) difference, see Patai 1977: 306–14 and Storfer 1990: 504–7.
28. Modestly higher means have disproportionate effects on the tails of the distribution. It is a mathematical implication of a trait that has a normal
distribution. The IQ test is normed for the entire population with a mean
of 100 and a standard deviation of 15. A subgroup with a mean of 107 can
be expected to have more than 4 times as many people with IQs of 145 or
higher than a subgroup with a mean of 100. For a subgroup with a mean of
115, the disproportion rises to 16:1.
29. Sheldon 1954.
30. For a discussion of the logic behind these selection pressures, see Patai 1977:
304–6.
31. Reuters, 12/17/01, reporting the work of geneticist Ariel Darvasi and his
colleagues at Jerusalem’s Hebrew University.
CHAPTER 13: CONCENTRATIONS OF EUROPEAN
AND AMERICAN ACCOMPLISHMENT
1. I inserted these pre-WWI borders on a map of modern Europe. The boundaries for the other countries are exact; my revisions are close, but approximate.
2. The locations of many of the small towns and rural areas were known and
taken into account when plotting the data. For the rest, I distributed the dots
randomly around the region except where mountainous or heavily forested
areas are sparsely populated. In such instances, I gave preference to the most
densely populated part of the region.
3. U. S. Bureau of the Census 1975: Series A 172–194.
4. Biographical data on some of the Jewish significant figures in question is lacking, hence the approximate figures. Note that the work country of people
who had made their major contributions while in Germany is classified as
Germany, even though they fled after the Nazis came to power.
5. A substantial number of significant figures who were raised in one place and
spent their work life in another were moving within language and cultural
settings and were not counted as emigrants. These included persons who
moved within the Austro-Hungarian empire and between present-day Austria
and present-day Germany. I also did not count as emigrants German-speaking Swiss who moved to Germany, Germans who moved to eastern Switzerland, French-speaking Swiss who moved to France, French who moved to
western Switzerland, and French-speaking Belgians who moved to France.
608 • NOTES FOR PAGES 309–342
CHAPTER 14: TAKING POPULATION INTO ACCOUNT:
THE ACCOMPLISHMENT RATE
1. The variables are population in 1900 and the total number of scientific significant figures from 1900–1950 (scientific, because that inventory has worldwide coverage).
2. I use 10 million as the base even though many countries had fewer than 10
million people to make it easier to talk in terms of rounded whole numbers.
Using one million as the base would produce many instances in which the
accomplishment rate would have to be expressed as a fraction of one figure.
3. The Western rates shown in the graphs sum the rates calculated for the individual countries. I replicated the timelines for each inventory using an aggregated rate (sum of significant figures across countries divided by the sum of
the population across countries). The shapes of the timelines were materially
indistinguishable.
4. The baseline has no normative meaning, but merely expresses the empirical
result when 1400–1950 is used for the calculation. The average would change
markedly if I were to lop off a century at either end.
5. Specifically, I averaged the values of the two measures for each of those years,
then computed the linear regression trendline.
CHAPTER 15: EXPLANATIONS I: PEACE AND PROSPERITY
1. Sorokin 1937: vol. 3, appendix to part three, 578–620.
2. Mee 1975: 25.
3. Hamilton 1934, reported in Clough 1968: 150, table 1.
4. Quoted in Landes 1998: 172.
5. Tawney 1958: 28.
6. Quoted in Cipolla 1980: 267.
7. Data involving money are always expressed in constant values based on the
1990 international dollar.
8. A fourth number of interest in the standard linear regression model is R2,
pronounced “r-squared,” where the R refers to the multiple correlation of all
the independent variables with the dependent variable. For mathematical
reasons I won’t go into, R2 is equivalent to the proportion of variation in the
dependent variable explained by all the independent variables combined. Go
back to the example of predicting your child’s height. If in a sample of children and their parents, the three independent variables (father’s height,
mother’s height, sex of the child) were found to have an R2 of .50, it would
mean that we can explain 50 percent of the variation in children’s height with
those three independent variables. In the analyses conducted here, however,
the standard linear model does not apply, because the dependent variables are
count variables—counts of the number of times that a rare event occurs (see
note 10 below). The regression model that does apply, the random-effects
negative binomial model for panel data, is not suitable for computing the R2
statistic. A “pseudo R2”can be calculated for some types of negative binomial
NOTES FOR PAGE 343 • 609
models, but it does not have the same meaning (see Cameron and Trivedi
1998: 153–5; Long 1997: 102–8), and indeed does not lend itself to an easily
expressed interpretation of any sort.
9. The choice makes no difference to the interpretation of the results. The betas
associated with the democracy and autocracy dummy variables will be different depending on whether one chooses totalitarianism or limited monarchy
as the reference group, for example, but the difference between the democracy
beta and the autocracy one will be the same, as will all such pairwise differences, including the differences between the reference country and every
other country.
10. The database consists of cross-sectional time-series data, also called panel data,
of the form xit, where xit is a set of observations for unit i and time t. In this
case, the units are countries and the times are two-decade periods from
1390–1410 to 1930–50. The basic analytic framework for the regression
analysis is a negative binomial model using a vector of dummy variables for
the two-decade periods and the random-effects option for the country units,
implemented using the xtnbreg procedure in the computer program Stata,
v.7. The reasons for these choices are as follows:
The dependent variable in the regression analyses in Human Accomplishment is always some variation on a count of significant figures. A count variable is by definition limited to zero or a positive number, which introduces a
problem: the standard regression model, known as ordinary least squares
(OLS), fits a straight regression line to the data. What does it mean if that
straight line goes below zero? It is a nonsensical result, and symptomatic of
ways in which the mathematics of the standard linear model can be misleading when count variables bounded from above, or as in the case of count variables, from below, are involved.
When the events being counted are common ones in which only a few
observations will show numbers close to zero and the underlying distribution
is plausibly close to normal, the standard linear model can often be used without problems. But as the events become rarer, the plausible underlying distribution is increasingly likely to be a Poisson distribution, not a normal one,
and the defects of the standard linear model increase. When zeroes make up a
large proportion of the values, as they do when we are measuring the appearance of significant figures over the course of a generation in a given country
of Europe, the standard linear model must be discarded.
Since few count distributions fit all of the specifications of a Poisson
distribution, the Poisson-based regression model comes in several variations.
The one most appropriate to these data is the negative binomial model
(chosen because the analyses uniformly showed highly significant evidence of
over-dispersion). For discussions of the negative binomial model and other
methods of analyzing count data, see Cameron and Trivedi 1998; Maddala
1983: 149–96, and Long 1997: 217–50.
Analyses of panel data raise a variety of issues. Subsequent notes take up
special cases. The general framework requires decisions to be made about how
to take into account the effects of the point in time t of an observation and
the unmeasured country-specific effects of unit i.
In the case of time, the objective is to take out the effects of time altogether. If I enter the midpoint year of the two-decade period as a continuous
610 • NOTES FOR PAGE 344
independent variable, I constrain the ability of the regression model to do so.
Suppose, for example, that the importance of the difference between the two
time periods centered in 1440 and 1460 is far less than the importance of the
difference between 1880 and 1900. When time is treated as a continuous variable, the regression model is forced to treat the two differences as the same.
The alternative, and the choice used throughout the analyses, is to enter the
two-decade periods as a vector of dummy variables, permitting the regression
model to treat each value independently of the others. Thus an analysis from
1400–1950 includes 27 separate variables representing the two-decade periods from 1390–1410 to 1930–1950, plus one of the two-decade periods (it
can be any of them) serving as the reference period and not entered in the
equation.
In the case of the country units, one option would be to enter a set of
dummy variables for countries. But because the dataset involves panel data, it
is preferable to use software specifically designed for time-series data. The
program used for these analyses, Stata v.7, provides such a version of the negative binomial model that offers two options for taking the unit into account:
random-effects or fixed-effects over-dispersion models. For those who may
be familiar with these terms as they are used for OLS, note that in a negative
binomial analysis, random-effects and fixed-effects refer to the distribution of the
dispersion parameter, not to a term associated with a dummy variable for a
given country (see Hausman 1984 and Cameron and Trivedi: 280–92). In the
case of the database for Human Accomplishment, the most plausible assumption
about the countries is that they play different roles for reasons that are independent of the other variables I am using—Germans are different from the
French, Swedes are different from Italians, and the British are different from
the Spanish in cultural ways that are unrelated to variables such as GDP and
population. In such a situation, the random-effects negative binomial model
is the preferred choice. As a check, all of the analyses were replicated using the
fixed-effects alternative. Hausman’s specification test (Hausman 1978, Hausman 1984) was used to verify the statistical appropriateness of the randomeffects assumption. The few cases in which the random-effects model failed
that test are noted in the text, along with information about the results of the
fixed-effects version.
11. Readers familiar with regression analysis may be wondering why lagged
values of the dependent variable are not included among the control variables.
They come later. See Chapter 16.
12. All the analyses were replicated with logged population entered as an independent variable in which its coefficient was not constrained. None of the
results was materially different from those presented in the tables, with the
single exception of an analysis in which another independent variable was
population of the largest city. When national population was entered as the
exposure variable, the coefficient of city population was small and insignificant; when national population entered as an unconstrained independent
variable, the coefficient of city population dominated. An examination of
multicollinearity suggests that entering national population as the exposure
variable yielded the more interpretable result.
13. Variation in logged variables represents proportional variation and often
better explains the dependent variable than movement in the raw values. Such
NOTES FOR PAGES 345–348 • 611
was the case with the variables used in these analyses. Logging a variable also
has the virtue of suppressing extreme values—for example, when dealing with
income distributions in which a comparative handful of people with multimillion-dollar incomes can distort the results.
When using logs, something must be done to accommodate values of
zero, since the logged value of zero is undefined. The typical solution is either
to rescale the entire variable, adding a constant between 0 and 1 to all values,
or to leave all the nonzero values unchanged but assign some value between 0
and 1 to the zero values. I have chosen the latter option for all the analyses,
assigning .25 to zero for purposes of computing logged values. This choice, a
necessarily subjective attempt to preserve a difference between 0 and 1 that is
neither unrealistically too big nor too small relative to the other logged values,
produces a logged value for 0 (rescaled to .25) that is –1.4, while the logged
values of 1, 2, and 3 are 0, .7, and 1.1 respectively. The analyses using such
rescaled values were replicated using .1 and .5 to see if the results were
affected.
14. For productive periods, see Dennis 1966 and Lehman 1953. For the choice of
the 20 years in which an individual turns 40, see Simonton 1997d. The label
assigned to the generation is in the middle—e.g., the label for the period
1630–1650 is 1640. Data on population and GDP are taken from the beginning of the period.
15. I eliminate philosophy from this calculation.
16. Sorokin 1937: vol. 3, appendix to part two and appendix to part three.
17. The source for this data, and for smaller European countries not covered by
Sorokin, was Brownstone and Franck 1994.
18. The presentation of the methodology for the war and disturbance variables is
given in Sorokin 1937: vol. 3, chapters 10 and 12.
19. For discussion and references, see Simonton 1997d: 7. See also the discussion
of purpose and autonomy, Chapter 19.
20. For all the analyses, the results were also run using the number of significant
figures in the separate inventories as the dependent variable. For all analyses
using logged variables that had been rescaled to accommodate values of zero,
I examined the results using three alternatives for rescaling zero: the one
reported in the text, .25, plus .1 and .5. Another standard procedure was to
check the results when the observation for the United States in 1940—an
extreme outlier in most of the analyses—was omitted. A variety of other diagnostic tests for standard problems in regression analysis involving multicollinearity among the independent variables were also routinely conducted.
Additional analyses specific to the war and unrest variables included
entering the war and unrest variables separately, and trying the different
permutations of lagged values up to three generations back, including a
version with no lagged values at all. The model was also run using unlogged
values of the population and density variables. To check the possibility that the
continuous variables were hiding relationships that might exist for very severe
war but not for lesser levels of war, I also created categorical variables for both
war and unrest, dividing war into categories of “no war during the generation,” “minor war,” “major war,” and “very severe war,” and dividing unrest
into “no unrest during the generation,”“minor unrest,” and “severe unrest.”
612 • NOTES FOR PAGES 348–352
21. A few dozen different runs of a regression model employing several variables
produces hundreds of betas, some of which are likely to be “statistically
significant” just by chance. In this case, the number of significant figures in the
visual arts had a statistically significant relationship with the war index
in the preceding generation, but the effect was small. As soon as one toyed
with the specification of the model (e.g., by dropping the lag for t–2), the
effect disappeared.
22. Simonton 1997d found a significant relationship between his measures of
creative activity and his political instability variable (similar to my civil unrest
variable) in the first preceding 20-year period, in a dataset that extended
from –700 to 1839. He did not find a significant relationship for his measure
of war.
23. The framework is taken from the specific estimates of GDP for the benchmark years of 1500, 1600, 1700, 1820, 1870, 1913, and 1950, expressed in
international 1990 dollars from Maddison 1998: Table B-18. To interpolate
GDP for the decades within the period 1500–1800 (I did not try to estimate
GDP for 1400–1500), the major sources were Barkhausen 1974, Van Dillen
1974, Romano 1974, and Clough 1968. For 1500–1700, I relied most heavily on Cipolla 1980: 249, fig. 10-1. For the period 1800–1950, I was able to
increase the precision of the estimates considerably by combining Maddison’s
benchmark estimates (with their virtue of being expressed in a common
metric) with the year-by-year estimates of GDP from another major compilation of historical economic data, Mitchell 1992: Table J1, expressed in the
separate currencies of the countries involved.
24. I use per capita GDP instead of national GDP for the same reason I use population density rather than geographic area—it reduces high correlations with
other independent variables. For example, the correlation of GDP with
population is .84, while the correlation of per capita GDP with population is
just .36.
25. Technological accomplishment (and, indirectly, accomplishment in the hard
sciences) may be seen as a cause of wealth as well as its effect. A full analysis of
the relationship of GDP and the emergence of significant figures would take
this interactive causation into account, modeling the number of significant
figures in technology and the sciences as causes of increased GDP, which in
turn acts as a cause of accomplishment in the arts and further accomplishments in the sciences. Methods are available for modeling complex causation.
I have chosen not to pursue them in this presentation, which focuses on
making a simpler point about the relationship of wealth as a cause of accomplishment. I will note, however, that when logged GDP per capita is treated
as the dependent variable and the measures of accomplishment (current and
lagged) are entered as the independent variables, a large and highly significant
relationship is found with the current and lagged values of the scientific
significant figures, but much weaker relationships with the current and lagged
values of significant figures in the arts.
26. There are 15 countries in each of the observations from 1400 to 1790. The
USA, Finland, Norway, and Canada are added in 1790, 1810, 1820, and 1870
respectively.
NOTES FOR PAGES 353–356 • 613
CHAPTER 16: EXPLANATIONS II: MODELS, ELITE CITIES,
AND FREEDOM OF ACTION
1. Quoted in Kroeber 1944: 17.
2. Quoted in Kroeber 1944: 18.
3. Simonton 1997d. The article was published in 1976.
4. Simonton 1997c. The article was published in 1988.
5. E.g., Simonton 1997a, Simonton 1997b.
6. The third era was chosen partly because the population data are the most
accurate and the biographical data most complete for 19C and 20C, and also
because the most recent era is the one in which the origins of the significant
figures were most dispersed, thereby providing a conservative estimate of the
dominant role of cities over the entire period from 1400–1950.
7. All computations are based on the place where the significant figures spent
their childhoods. When more than one city is within the same comparison
area, populations and significant figures from all the cities have been
subtracted from the comparison area total. The computation divides the
number of significant figures who were active over the course of a halfcentury by the relevant population at the midpoint of the half-century—a
“per million” figure different from the one you might be thinking of, the
number of significant figures who were active over the course of a half
century divided by the number of people who lived in that country over the
course of a half century.
Note that the region within which Paris is located, Île de France, is almost
coincident with greater Paris, hence it was not possible to get a clean comparison of the city of Paris with its immediately surrounding area. The lack of any
other city/region comparison in France is explained by the remarkable fact
that no other French region produced 25 significant figures from 1800–1950.
The highest was 18. The same centralization of significant figures in the
national centers explains the absence of city/region comparisons for Russia,
Spain, and Italy.
Some details about the mechanics of the calculations: For each halfcentury within the 1800–1950 period, I divided the number of significant
figures from the city by the population of the city at the midpoint of the halfcentury, then repeated the calculation for significant figures coming from the
rest of the region, divided by the population of the region (minus the city
population, of course) at the midpoint. The numbers in the table represent the
weighted average over the entire period. Unweighted averages were produced
as well (the added ratio for the three half-centuries divided by three). Each
option produces its own disadvantages. When a city had no significant figures
in a half century, using the unweighted average tended to understate the real
degree to which it out-produced the surrounding region. But a case such as
Stuttgart’s or Geneva’s, which produced several significant figures while their
populations were still extremely small, tend to overstate their roles. But those
two cities are the only instances in which the weighted average created a
problem, whereas the problems associated with the unweighted averages were
much more common, hence the choice of measure to present in the table.
614 • NOTES FOR PAGES 357–366
8. A map showing where the significant figures worked as adults makes the same
point.
9. Almost all the generalizations about cities that follow in the text have changed
in the last half century, altered by the growth of suburbs and, more recently,
the ability of people to do work in rural areas that formerly had to be done in
close physical proximity to colleagues, models, institutions, libraries, and audiences. But they held true until 1950.
10. Simonton 1997d: 5.
11. Simonton 1997d. As a proxy measure of cultural diversity, Simonton used a
measure of political fragmentation across the Western world, counting the
number of independent states. (His geographic unit of analysis embraced the
entire West.) In effect, my measures of elite cities (see page 367) approximate
political fragmentation within the countries I use as my geographic unit of
analysis—e.g., Italy and Germany have the largest number of elite cities, and
until 19C also had the greatest number of independent political units within
their borders.
12. Finer 1997: vol. 2, 965.
13. Alexander Solzhenytsin and Boris Pasternak are not included in this list
because their major works were not published until after 1950.
14. For a discussion of property rights in Russia and their relationship to freedom
of action, see Pipes 1999: 159–208.
15. A. H. Lybyer, The Government of the Ottoman Empire in the Time of Suleiman the
Magnificent, quoted in Toynbee and Somervell 1946: 176.
16. Lags can refer to any number of time periods. For example, if you have reason
to believe that the causal role of a lagged variable is delayed, you might want
to compute lags going back several time periods. For an extended discussion
of the lagged analysis of creative figures and celebrities (which also uses Kroeber 1944 as a point of departure), see Simonton 1997c.
17. When the raw value of a first-order lag of a count variable, yt–1, is entered as
an additional regressor, it produces explosive results for values of beta greater
than zero. Cameron and Trivedi recommend specifying a multiplicative role
for yt–1. This entails using a rescaled value of yt–1,y* in which a constant t–1
between 0 and 1 is added to the raw value, permitting logged values to be
computed for yt–1=0. Cameron and Trivedi 1998: 238–40. The constant used
in these analyses was .25. The analyses were replicated using .1 and .5 as
constants, to test for sensitivity to the choice of constant. The differences were
minor. An alternative approach for dealing with the problem of explosive
results is to use first differences as the regressands (y–yt-1 for the first lagged
period, yt–1–yt–2 for the second lagged period, etc.). The analyses were replicated using this approach. The results produced no important differences from
those reported in the text.
18. Replication using the fixed-effects option showed no material differences
from the results presented in the text. In the replication using equally
weighted inventories, the beta for the second lag is only +.03 and is not
statistically significant.
19. When the values of the dependent variable in successive time periods are
NOTES FOR PAGES 367–378 • 615
correlated, a condition known as autocorrelation may be present. Autocorrelation can affect the p values, deceiving us into thinking that a beta is statistically
significant when it really isn’t. Autocorrelation does not necessarily exist just
because the values of the dependent variable are serially correlated. It exists
when the error terms—the difference between the actual values of the
dependent variable and the values predicted by the regression equation—are
serially correlated. A standard method of identifying whether autocorrelation
exists is the Durbin-Watson statistic, which can easily be computed when
using OLS (ordinary least squares) regression models. The Durbin-Watson
statistic cannot be calculated with the negative binomial model, the one we
are using for the count data that constitute our dependent variable. The good
news is that autocorrelation doesn’t affect the beta coefficients themselves, so
our estimates of the magnitude of the effect that an independent variable has
remains interpretable. Also, autocorrelation biases the p values in just one
direction. We don’t need to worry that a statistically insignificant result has
been falsely understated. I need only be cautious about placing too much
weight on a marginally significant beta—and in fact, none of the substantive
interpretations of these regression analyses is driven by close estimates of the
statistical significance of the betas.
20. If a city had a population meeting one of the criteria, it was included
throughout the database (e.g., a city that qualified by its 1900 population
but not by its 1700 population was included for all half-centuries since its
founding).
21. Classification was based on the position of the university relative to all of
Europe, hence the leading universities in a given country may not be
included. Universities that were on the cusp included the Universities of
Bordeaux, Freiberg, Grenoble, Glasgow, Columbia, Princeton, and Chicago.
Including them does not materially change the results presented in the text.
With regard to American universities, it must be remembered that they are
competing not just with other American universities, but with European
ones, and not during the most recent decades when American universities
have been dominant, but before 1950.
22. My chief source for the coding is S. E. Finer’s magisterial three-volume study,
Finer 1997. The categorizations of countries as democracies generally follows
Vanhanen 1984, although I give democratic status to a few countries earlier
than Vanhanen does (most conspicuously, I code Britain as a liberal democracy
after the Reform Act of 1832).
23. Finer 1997: vol. 3, 1276.
24. Adams 1787.
25. In the very few instances when there was a tie, the code for the more authoritarian system was entered.
26. The replication using the fixed-effects option and the equally weighted transformation of the number of significant figures yielded comparable results.
27. Hausman 1984: 916.
28. The relevant statistical test for appropriateness of the random-effects model is
the Hausman test (Hausman 1978). But whatever tests the random effects
model passes, it requires the strong assumption that the unexplained between-
616 • NOTES FOR PAGES 379–382
country differences are not functions of (or importantly correlated with)
other variables already in the model. The fixed effects model does not require
this assumption. I believe the assumption to be justified, but something like
the Hausman test can demonstrate only that the assumption is not demonstrably false, not that it is unequivocally true. On that score, reasonable people
can disagree. Showing the results from both models seems prudent.
CHAPTER 17: WHAT’S LEFT TO EXPLAIN?
1. The variables included in the regression that produced the figure are war, civil
unrest, per capita GDP, wealth relative to other countries. the number of
significant figures in each of the two preceding generations, the number of
political and economic centers, the number of elite universities, the freedom
of action categories, population of the nation’s largest city, and population
density. I omitted the dummy variables for time, and used a standard negative
binomial procedure (Stata’s nbreg procedure) rather than the version that
takes the role of the individual country into account. The point of this exercise is not to obtain accurate estimates of the effects of the different independent variables (for which the time dummies and estimates of random or
fixed effects are important), but to give you a sense of how much the variables
operationalizing peace, prosperity, models, elite cities, and freedom of action
explain, taken together. For this purpose, incorporating the time dummies is
misleading. The time dummies improve the predictive power of the equation
(the number of significant figures increased over time, and the time dummies
take that into account), but they don’t explain anything about why significant
figures increased over time. Similarly, incorporating the country-specific
effects doesn’t explain anything except (to put it roughly) “Sweden is different from Italy in ways not measured by the other variables.” We still don’t
know how they are different.
2. GDP data are not available for 1400–1500, hence there are no observations
prior to 1500 for equations that include GDP data.
3. For readers who may be wondering if this correlation is inflated by the large
number of zeroes in the values for the number of significant figures (the
dependent variable), the correlation between the actual and predicted values
for the subset of cases in which the number of significant figures was greater
than zero (.910) was virtually identical to the correlation for the entire set of
actual and predicted values (.917).
4. The only variable that might seem to help explain the drop in the accomplishment rate is the negative effect of despotic regimes, but that is illusory—
Russia and the Balkans were despotic before the Communists took over, and
the effects of Naziism are limited to the 1930–1950 generation.
5. Kroeber 1944, Simonton 1997b, Simonton 1997a.
NOTES FOR PAGES 383–399 • 617
CHAPTER 18: THE ARISTOTELIAN PRINCIPLE
1. Aristotle 1962: X,1175a, 12–14.
2. Rawls 1971: 426.
3. The seminal texts are Watson 1914 and Skinner 1938.
4. Maslow 1943.
5. Maslow 1943: 383. Italics in the original.
6. For a summary of the work over the course of the 1940s and 1950s that led
away from behaviorism, see Murray 1988: 138–141.
7. R. L. White 1959.
8. Csikszentmihalyi 1996 is a recent discussion of flow that bears directly on
human accomplishment in the arts and sciences.
9. For a review of work on intrinsic and extrinsic rewards, see Murray 1988:
148–54. For a review of the literature specifically focused on creative people,
see Ochse 1990: 133–59.
CHAPTER 19: SOURCES OF ENERGY: PURPOSE
AND AUTONOMY
1. For example, see Mozart’s letter in Ghiselin 1952: 34–5.
2. Steptoe 1998: 153. The two famous symphonies were the G minor symphony
(K550) and the “Jupiter” symphony (K551).
3. Quoted in Lang 1997: 646.
4. Simon 1972.
5. For the role of practice, see Ericcson and Tesch-Romer 1993.
6. For a summary and reference to other sources, see Simonton 1988:
chapter 4.
7. Ochse 1990: 131, summarizing his review of the literature. For another
review using other kinds of evidence, see Simonton 1994: chapter 5.
8. Quoted in Ochse 1990: 132.
9. This wording comes from the Random House Dictionary of the American
Language, New York: Random House, 1981 edition.
10. Sukenick 1969: 41.
11. To get a sense of the evidence for this statement, a good single source is Cox
1926, because of the individual case studies she presents for each of the 300
geniuses in her sample. They are also characterized by a continuing reflection
on the events of their lives. Howard Gardner sees this as one of the major
lessons to emerge from his study of giants (Gardner 1997: 14).
12. Quoted in Bary et al. 1963: 61.
13. Xin et al. 1997: 6.
14. The following interpretation draws from Goldstein 1980: chapter 4.
15. Goldstein 1980: 98.
618 • NOTES FOR PAGES 400–405
16. Cohen 1994: 389, which provides a summary of the work of von
Grunebaum, Sayili, and Saunders (384–417).
17. Grunebaum 1969: 114.
18. Sayili 1960: 415 ff.
19. Saunders 1963: 716.
20. This point is elaborated in Stark 2003: 154–56.
21. Two primary sources that I have relied upon are Macfarlane 1979 and
Dumont 1986. I was led to them by Deepak Lal’s summary of the various
positions on individualism and a guide to the references in Lal 1998: chapters
5 and 6.
22. Thornton 2000: 193.
23. For a discussion of views of Greek individualism, see Dumont 1986: 27–28.
For a discussion of the reasons that the Athenian formulation did not produce
continuing scientific progress, see Stark 2003: 151–54.
24. The positive role of Christianity may be on the verge of renewed intellectual
respectability. Sociologist Rodney Stark’s For the Glory of God (2003) appeared
while this text was in final preparation for publication. Stark’s long chapter on
the role of Christianity in the scientific revolution (121–99) makes a number
of points that are coordinate with my arguments regarding purpose and
autonomy. It also has valuable quantitative data about the religious beliefs of
leading scientists. Christianity’s role also has a place in two recent and
respected analyses of the sources of economic growth, Lal 1998 and Landes
1998.
25. The text paraphrases Dumont 1986: 29–31, who in turn is drawing on the
work of Ernst Troeltsch, For another discussion of this common theme, see
Tarnas 1991: 116-17.
26. Braudel 1993: 347–48.
27. Neither did the Balkans develop individualism, though the relative roles of
the Muslim and Orthodox faiths are difficult to disentangle.
28. Weber 1958.
29. Weber’s thesis is by no means dead, but it has taken a beating. For a recent
assessment of Weber’s standing among economists, see Landes 1998: 194–99
(who himself is inclined to be supportive). For an appraisal of Weber’s characterization of Protestantism, see Novak 1993: 1–11. For an operationalization of Weber’s thesis from a psychologist’s perspective, see McClelland 1961:
47–57.
30. Merton 1970. For a discussion of scholarly reaction to what is known as the
“Merton thesis,” see Cohen 1994: 314–21. See also Stark 2003: 158–60.
31. These are the encounters that produced the greatest outpouring of accomplishment in the arts and sciences. Patai 1977 identifies six great historical
encounters with Gentile cultures: the Canaanites, from the first patriarchs
down to the Babylonian exile; Hellenism, late –4C to +2C; the Arab empire,
beginning in 7C; Renaissance Italy from 14C; Christian sectarian movements
in East Europe in 18C; and modern Western culture from 18C.
32. Catholics also could and did pray directly to God, but as one of several forms
NOTES FOR PAGES 405–411 • 619
of a relationship with God that was mediated by ritual, the priest, and by
the distinctive roles of Mary and the saints as intercessors. My argument is that
direct, unmediated prayer played a larger role in Protestantism than
in Catholicism, and had a commensurately greater effect in producing
mavericks.
33. Russello 1998: 175.
34. The phrase Renaissance Catholicism is short-hand for a moment in history
when Aquinas’s humanism was a new and vital part of Catholicism. I am not
prepared to argue that Protestantism affirmed autonomous efficacy any more
than Renaissance Catholicism did. Indeed, one could argue that the doctrine
of the Calvinist doctrine of predestination should have had a depressing effect
on autonomous efficacy, not an energizing one. Weber’s original essay deals
with this issue most effectively (Weber 1958: 98–128). Simplifying radically,
insofar as predestination was a felt belief (it was not, for many Protestants), its
practical effect was to inspire achievement as a visible proof, to oneself as well
as to others, that one was among the elect.
35. Since I am arguing that the Christian religion is a primary force behind
modern human accomplishment, readers may reasonably ask whether I am
writing out of personal religious conviction. The answer is that I was raised as
a mainstream Presbyterian, was drawn to Buddhism during the six years I
lived in Asia (and still am), currently attend Quaker meetings, and can best be
described as an agnostic.
CHAPTER 20: SOURCES OF CONTENT: THE ORGANIZING
STRUCTURE AND TRANSCENDENTAL GOODS
1. I use chess as the example, but partisans of the Japanese game go could argue
that go takes the prize for richness of structure combined with utter simplicity. Go is played with just one kind of piece (pebbles) and on a board consisting simply of a matrix of lines. The rules can be stated in a few paragraphs.
And yet the game has such depth that, as I write, the same generation of
computers that has completely solved checkers and that can play at the highest levels of grandmaster chess cannot play go better than does a middling
amateur.
2. In practice, scientists who see themselves as faithful to the scientific method
are often hostile to innovation, as witnessed by frequent episodes in the
history of science when the pioneers of new theories were subjected to ferocious attacks and professional ostracism that went far beyond technical criticism of their findings. Such attacks continue to this day. But the strength of
the scientific method is precisely that, by and large, it has successfully kept
open a path whereby the pioneers (or their successors) could eventually be
vindicated if their findings were sound.
3. Lang 1997: 623.
4. Martindale 1990 gives the most extensive treatment of the inherent need of
artists to generate differences from those who have gone before.
5. In the visual arts, one can, for example, categorize the significant figures
according to the school to which they are assigned in art histories—
620 • NOTES FOR PAGES 412–424
Mannerism, Baroque, Impressionist, etc.—and then compare the relative
space given to these schools. But the results are extremely sensitive to how the
schools are defined. If Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, Expressionism, and
Surrealism are all treated as separate schools but the Renaissance is treated as
a single school, then the Renaissance is likely to look much more important.
But the Renaissance can also be broken down by Florentine school,Venetian
school, etc. Since there is no objective way (that I know of) to consistently
define schools, I abandoned the attempt. Similar problems arise with categorizing music and literature.
6. This list comes from the opening of Gilson 1960: 137–63, which provides an
excellent discussion of transcendentals in Catholic philosophy. I am indebted
to Michael Novak for drawing this issue to my attention.
7. Trans. W. D. Ross, in Hutchins 1952: vol. 9, 339.
8. These examples are taken from Plato’s The Republic, Book I, sections 352–53,
in Hutchins 1952: vol. 7, 309.
9. Quoted in Lindley 2001: 226.
10. The equation describes the relationship between entropy and probability. S
denotes the entropy of a system. k is Boltzmann’s constant, which defines the
relation between temperature and energy in each molecule of an ideal gas,
expressed as joules per Kelvin. W is a probability that refers to the number of
microstates for any given state of the system (given any gross distribution of
particles, how many different ways could the particles individually be
arranged to yield that gross distribution?). The equation thus describes
entropy in a way that is inherently probabilistic—a common way for physicists
to think today, but an epochal departure when Boltzmann did his work.
11. The full quote comes from Einstein in his book Die Grundlage des Allgemeinen
Relativitätstheorie (1916): “I adhered scrupulously to the precept of that brilliant theoretical physicist L. Boltzmann, according to whom matters of
elegance ought to be left to the tailor and the shoemaker.” I have been unable
to track down the occasion of Boltzmann’s original remark.
12. The evolution of the role of beauty from the post-impressionists such as
Cézanne and Van Gogh into the more radical forms of art in 20C is vividly
conveyed by letters and essays written by the artists themselves, collected in
Chipp 1968.
13. I use “kill innocent people” as shorthand for “kill people, directly or through
imprisonment or starvation, including women and children, who are not
fighting in an army, but are from classes that are a danger to the revolution.”
That the Soviet Union engaged in such policies was no secret in the 1920s
and 1930s, even though Western intellectuals refused to confront the scale of
those policies.
14. Among the many treatments of the ways in which artists and composers
consciously saw themselves as overthrowing the Western tradition on a grand
scale, two excellent recent ones are Watson 2000: chapter 4, and Barzun 2000:
713–71.
15. Quoted in Barzun 2000: 718.
16. Barzun 2000: 718.
17. Quoted in Maritain 1960: 21.
NOTES FOR PAGES 424–432 • 621
18. Apollinaire 1968: 228.
19. Quoted in Scruton 1997: 55–56.
CHAPTER 21: IS ACCOMPLISHMENT DECLINING?
1. Restrictions apply to that statement. Analyzing changes in the accomplishment rate by specific country becomes more problematic, especially for small
countries with few significant figures to begin with. But the analyses
throughout this chapter aggregate the significant figures across countries, and
I analyze trends over several decades, not decade-by-decade changes. For
these purposes, the correlations between significant figures as I have defined
them and larger populations of artists and scientists are reliably interpretable.
2. For a discussion of the relationship between perceived danger and actual
crime, see Murray 1988: 86–111.
3. I am referring to the “broken windows” theory of crime prevention originated by James Q. Wilson and George Kelling. See Wilson 1983: chapter 5.
4. London’s The Daily Telegraph published an account of the 1899 list and listed
the entries in its edition of 4 January 2000.
5. Chrisafis, Angelique, “Don Quixote is the World’s Best Book Say the World’s
Top Authors,” The Guardian, 8 May 2002.
6. Simonton 1984b.
7. Taagepera and Colby 1979. It should not be assumed that this exponential
decay in attention is caused by lack of information about earlier events. The
sources for 1700–1750 and 1800–1850 that I used in my example are so
complete that they could easily support a level of detail comparable to
1900–1950 in an almanac of major news events of the type that Taagepera and
Colby used. Dean Simonton notes that the same magnitude of epochcentric
bias is seen in histories of China, for which the archival record is highly
detailed well back into the pre-Christian era. Simonton 1990: 131.
8. I obtained histories of art, music, literature, and the sciences written in the
first half of 20C or the latter decades of 19C and compared their treatment of
a given half century with the treatment in the sources used for Human Accomplishment, almost all of which came from late 20C. Thus, for example, the half
century from 1800–1850 is more than a century removed from the sources
used for Human Accomplishment, but only half a century removed from sources
written in early 20C. Did the source written in early 20C devote comparatively more space to 1800–1850 than the later sources did? Some such effects
were observed, but they were much smaller than the effect reported by
Taagepera and Colby 1979.
9. I must hedge the estimate of the percentage because, even in an era of low
urbanization, the factors that produce concentrations of human capital in
cities were at work (see page 355).
622 • NOTES FOR PAGES 433–437
10. The figures for 1900–1950 combined the statistics for the countries that in
1950 were Austria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.
11. Mitchell 1992: Table I2. Britain is omitted because, strangely for a country
that has some statistics stretching back to Elizabethan times, the numbers go
back only to 1922. The number of British university students increased 6.1
times as fast as population during 1922–1950.
12. U. S. Bureau of the Census 1975: Tables A6–8, H751–765, H766–787.
13. My actual best estimates, based on the proportion of population that was
urban and the proportion of the population that had more than a subsistence
income and some rudimentary exposure to education, were 2 percent in
1400, 10 percent in 1800, and 80 percent in 1950. I decided to make the estimates conservative, hence the figures of 10 percent, 25 percent, and 75
percent in the text. Data include the United States and Canada after their
foundings. The values for the de facto population in the intervening years are
based on a geometric interpolation of values between the 1400, 1800, and
1950 estimates.
14. See Moore and Simon 2000 for a convenient summary of trends over 20C.
15. The subsequent statements about the inventory of events refer to the set of
events that were mentioned by more than one source, amounting to 3,499
events.
16. The unweighted counts of people and events are conceptually and arithmetically independent. Whether someone qualified as a significant figure has no
relationship to the number of events that a person might have in the events
inventory. Whether an event qualified for the analysis above had no relationship to whether the scientist responsible for it is in the inventory of persons
(e.g., the invention of the aerosol spray can gets into the inventory of events,
while its inventor doesn’t qualify as a significant figure). The count of significant figures and the summed index scores are not quite arithmetically independent (there is some degree of built-in correlation), but the strength of the
link does not prevent the two measures from taking on very different values,
as the results for the music inventory demonstrate (see page 319). Conceptually, the counts of significant figures and summed index scores are quite
distinct. So much effort was expended creating the index scores for just that
reason: It seemed unlikely that an undifferentiated count of significant figures
would have nearly the explanatory power of a measure that captured the
different eminence of people; a similar logic applied to events. But in fact the
weighted measures, although more satisfactory aesthetically than the count of
significant figures (it rubs against the grain to give Isaac Newton and the
inventor of the ballpoint pen the same score of “1”) tell the same story as the
unweighted counts tell in every case except music. The explanation lies in the
nature of the Lotka curve. The number of significant figures with high index
NOTES FOR PAGES 438–443 • 623
scores is tiny relative to the total number of significant figures, the great
majority of whom have index scores ranging from 1 to 10, not 1 to 100.
17. Stent 1969. The discussion in the text is based on the account of Stent’s views
in Horgan 1997: 9–15.
18. Pauling 1931. This was his most famous single paper. The book laying out his
full theory was published in 1939.
19. Horgan 1997.
20. Quoted in Horgan 1997: 90.
21. Most of what we think of as Elizabethan drama was written by men who
turned 40 after she died in 1603, hence the use of the half-century ending
in 1619.
22. Data are taken from the web pages of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts
and Sciences and of the Writers Guild of America.
23. A search of violinists’ CDs available from Barnes and Noble indicates that the
top dozen violinists monopolize more than 80 percent of all the CDs featuring violinists. Fritz Kreisler, who died in 1962, appears as a performer on 250
CDs, more than twice as many as number 2, Isaac Stern, who died in 2001.
The violinists with the third and fifth highest number of CDs, Yehudi
Menuhin and Jascha Heifetz, died in 1999 and 1987 respectively. The only
active performer among the top five is number 4, Itzhak Perlman.
24. The violinist example draws from Rosen 1981, who introduced some of the
economic theory of winner-take-all markets.
25. Frank and Cook 1995: 32–44. The 11 conditions giving rise to winner-takeall markets are as follow: Production cloning, discussed in the text, refers to the
ability of all consumers to get what they want, giving them the opportunity
to converge on the best. Network economies refers to the advantage of being the
prevalent choice (the reasons VHS won out over the Beta system in video
recording despite its technical inferiority). Lock-in through learning parallels
network economies except it comes from the supply side—the more that has
been invested in a technology, the more research and development it gets in
the next round. Other self-reinforcing processes includes qualities such as prestige—Harvard gets the best applicants partly because it has a reputation as the
place with the best students. Decision leverage refers to situations in which small
differences in the quality of a decision-maker become important because a
single right or wrong decision can have huge consequences. Natural limits on
the size of the agenda is discussed in the text under the heading of Frank and
Cook’s evocative phrase “mental shelf space.” Habit formation is self-explanatory. Purely positional concerns, gifts and special occasions, and avoidance of regret are
all different reasons why we search out the product or person that is considered number one, aside from their intrinsic merits. Concentrated purchasing
624 • NOTES FOR PAGES 444–458
power refers to the effects of great wealth in bidding up the value of things
desired by the very wealthy, whether individuals or corporations.
26. For the theory behind the cases when winner-take-all markets arise when the
quality of products is equal, see Adler 1985.
27. Quoted in Herman 1997: 63.
28. Criticism of Western culture became even stronger in the 1960s and thereafter than it had been before, but the criticism came from a new direction.
The earlier conservative declinists such as Spengler and Toynbee had valued
Western civilization and saw its decay. In the 1960s and thereafter, a new
generation of leftist scholars despised Western civilization, seeing it as a source
of destruction throughout the world, whether of humane values (destroyed by
multinational corporations and globalization) or the environment (destroyed
by multinational corporations and the mindless consumerism of the West).
Postmodernist critiques of the arts are another expression of the left’s disdain
for Western civilization. For thinkers on the right, cultural trends in the
West were already worrisome before the new criticism came along. The
ascendancy of the postmodernists compounded their gloom. The traditional
repository for the best of Western civilization, the university, had been overrun by sophists and intellectual children heedless of the heritage they were
destroying. Thus historian Gertrude Himmelfarb chose the title On Looking
into the Abyss for her critique of postmodernism (Himmelfarb 1994).
29. I highly recommend both Brander 1998 and Herman 1997.
30. Toynbee has an especially persuasive account of this process in a long chapter
entitled “Schism in the Soul.” Toynbee and Somervell 1946: 429–532. For
an essay describing what I see as one aspect of Toynbee’s prescience, see
Murray 2001.
31. Somehow the book containing this story has disappeared from my collection
of science fiction. I may be misremembering some of the details—I recently
heard someone else refer to the story, claiming that Pergolesi, who died at 26,
was the protagonist. My memory says Mozart, and I’m sticking with him.
CHAPTER 22: SUMMATION
1. John Derbyshire (Derbyshire 2003), personal communication, 2002.
2. Gibbon 1952: 84.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The sources used to create the inventories are listed in Appendix 3. The following includes only sources cited in the text.
Abbott, E. A. 1991. Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. Original edition, 1884.
Abraham, G. 1979. The Concise Oxford History of Music. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Adams, J. 1787. A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of
America. London: C. Dilly.
Adler, M. 1985. “Stardom and talent.” American Economics Review 75: 208-212.
Allison, P. D., J. S. Long, and T. K. Krauze. 1982. “Cumulative advantage and
inequality in science.” American Sociological Review 47: 615-625.
American Jewish Historical Society. 1999. American Jewish Desk Reference: The
Philip Leff Group, Inc.
Apollinaire, G. 1968. “The beginnings of Cubism.” Pp. 216–28 in Theories of
Modern Art;A Source Book by Artists and Critics, edited by H. B. Chipp. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Aristotle. 1962. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by M. Ostwald. Indianapolis, IN:
Library of Liberal Arts.
Balsdon, J. P. V. D. 1969. Life and Leisure in Ancient Rome. New York: McGraw Hill.
Barkhausen, M. 1974. “Government control and free enterprise in Western
Germany and the Low Countries in the eighteenth century.” Pp. 212–68 in
Essays in European Economic History 1500–1800, edited by P. Earle. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Barkow, J. H., L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby eds. 1992. The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary
Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barraclough, G. ed. 1993. The Times Atlas of World History. Maplewood, NJ:
Hammond Inc.
Bary, W. T. de, W.-T. Chan, and B. Watson eds. 1963. Sources of Chinese Tradition.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Barzun, J. 2000. From Dawn to Decadence: 1500 to the Present. New York: HarperCollins.
Bate, W. J. 1975. Samuel Johnson. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Bauer, H. H. 1992. Scientific Literacy and the Myth of the Scientific Method. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
626 • BIBLIOGRAPHY
Beardsley, M. C. 1966. Aesthetics from Classical Greece to the Present: A Short History.
Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
Benzon, W. L. 2001. Beethoven’s Anvil: Music in Mind and Culture. New York: Basic
Books.
Bernstein, P. 1996. Against the Gods:The Remarkable Story of Risk. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Bloom, A. 1987. The Closing of the American Mind. New York.
Bloom, H. 1998. Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human. New York: Riverhead
Books.
Boorstin, D. J. 1983. The Discoverers:A History of Man’s Search to Know His World and
Himself. New York: Random House.
Boorstin, D. J. 1992. The Creators: A History of Heroes of the Imagination. New York:
Random House.
Boorstin, D. J. 1998. The Seekers:The Story of Man’s Continuing Quest to Understand
His World. New York: Random House.
Brander, B. G. 1998. Staring into Chaos: Explorations in the Decline of Western Civilization. Dallas: Spence Publishing.
Braudel, F. 1979. The Structures of Everyday Life:The Limits of the Possible. Translated
by S. Reynolds. New York: Harper & Row.
Braudel, F. 1993. A History of Civilizations. Translated by R. Mayne. New York:
Penguin.
Brewer, J. 1997. The Pleasures of the Imagination: English Culture in the Eighteenth
Century. London: HarperCollins.
Brillat-Savarin, J. A. 1826. Physiologie du Goût, ou Meditations de Gastronomie Transcendante. Paris: Sautelet et Cie.
Brookstein, A. 1977. “Patterns of scientific productivity and social change.” Journal
of the American Society for Information Science: 206–210.
Brownstone, D. M. and I. M. Franck. 1994. Timelines of War. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Burke, J. 1975. Connections. Boston: Little Brown.
Burke, J. 1985. The Day the Universe Changed. Boston: Little, Brown.
Bush, S. and H.-y. Shih eds. 1985. Early Chinese Texts on Painting. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cameron, A. C. and P. K. Trivedi. 1998. Regression Analysis of Count Data.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Campbell, J. 1949. Hero with a Thousand Faces. New York: Pantheon.
Campbell, J. 1974. The Mythic Image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Candolle, A. d. 1885. Histoire des Sciences and des Savants Depuis Deux Siècles.
Geneva: Georg.
Casson, L. 1975. Daily Life in Ancient Rome. New York: McGraw-Hill.
BIBLIOGRAPHY • 627
Cattell, J. M. 1903. “A statistical study of eminent men.” Popular Science Monthly,
February, pp. 359–377.
Chipp, H. B. ed. 1968. Theories of Modern Art: A Source Book by Artists and Critics.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cipolla, C. M. 1980. Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy
1000–1700. New York: W. W. Norton.
Clough, S. B. 1968. European Economic History:The Economic Development of Western
Civilization. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Clunas, C. 1997. Art in China. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cohen, H. F. ed. 1994. The Scientific Revolution:A Historiographical Inquiry. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Cowell, F. R. 1961. Everyday Life in Ancient Rome. London: B.T. Batsford.
Cox, C. M. 1926. The Early Mental Traits of Three Hundred Geniuses. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Coxill, D. 1998. “The riddle of the Sphinx.” InScription: Journal of Ancient Egypt:
13–19.
Croce, B. 1902. Estetica come scienze dell’ espressione e linguistica generale.
Cronbach, L. J. 1951. “Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests.”
Psychometrika 16: 297.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1975. Beyond Boredom and Anxiety: The Experience of Play in
Work and Games. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1996. Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention. New York: HarperPerennial.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1997. Finding Flow:The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life. New York: Basic.
Davis,W. S. 1962. A Day in Old Rome:A Picture of Roman Life. New York: Biblo and
Tannen.
De Santillana, G. and H.v. Dechend. 1969. Hamlet’s Mill:An Essay on Myth and the
Frame of Time. Boston: Gambit.
Dennis, W. 1954. “Productivity among American psychologists.” American Psychologist 9: 191–194.
Dennis,W. 1966. “Creative productivity between the ages of 20 and 80 years.” Journal of Gerontology 21: 1–8.
Derbyshire, J. 2003. Prime Obsession: Bernhard Riemann and the Greatest Unsolved
Problem in Mathematics. Washington, D.C.: John Henry Press.
DeVries, J. 1984. European Urbanization 1500–1800. London: Methuen.
DeVries, K. 1992. Medieval Military Technology: Broadview Press.
Dewey, J. 1934. Art as Experience. New York.
Diamond, J. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel:The Fates of Human Societies. New York:
W. W. Norton.
628 • BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dobecki, T. L. and R. M. Schoch. 1992. “Seismic investigations in the vicinity of
the Great Sphinx of Egypt.” Geoarchaeology 10: 527–44.
Dumont, L. 1986. Essays on Individualism: Modern Ideology in Anthropological Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Durant, W. 1935. Our Oriental Heritage. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Eco, U. 1999. “How the bean saved civilization.” New York Times Magazine, April
18, pp. 136–148.
Edgerton, S. Y. 1975. The Renaissance Rediscovery of Linear Perspective. New York:
Basic Books.
Edwards, I. E. S. 1949. The Pyramids of Egypt. London: Penguin.
Eisenstadt, J. M. 1978. “Parental loss and genius.” American Psychologist 33: 211–223.
Ellis, H. 1904. A Study of British Genius. London: Hurst.
Ellis, J. M. 1997. Literature Lost: Social Agendas and the Corruption of the Humanities.
New Haven:Yale University Press.
Elon, A. 2002. The Pity of It All:A History of the Jews in Germany, 1743–1933. New
York: Henry Holt & Co.
Ericcson, A. R. T. and C. Tesch-Romer. 1993. “The role of deliberate practice in
the acquisition of expert performance.” Psychological Review 100: 363–406.
Eysenck, H. 1995. Genius: The Natural History of Creativity. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Farnsworth, P. R. 1969. The Social Psychology of Music. Ames, IA: Iowa State
University Press.
Finer, S. E. 1997. The History of Government. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Forrest, D. W. 1974. Francis Galton: The Life and Work of a Victorian Genius. New
York: Taplinger.
Frank, R. H. and P. J. Cook. 1995. The Winner-Take-All Society:Why the Few at the
Top Get So Much More Than the Rest of Us. New York: The Free Press.
Furnham, A. and C. Bonnett. 1992. “British research productivity in psychology
1980-1989. Does the Lotka-Price law apply to university departments as it does
to individuals?” Journal of Personality and Individual Differences 13: 1333–1341.
Galton, F. 1869. Hereditary Genius: An Inquiry into Its Laws and Consequences.
London: Macmillan.
Gardner, H. 1997. Extraordinary Minds. New York: Basic Books.
Gauri, K., J. J. Sanai, and Bandyopadhyay. 1995. “Geologic weathering and its
implications on the age of the Sphinx.” Geoarchaeology 10: 119–33.
Gay, P. 1966. The Enlightenment:An Interpretation. New York: Random House.
Geary, D. C. 1998. Male, Female: The Evolution of Human Sex Differences. Washington: American Psychological Association.
Gernet, J. 1962. Daily Life in China on the Eve of the Mongol Invasion 1250–1276,
Translated by H. M. Wright. New York: Macmillan.
BIBLIOGRAPHY • 629
Ghiselin, B. ed. 1952. The Creative Process: Reflections on Invention in the Arts and
Sciences. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gibbon, E. 1952. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire:A One-Volume Abridgement by Dero A. Saunders. London: Penguin.
Gillespie, C. C. ed. 1980–1990. Dictionary of Scientific Biography. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons.
Gilson, E. 1960. Elements of Christian Philosophy. Garden City, NY: Doubleday &
Co.
Goetzel,V. and M. G. Goetzel. 1962. Cradles of Eminence. Boston: Little, Brown.
Goldstein, T. 1980. Dawn of Modern Science. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gombrich, E. H. 1995. The Story of Art. London: Phaidon.
Goring, R. 1994. Larousse Dictionary of Writers. Edinburgh: Larousse.
Gowing, L. ed. 1995. Biographical Dictionary of Artists. London: Andromeda Oxford
Ltd.
Greenberg, M. H. 1979. The Jewish Lists. New York: Schocken Books.
Grout, D. J. and C. V. Palisca. 1996. A History of Western Music. New York: W. W.
Norton & Co.
Grunebaum, G. E. v. 1969. Islam: Essays in the Nature and Growth of a Cultural Tradition. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Haitun, S. D. 1983. “The ‘rank distortion’ effect and non-Gaussian nature of scientific activities.” Scientometrics 5: 375–395.
Hall, P. 1998. Cities in Civilization. New York: Pantheon.
Hamilton, E. J. 1934. American Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hancock, G. 1995. Fingerprints of the Gods: A Quest for the Beginning and the End.
London: William Heinemann.
Harrell, J. A. 1994a. “More Sphinx debate: He said, I say . . .” KMT 5: 3–4.
Harrell, J. A. 1994b. “The Sphinx controversy: Another look at the geological
evidence.” KMT 5: 70–74.
Hartwell, R. 1966. “Markets, technology, and the structure of enterprise in the
development of the eleventh century Chinese iron and steel industry.” Journal of
Economic History 26: 29–58.
Hausman, J. 1978. “Specification tests in econometrics.” Econometrica 46: 1251–72.
Hausman, J., Bronwyn H. Hall, Zvi Griliches. 1984. “Econometric models for
count data with an application to the patents-R&D Relationship.” Econometrica
52: 909–38.
Hemming, J. 1993. The Conquest of the Incas. London: Macmillan.
Herman, A. 1997. The Idea of Decline in Western History. New York: Free Press.
Himmelfarb, G. 1994. On Looking into the Abyss: Untimely Thoughts on Culture and
Society. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
630 • BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hodges, P. and J. Keable. 1989. How the Pyramids Were Built. Shaftesbury: Element
Books.
Honour, H. and J. Fleming. 1982. The Visual Arts:A History. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Horgan, J. 1997. The End of Science: Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twilight of
the Scientific Age. New York: Broadway Books.
Hough, R. 1994. Captain James Cook. New York: W.W. Norton.
Huber, J. C. 1998. “Invention and inventivity is a random, Poisson process: A
potential guide to analysis of general creativity.” Creativity Research Journal 11:
231–241.
Hughes, R. 1997. American Visions: The Epic History of Art in America. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
Hume, D. 1997. “Of the standard of taste.”Pp. 76–93 in Aesthetics: The Classic Readings, edited by D. E. Cooper. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hung, W. 1997. “The Origins of Chinese Painting.” Pp. 15–86 in Three Thousand
Years of Chinese Painting, edited by Y. Xin, R. M. Barnhart, et al. New Haven,
CT:Yale University Press.
Hutchins, R. M. ed. 1952. Great Books of the Western World. London: Encyclopedia
Britannica, Inc.
Istituto per la Collaborazione Culturale ed. 1959. Enciclopedia Universale dell’Arte.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Jacobs, J. 1886. “The comparative distribution of Jewish ability.” Journal of the
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 15: 365.
James, P. and N. Thorpe. 1999. Ancient Mysteries. New York: Ballantine Books.
James, W. 1987. “Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking.”
Pp. 479–624 in William James:Writings 1902–1910. New York: The Library of
America.
Janson, H. W. and A. F. Janson. 1997. History of Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams,
Inc.
Jaynes, J. 1976. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Jensen, A. R. 1980. Bias in Mental Testing. New York: Free Press.
Jensen, A. R. 1996. “Genius and giftedness: Crucial differences.” in Intellectual
Talent, edited by C. P. Benbow and D. Lubinski. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Jourdain, R. 1997. Music, the Brain, and Ecstasy: How Music Captures Our Imagination.
New York: Avon Books.
Kanigel, R. 1991. The Man Who Knew Infinity: A Life of the Genius Ramanujan. New
York: Scribners.
Kant, I. 1997. “Critique of aesthetic judgment.” Pp. 94–122 in Aesthetics: The
Classic Readings, edited by D. E. Cooper. Oxford: Blackwell.
BIBLIOGRAPHY • 631
Kaplan, R. 2000. The Nothing that Is: A Natural History of Zero. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kaptchuk, T. J. 1983. The Web that Has No Weaver: Understanding Chinese Medicine.
Chicago: Congdon and Weed.
Kemp, M. 1990. The Science of Art: Optical Themes in Western Art from Brunelleschi to
Seurat. New Haven:Yale University Press.
Kimball, R. 2000. Experiments Against Reality:The Fate of Culture in the Postmodern
Age. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
Kimura, D. 1999. Sex and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Klein, R. G. and E. Blake. 2002. The Dawn of Human Culture. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Kroeber, A. L. 1944. Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Lal, D. 1998. Unintended Consequences:The Impact of Factor Endowments, Culture, and
Politics on Long-Run Economic Performance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Landes, D. S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. New York: W.W. Norton.
Lang, P. H. 1997. Music in Western Civilization. New York: W.W. Norton.
Laozi. 1963. Tao Te Ching. Translated by D. C. Lau. Baltimore, MD: Penguin.
Lawton, I. and C. Ogilvie-Herald. 1999. Giza: The Truth. London: Virgin.
Legoyt, A. 1868. De Certaines Immunités Biostatiques de la Race Juive. Paris.
Lehman, H. C. 1953. Age and Achievement. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Lehner, M. 1997. The Complete Pyramids. London: Thames & Hudson.
Lindley, D. 2001. Boltzmann’s Atom:The Great Debate that Launched a Revolution in
Physics. New York: Free Press.
Lombroso, C. 1910. The Man of Genius. London: W. Scott. Orig. ed., 1889.
Long, J. S. 1997. Regression Models for Categorical and Limited Dependent Variables.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Long, J. S. and J. Freese. 2001. Regression Models for Categorical Dependent Variables
Using Stata. College Station, TX: Stata Press.
Lotka, A. J. 1926. “The frequency distribution of scientific productivity.” Journal of
the Washington Academy of Sciences 16: 317–323.
Lynn, R. In press. “The intelligence of American Jews.” Personality and Individual
Differences.
Lynn, R. and T. Vanhanen. 2002. IQ and the Wealth of Nations. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Macfarlane, A. 1979. The Origins of English Individualism. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Maddala, G. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
632 • BIBLIOGRAPHY
Maddison, A. 1998. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD
Development Centre.
Magill, F. N. ed. 1991. Great Events from History II: Science and Technology Series.
Pasadena, CA: Salem Press.
Mair,V. H. ed. 1994. The Columbia Anthology of Traditional Chinese Literature. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Maquet, J. 1986. The Aesthetic Experience: An Anthropologist Looks at the Visual Arts.
New Haven:Yale University Press.
Maritain, J. 1960. The Responsibility of the Artist. New York: Charles Scribner’s
Sons.
Martindale, C. 1990. The Clockwork Muse:The Predictability of Artistic Change. New
York: Basic.
Martindale, C. 1995. “Fame more fickle than fortune: On the distribution of literary eminence.” Poetics 23: 219–234.
Maslow, A. H. 1943. “A theory of human motivation.” Psychological Review 50:
371–96.
Mattei, J.-F. ed. 1998. Les Oeuvres Philosophiques Dictionnaire. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Mayr, E. 1982. The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McClelland, D. C. 1961. The Achieving Society. New York: D. Van Nostrand.
McEvedy, C. 1992. The New Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. New York: Penguin.
McEvedy, C. and R. Jones. 1978. Atlas of World Population History. New York: Facts
on File.
Mee, C. L. 1975. Daily Life in Renaissance Italy. New York: American Heritage
Publishing.
Merton, R. K. 1968. “The Matthew effect in science.” Science 159: 56–63.
Merton, R. K. 1970. Science,Technology and Society in Seventeenth-Century England.
New York: Harper & Row.
Mitchell, B. R. 1992. International Historical Statistics: Europe 1750–1988. New
York: Stockton Press.
Moles, A. 1958. Information Theory and Esthetic Perception. Translated by J. E. Cohen.
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Moore, S. and J. L. Simon. 2000. It’s Getting Better All the Time: 100 Greatest Trends
of the Last 100 Years. Washington, D.C.: Cato.
Munro, T. 1965. Oriental Aesthetics. Cleveland, OH: Press of Western Reserve
University.
Munson, L. 2000. Exhibitionism:Art in an Era of Intolerance. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
Murphy, L. J. 1973. “Lotka’s law in the humanities?” Journal of the American Society
for Information Science: 461–462.
BIBLIOGRAPHY • 633
Murray, C. 1988. In Pursuit: Of Happiness and Good Government. New York: Simon
& Schuster.
Murray, C. 2001. “Prole models: America’s elites take their cues from the underclass.” in Wall Street Journal. New York.
Needham, J. 1954. Science and Civilisation in China. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Needham, J. 1981. Science in Traditional China. Hong Kong: The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Nicholls, J. G. 1972. “Creativity in the person who will never produce anything
new and useful: The concept of creativity as a normally distributed trait.” American Psychologist 27: 717-727.
Nisbett, R. E. 2003. The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think
Differently . . . and Why. New York: Free Press.
Novak, M. 1993. The Catholic Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. New York: Free
Press.
Ochse, R. 1990. Before the Gates of Excellence: The Determinants of Creative Genius.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Ogden, C. K. and I. A. Richards. 1923. The Meaning of Meaning:A Study of the Influence of Language upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. New York: Harcourt,
Brace.
Olby, R. C., G. N. Cantor, J. R. R. Christie, and M. J. S. Hodge, eds. 1990.
Companion to the History of Modern Science. London: Routledge.
Pacey, A. 1998. Technology in World Civilization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pandey, K. C. 1950. Comparative Aesthetics., vol. 1, Indian Aesthetics. Banaras, India:
Chowkhamba.
Pao, M. L. 1986. “An empirical examination of Lotka’s Law.” Journal of the American
Society for Information Science: 26–33.
Patai, R. 1977. The Jewish Mind. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Pauling, L. 1931. “The nature of the chemical bond: applications of results obtained
from the quantum mechanics and from a theory of paramagnetic susceptibility
to the structure of molecules.” Journal of the American Chemical Society.
Petrie, W. M. F. 1990. The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh (Revised ed.). London.
Pinker, S. 2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New York:
Viking Penguin.
Pipes, R. 1999. Property and Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Popper, K. 1963. Conjectures and Refutations. London: Routledge and Keagan Paul.
Porter, R. and M. Ogilvie eds. 2000. The Biographical Dictionary of Scientists. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Potter, W. G. 1981. “Lotka’s law revisited.” Library Trends: 21–39.
Price, D. 1963. Little Science, Big Science. New York: Columbia University Press.
634 • BIBLIOGRAPHY
Price, D. S. 1976. “A general theory of bibliometric and other cumulative advantage processes.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 27: 192–306.
Protzen, J.-P. 1986. “Inca stonemasonry.” Scientific American, February, pp. 94–103.
Quetelet, A. 1834. Sur l’Homme et le Developpement de ses Facultés. Paris.
Quigley, C. 1961. The Evolution of Civilizations:An Introduction to Historical Analysis.
New York: Macmillan Company.
Randel, D. M. ed. 1996. The Harvard Biographical Dictionary of Music. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Rawls, J. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rebatet, L. 1969. Une Histoire de la Musique. Paris: Robert Laffont & Raymond
Bourgine.
Reischauer, E.O. and J. K. Fairbank. 1958. East Asia:The Great Tradition. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Romano, R. 1974. “Italy in the crisis of the seventeenth century.” in Essays in European Economic History 1500–1800, edited by P. Earle. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ronan, C. A. 1981. The Shorter Science and Civilisation in China: An Abridgement of
Joseph Needham’s Original Text, vol. 2. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press.
Rosen, S. 1981. “The economics of superstars.” AER 71: 845–858.
Rudgley, R. 1999. The Lost Civilizations of the Stone Age. New York:The Free Press.
Rushton, J. and C. Ankeny. 1997. “Race and sex differences in brain size and
cognitive ability.” Advances in cognition and educational practice 4: 24–77.
Russell, B. 1945. A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Russell, P. 1995. The Gay 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Gay Men and
Lesbians, Past and Present. Secaucus, NJ: Citadel Press.
Russello, G. J. ed. 1998. Christianity and European Culture: Selections from the Work of
Christopher Dawson. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press.
Rybczynski, W. 1999. “One good turn: How machine-made screws brought the
world together.” New York Times Magazine, April 18, 133ff.
Sadie, S. ed. 1980. The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. London:
Macmillan.
Sarton, G. 1927–48. Introduction to the History of Science. Washington, D.C.:
Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Saunders, J. J. 1963. “The problem of Islamic decadence.” Journal of World History 7:
701–20.
Sayili, A. 1960. “The causes of the decline of scientific work in Islam” in The Observatory in Islam and Its Place in the General History of the Observatory. Ankara,Turkey.
Schoch, R. M. 1992. “Redating the Great Sphinx of Giza.” KMT 3: 53–59, 66–70.
Schoch, R. M. 2000. “Further evidence supporting a pre-2500 B.C. date for the
Great Sphinx of Giza, Egypt.” Geological Society of America 32: A276.
BIBLIOGRAPHY • 635
Schoch, R. M. and R. A. McNally. 1999. Voices of the Rocks: A Scientist Looks at
Catastrophes and Ancient Civilizations. New York: Harmony Books.
Schonberg, H. C. 1997. Lives of the Great Composers. New York: W. W. Norton
& Co.
Schuster, J. A. 1990. “The Scientific Revolution.” Companion to the History of
Modern Science, edited by R. C. Olby, G. N. Cantor, J. R. R. Christie, and
M. J. S. Hodge. London: Routledge.
Scruton, R. 1997. “The eclipse of listening.” The Future of the European Past, edited
by H. Kramer and R. Kimball. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
Seldes, G. 1985. The Great Thoughts. New York: Ballantine Books.
Settle, T. B. 1983. “Galileo and early experimentation.” Springs of Scientific Creativity: Essays on Founders of Modern Science, edited by R. Aris, H. T. Davis, and
R. H. Steuwer. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Shapin, S. 1996. The Scientific Revolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shedlock, J. S. ed. 1972. Beethoven’s Letters. New York: Dover Publications.
Sheldon, P. M. 1954. “The families of highly gifted children.” Marriage and Family
Living 16: 59–61.
Shiba, Y. 1970. Commerce and Society in Sung China. Translated by M. Elvin. Ann
Arbor, MI: Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan.
Shockley, W. 1957. “On the statistics of individual variations of productivity
in research laboratories.” Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers 45:
279–290.
Simon, H. A. 1955. “On a class of skew distribution functions.” Biometrika 42:
425–440.
Simon, H. A. 1972. “Productivity among American psychologists: An explanation.”
American Psychologist 9.
Simonton, D. K. 1981. “Creativity in Western civilization: Intrinsic and extrinsic
causes.” American Anthropologist 83: 628–30.
Simonton, D. K. 1984a. Genius, Creativity, and Leadership. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Simonton, D. K. 1984b. “Leaders as eponyms: Individual and situational determinants of monarchal eminence.” Journal of Personality 52: 1–21.
Simonton, D. K. 1988. Scientific Genius: A Psychology of Science. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Simonton, D. K. 1990. Psychology, Science, and History: An Introduction to Historiometry. New Haven:Yale University Press.
Simonton, D. K. 1991. “Latent-variable models of posthumous reputation: A quest
for Galton’s G.” Journal of Personal and Social Psychology 60: 607–619.
Simonton, D. K. 1992. “Social context of career success course for 2,026 scientists
and inventors.” PSPB 18: 452–463.
636 • BIBLIOGRAPHY
Simonton, D. K. 1994. Greatness:Who Makes History and Why. New York: Guilford
Press.
Simonton, D. K. 1997a. “Artistic creativity and interpersonal relations.” Pp. 29–53
in Genius and Creativity: Selected Papers. Greenwich, CT: Ablex Publishing.
Simonton, D. K. 1997b. “Foreign influence and national achievement: The impact
of open milieus on Japanese civilization.” JPSP 72: 86–94.
Simonton, D. K. 1997c. “Galtonian genius, Kroeberian configurations, and emulation: A generational time-series analysis of Chinese civilization.” Pp. 55–76 in
Genius and Creativity: Selected Papers. Greenwich, CT: Ablex Publishing.
Simonton, D. K. 1997d. “Sociocultural context of individual creativity: A transhistorical time-series analysis.” Pp. 3–28 in Genius and Creativity: Selected Papers.
Greenwich, CT: Ablex Publishing.
Simonton, D. K. 1998. “Fickle fashion versus immortal fame:Transhistorical assessments of creative products in the opera house.” JPSP 75: 198–210.
Simonton, D. K. 1999. Origins of Genius: Darwinian Perspectives on Creativity. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Sivin, N. 1990. “Science and medicine in Chinese history.” Pp. 164–96 in Heritage
of China: Contemporary Perspectives on Chinese Civilization, edited by P. S. Ropp.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Skinner, B. F. 1938. The Behavior of Organisms:An Experimental Analysis. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Solomon, M. 1998. Beethoven. New York: Schirmer.
Sorokin, P. A. 1937. Social and Cultural Dynamics. New York: Bedminster Press.
Spengler, O. 1926. The Decline of the West, vol. 1. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Stark, R. 2003. For the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations, Science,
Witch-Hunts, and the End of Slavery. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Stent, G. 1969. The Coming of the Golden Age: A View of the End of Progress. Garden
City, NY: Natural History Press.
Steptoe, A. 1998. “Mozart: Resiliance under stress.” Pp. 141–64 in Genius and the
Mind: Studies of Creativity and Temperament, edited by A. Steptoe. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Stigler, S. S. 1999. Statistics on the Table: The History of Statistical Concepts and
Methods. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Storfer, M. D. 1990. Intelligence and Giftedness:The Contributions of Heredity and Early
Environment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Stove, D. 1998. Anything Goes: Origins of the Cult of Scientific Irrationalism. Paddington NSW, Australia: Macleay Press.
Sukenick, R. 1969. “The death of the novel” in The Death of the Novel and Other
Stories. New York: Dial.
Taagepera, R. and B. N. Colby. 1979. “Growth of Western civilization: Epicyclical
or exponential?” American Anthropologist 81: 907–12.
BIBLIOGRAPHY • 637
Taine, H. A. 1889. Philosophy of Art. Translated by J. Durand. New York: H. Holt
& Co.
Tarnas, R. 1991. The Passion of the Western Mind: Understanding the Ideas that Have
Shaped Our World View. New York: Ballantine Books.
Tawney, R. H. 1958. Business and Politics under James I. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Terman, L. M. and M. H. Oden. 1947. The Gifted Child Grows Up: Twenty-Five
Years’ Follow-Up of a Superior Group, vol. 4. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Thornton, B. 2000. Greek Ways: How the Greeks Created Western Civilization. San
Francisco: Encounter Books.
Toynbee, A. J. and D. C. Somervell. 1946. A Study of History:Abridgment of Volumes
I–VI. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trager, J. 1994. The People’s Chronology: A Year-by-Year Record of Human Events from
Prehistory to the Present. New York: Henry Holt & Co.
Trilling, C. 1951. The Liberal Imagination: Essays on Literature and Society. London:
Secker and Warburg.
U. S. Bureau of the Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial
Times to 1970, vol. 1. Washington, D.C.: U. S. Bureau of the Census.
Van Dillen, J. G. 1974. “Economic fluctuations and trade in the Netherlands,
1650–1750.” Pp. 198–211 in Essays in European Economic History 1500–1800,
edited by P. Earle. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Vanhanen, T. 1984. The Emergence of Democracy: A Comparative Study of 119 States,
1850–1979. Helsinki: The Finnish Society of Sciences and Letters.
Vega, G. de la. 1961. The Royal Commentaries of the Incas. New York: Orion
Press.
Vital, D. 1999. A People Apart: The Jews in Europe 1789–1939. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Voos, H. 1974. “Lotka and information science.” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science: 270–272.
Wain, J. 1974. Samuel Johnson A Biography. New York:Viking.
Watson, J. B. 1914. Behavior: An Introduction to Comparative Psychology. New York:
H. Holt.
Watson, P. 2000. A Terrible Beauty: A History of the People and Ideas That Shaped the
Modern Mind. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Weber, M. 1958. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Translated by
T. Parsons. New York: Scribner & Sons.
White, J. 1987. The Birth and Rebirth of Pictorial Space. Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press.
White, L., Jr. 1962. Medieval Technology and Social Change. New York: Oxford
University Press.
638 • BIBLIOGRAPHY
White, R. L. 1959. “Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence.”
Psychological Review 66: 297–333.
Will, G. F. 1990. Men at Work: The Craft of Baseball. New York: Macmillan.
Wilson, D. S. 2002. Darwin’s Cathedral: Evolution, Religion, and the Nature of Society.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, E. O. 1980. Sociobiology: The Abridged Edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Wilson, J. Q. 1983. Thinking About Crime, rev. ed. New York: Basic Books.
Windschuttle, K. 1996. The Killing of History. San Francisco: Encounter Books.
Woods, F. A. 1911. “Historiometry as an exact science.” Science 33: 568–574.
Xin,Y., N. Chongzheng, J. Cahill, L. Shaojun, and W. Hung eds. 1997. Three Thousand Years of Chinese Painting. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Zehou, L. 1981. The Path of Beauty: A Study of Chinese Aesthetics. Translated by
G. Lizeng. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
Zhao, H. and G. Jiang. 1985. “Shifting of world’s scientific center and scientist’s
social ages.” Scientometrics 8: 59–80.
INDEX
Page numbers in italics refer to charts, maps, and illustrations.
Page numbers 589 through 624 refer to notes.
Abbott, Edwin, 209
Abel, Niels, 313
Abraham, 132
absolute monarchy, 371, 372, 373
abstraction, 211, 215–16, 289, 290
Abu Nawas, 138
acceleration, 30
accomplishment:
artistic vs. scientific, 205
biology as factor in, 285
blind spots about, 53–55
categories of, 76
Christianity and, 402–5
delimiting of, 76
environment in, 285
foundations of, 451–52
homosexuality and, 287
in -800, 15
non-European, 258–61, 381
outer boundaries of, 107, 108–9
past 1950, 453–54
popular lists of, 155
population in, 309–29, 309
accomplishment rate, 309–29, 312–28, 427
in the arts, 430, 453
for Chinese literature, 323, 323, 427
decline in, see declining accomplishment
de facto population and, 432–35, 434
meaning of, 429
measuring of, 310–11
population and, 427, 429
in sciences, 430, 453
significant figures vs., 427–28, 428, 436–37,
437, 445–46
for Tuscany in 1500, 433
for Western literature, 427, 429–30
accounting, 229
accumulative advantage, 93–94
achievements, inevitability and, 54
achromatic lens, 414
Ádám, Jeno, 108
Adams, Brooks, 446
Adams, Henry, 446
Adams, John, 371
Adler, Mortimer, 105
Advaita Vedanta school, 132, 144, 326
Advancement of Learning (Bacon), 299
Aeneid (Virgil), 26
aeronomy, 125
Aeschylus, 26, 220, 260, 333, 354
aesthesis, 69
aesthetics, 63–68, 69–70, 71, 224
Africa, Africans, 33, 265
art forms of, 260
decorative arts and crafts in, 261
Nobel Prizes and, 282
science in, 284
Agatharcus of Samos, 213
Agathon, 600
age, 411–12
agnosticism, 408
agriculture, 6, 7, 229, 315
in China, 14, 73
air, composition of, 124
airplanes, 114, 159, 315, 437
air pressure, 240
Akhenaton, 212–13
al-Akhtal, 321
Alberti, Leon Battista, 215, 216, 412
alchemy, 414
Alexander the Great, 27, 220
Alexandria, 17, 275
al-Farazdaq, 321
algebra, Boolean, 228
al-Hamadhani, 321
al-Hariri, 321
al-Khwarizmi, 231–32
al-Ma’arri, 138, 321
Almagest (Ptolemy), 30, 162
al-Mansur, 231
al-Mutanabbi, 138, 143, 321
alphabets, 211, 599
640 • INDEX
America, pre-Columbian, 260, 261
American Association for the Advancement of
Science, 23
American Council of Learned Societies, 257
American League, 104
American Revolution, 9, 50, 335
amusement, 406
Analects (Confucius), 42, 227
analytic geometry, 313
anatomy, 123, 439
Anaxagoras, 316, 333
Anaximander, 30
Anderson, Maxwell, 115
aneroid barometer, 414
anesthetics, 128
Anfinsen, Christian, 605
Angkor Wat, 264
Anglo-Dutch wars, 333
animals, domestication of, 229
Ankara, 6
anthrax, 128
anthropology, 77
antibiotics, 162
Antigone (Sophocles), 26
Antikythera Mechanism, 16–17
anti-Semitism, 276, 281, 286, 292
antisepsis, 162
Antonine Rome, 25, 26–32, 51, 235
anatomy and physiology in, 29, 30
architecture in, 27–28, 30
arts in, 47
governance of, 31–32
history in, 26
law in, 32
life expectancy in, 29
literature and drama in, 26, 31
medical care in, 28–30, 46
painting and sculpture in, 26–27, 30–31, 40
parallels to 21st century life in, 28
philosophy in, 26, 30, 31
policing in, 45
religion in, 31, 41
roads in, 27
science in, 30
technology in, 27–28
water supply and sewage in, 28
Antoninus Pius, 26, 30
Apelles, 27, 260
Apollinaire, Guillaume, 424
Apuleius, 220
Aquinas, Thomas, 223, 402–3, 404, 416, 457,
618
Arabic language, 138, 321
Arabic numerals, 161
as meta-invention, 211, 230, 231–32, 244, 414
Arab literature inventory, 78, 84, 138, 143
accomplishment rate for, 312, 321
Arabs, Arab world, 9, 33, 381, 452
Arabic numerals in, 231–32
arts inventories for, 250, 251
as familistic and hierarchical, 401
literature of, 138, 321
mathematics in, 161, 230
philosophy of, 78, 399–400
scholar-scientists in, 256
science in, 253, 254, 256, 257, 275, 284,
399–401
see also Islam
archaeology, 219
Archimedes, 30, 129, 231, 241, 255
architecture, 77, 214, 215, 260–61
in Antonine Rome, 27–28, 30
of Michelangelo, 54
Argentina, 85
Aristophanes, 26, 220, 333
Aristotelian principle, 385–89, 389, 391, 417,
422, 455–58
Aristotelians, Aristotelianism, 224, 240, 456
Aristotle, 7, 26, 54, 70, 71, 123, 133, 143, 144,
217, 224, 230, 236, 237, 240–41, 255, 260,
316, 332, 333, 385–86, 402, 416, 417, 418,
600
ethics of, 227, 228
logic established by, 225–26, 231
mathematics and, 232
as polymath, 114–15, 130
as System Builder, 152, 153
Arkwright, Richard, 44
armillary, 38–39
Ars Amatoria (Ovid), 10
Ars Magna (Cardano), 242
art, see visual arts
artificial heating, 315
artificial lighting, 315
artists, undiscovered, 109
arts, 455
accomplishment past 1950 in, 453–55
accomplishment rate in, 430, 453
artist as building block of, 207
Catholic humanism in, 402–3
craft in, 411
declining accomplishment in, 440–47, 441
delayed recognition in, 82
difficulty explanations for, 105–6
enduring works in, 63, 453–54
excellence in, 62–72
INDEX • 641
fashion and assessment of, 82, 83
genres in, 206
greatness fatigue in, 445–46
great works vs. great artists in, 206
human capital in, 428, 440–42
market saturation in, 428, 442–44
meta-inventions in, 211, 212–22
organizing structure in, 410
principles in, 411
religion and, 455–57
significant events in, 205–7
significant figures in, 445–46
tools in, 411
transcendental goods in, 420–25
see also specific arts
arts inventories, 84, 121, 144–47, 251, 497–99
accomplishment rate in, 311
Eurocentrism in, 248–51, 249
1950 cutoff for, 82
for non-European world, 250
for persons, 78
women in, 266, 271, 274, 289–90
see also specific inventories
Art Through the Ages (Gardner), 74–75
Ashkenazi Jews, 265, 291–93
Asia, Asians, 265
architecture of, 260
decorative arts and crafts of, 261
Nobel Prizes and, 282
Asia Minor, 230
Assayer,The (Galileo), 240
Assyria, 16, 213
asteroids, 438, 449
astrology, 31, 156
astronomy, 30, 60, 150, 153, 234, 266, 399, 411,
437, 440, 449
central events in, 160–61, 163–66
database for, 76
organizing structures in, 413–14
principles in, 413
astronomy inventory, 122, 143, 311
Jews in, 279
astrophysics, 440
Asvaghosa, 140
asymptotes, 110
As You Like It (Shakespeare), 8
atheism, 408
Athenian principle, 401–2
Athens, 223, 300
logic invented in, 225–26
Periclean Age in, 332–33
atomism, 30
atoms, 126, 437
Augustine, Saint, xviii, 70, 287
Austen, Jane, 71–72, 83
Australia, 43
Austria, 298, 307, 335
Austro-Hungary, 347
Jewish emancipation in, 276
university students in, 433
authors, significant vs. other, 429
autocorrelation, 614
autocracy, 343, 363, 373
autonomous efficacy, 407
autonomy, 391, 394–95, 403–5, 406, 409, 451,
453
in Christianity, 408
culture and, 395
in East Asia, 397–99
in Europe, 401
Islam and, 401
avant-garde, 422
Avicebron (Solomon ibn Gabirol), 275
axioms, 230
Ayrton, Herthe, 272
Aztecs, xvi, 337
Babbage, Charles, 599
Babel, Isaak, 362
Babst,Valentin, 108
Babylon, 399
number system in, 231
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 48, 66, 68, 83, 85, 120,
134, 146, 386, 421, 444, 454, 457
Bacon, Francis, 287, 299, 316
Bacon, Roger, 237
bacteria, 149
Baden-Württemberg, 298
Balkans, 298, 307, 349, 374
Ottoman Empire’s rule of, 363–64, 373
wars in, 335
balloon flights, 114
ballpoint pens, 114
Baltic, 300
Balzac, Honoré de, 318
Banks, Joseph, 43, 49
Barcelona, 357
Baroque:
art in, 299
France in, 357
music in, 299, 417
tonal harmony in, 218
Barrow, Isaac, 313
Barzun, Jacques, 221, 424
baseball, 65, 66, 101, 102, 104
batting average in, 97, 101, 102
642 • INDEX
Basho, 121, 141, 143
Baths of Caracalla, 28
Baudelaire, Charles, 318
Baumgarten, Alexander, 69
Bavaria, 298
BBC, 156
Beagle, 148, 149
beauty, xx, 62, 69, 224, 416, 417, 418, 422, 452,
456
in the arts, 420, 424
in science, 418–19
Beethoven, Ludwig van, xix, 48, 54, 59, 64, 83,
119, 120, 134, 143, 144, 146–47, 153, 155,
207, 319, 392, 454, 597
behavioral sciences, 450
behaviorism, 387
Belgium, 298, 390, 433
Bell, Alexander Graham, 126, 148
bell curve, 87, 88, 92–93, 101, 105, 464–66,
465, 595
in golf skills, 97–98, 98, 99, 595–96
Bellows, George, 115
Bentham, Jeremy, 316
Benton,Thomas Hart, 115
Berenson, Bernard, 69
Berkeley, George, 61
Berkeley, University of California at, 438
Berlin, 305, 357, 368
Berlioz, Hector, 120
Bernini, Gian Lorenzo, 74, 75, 205, 317
Bernoulli, Jakob, 313
Berzelius, Jöns Jacob, 124, 130, 153
Beta coefficients, 341
bias, 84–86
Big Bang theory, 160–61, 381
biochemistry, 149
biographical dictionaries, 108, 151–52, 152
histories vs., 109, 157
biology, 60, 439, 440
central events in, 160, 161, 167–70
classification in, 123
database for, 76
environment vs., 285
as factor in achievement, 285
organizing structures in, 414
sex differences and, 289–91
System Builders in, 152
women in, 270–71
biology inventory, 123, 128, 130, 143, 311
bipedality, 3
Birmingham, 44
Biro brothers, 114
Bismarck, Otto von, 276
Bjørnson, Bjørnstjerne, 121
Black Death, 299
black holes, 122
blitzkrieg, 289
blood, circulation of, 29
Bloom, Harold, 71, 145
Boccaccio, Giovanni, 147, 148, 412
Bohemia, 335
Bohr, Niels, 144
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 419
Bolyai, János, 228
books, 452, 454
Boolean algebra, 228
Boorstin, Daniel, 215
Boston marathon, 101, 102
Boswell, James, 61
botany, 123, 399
Bourbaki, Nicolas, 114
Bow Street Runners, 45
Boyle, Robert, 240, 241, 243, 414
Boyle’s Law, 241
Boylston, Zabdiel, 46–47
Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta (Brahmagupta), 230, 231
Brahms, Johannes, xix, 69, 119, 134, 153, 454
brain size, 289, 589
Braudel, Fernand, 403
Breakthroughs:A Chronology of Great Achievements
in Science and Mathematics, 158
Brick Layers, 147, 151, 152–53
Britain, 73, 85, 251, 307, 309
accomplishment in, 296–98, 338
cities in, 357, 359
Georgian, see Georgian Britain
Industrial Revolution in, 357
Jews in, 276, 280–81
Roman, see Roman Britain
wars and civil unrest in, 335, 347
writers from, 251
see also England
British Open, 100, 101, 104
British Royal Society, 43
brothers, 114–15
Brunelleschi, Filippo, 214–15, 299, 412, 600
Buck, Pearl, 115
Buddha, 132, 133, 223, 224, 262, 326
Buddhism, 41, 223, 402
ethics of, 227
Madhvamika, 326
Mahayana, 132
purpose and, 396–97
bunraku, 141
INDEX • 643
buoyancy, 30
Burke, Edmund, 49
Burke, James, 156
Byron, George Gordon, Lord, 142, 287, 318
Cabezón, Antonio de, 338
cabinetry, 77
Cage, John, 69
calculation, 228
calculators, 159
calculus, 206, 228, 313
Calderon de la Barca, Pedro, 338
Caldwell, Taylor, 444
Calestani,Vinzenzo, 108
calibration of uncertainty, 211, 232–33
Caligula, 32
Calvinism, 404, 618
camera obscura, 215
Campbell, Joseph, 21, 590
Canada, 347, 349
canon, 59, 84, 101
Canon (Pachelbel), 207
Cao Zhan, 222
Cape Horn, 42
capitalism, 337
Capitol building, U.S., 28
Caravaggio (Merisi), 299, 317, 454
carbon, 124
Cardano, Girolamo, 232, 242
Caribbean, 33
Carracci, Annibale, 299
Cather, Willa, 115
Catholicism, 363, 364, 402–5, 407, 618
meditation in, 225
Catlin, George, 250
Cattell, J. McKeen, 73
Cauchy, Augustin, 313
causation, 235–36
Cavalieri, Francesco, 313
CDs, 442–43, 444
celestial motion, 122
Cellini, Benvenuto, 261
Central America, 21
architecture in, 260
science in, 254
Central Europe, 260, 291, 363
central events, 159
in astronomy, 160–61, 163–66
in biology, 160, 161, 167–70
in chemistry, 160, 161, 171–75
in earth sciences, 160, 161, 176–78
in mathematics, 160, 161, 188–93
in medicine, 160, 161–62, 194–97
in physics, 160, 161, 179–87
in technology, 160, 162, 198–204
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de, 221, 318, 338
Ceylon, 33
Cézanne, Paul, xix, 89, 206, 398, 432
chance-configuration theory, 94
Charlemagne, 9
Charles VIII, King of France, 333
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 412
chauvinism:
cultural, 63
national, 85–86
Chemical Abstracts, 90
chemical analysis, 414
chemical nomenclature, 124
chemical reactions, 439
chemical system, body as, 314
chemistry, 53–54, 60, 107, 124, 149, 153, 267,
399, 439, 440
central events in, 160, 161, 171–75
database for, 76
industrial, 315
organizing structures in, 414
quantitative, 124, 160
chemistry inventory, 124, 143, 311
chess, 101, 102, 104, 386–87
Chikamatsu Monzaemon, 141, 143
China, 10, 14, 16, 70, 600
aesthetics in, 70, 90
agriculture in, 14, 37
anonymity in sculpture of, 78
art in, 398, 425, 602
arts inventories for, 250, 251, 262
Communist, 362
cultural activity shut down in, 131, 135, 139,
140, 141
Daoism in, 210
ethics in, 226–28, 244
experimentalism in, 235–37
family in, 397, 401
government in, 14
Han dynasty of, 39
Imperial, 34
inventories for, 84
literature in, 221–22, 328, 398, 602
mathematics in, 228–30, 233
Ming Dynasty of, 33, 34, 266, 398
in -800, 16
models in, 355, 381
musical scales discovered in, 217
music in, 217, 260
644 • INDEX
China (continued)
number system in, 228
paper money in, 229
philosophy in, 223, 224
poets of, 262
purpose in, 396–97
Qing dynasty in, 135
road system in, 37
science in, 253, 254, 255, 256, 262, 284,
398–99, 601
secular observation of nature in, 233, 234–35,
244
in Song Dynasty, see Song China
Tang dynasty of, 40, 135, 322, 323, 420
written language in, 211
Chinese art inventory, 78, 84, 120, 121, 131,
135, 136, 139, 140, 143, 147, 260, 320
Chinese literature inventory, 78, 131, 139, 140,
143, 147
accomplishment rate for, 323, 323, 427
Chinese painting inventory,
accomplishment rate for, 322, 322
Chinese philosophy inventory, 78, 79, 121, 131,
132, 133, 139, 143, 144, 320
accomplishment rate for, 324, 324
cholera, 128
Chopin, Fryderyk, 79
Christianity, 31, 41, 275, 295, 338, 599, 617–18
in Arab world, 321
autonomy and, 408
divisions within, 364
and Greek philosophy, 400
humanism and, 402–3
individualism in, 210, 402–5
medieval, 401, 403
monotheism in, 226
purpose and, 407–8
in Renaissance, 403
Christie, Agatha, 444
chromosomes, 123
chronologies of events, 151–52, 152, 157, 159
chronomoters, 414
Church, Frederic, 115, 250
Cicero, 31, 32, 133
cinematography, 114
cities, 380, 433–34
as accelerant, 358
dummy variables for, 368
elite, see elite cities
with elite universities, 368, 369, 370, 376
entrepôt, 368
human capital of, 358–60
industrial, 368, 369–70
maintenance of, 162
with non-elite universities, 368, 369
as political or financial centers, 367–68, 369,
370, 376
populations of, 367, 376, 381
significant figures and, 369, 370
City of God (Augustine), xviii
Civil War, U.S., 8, 305
Clancy,Tom, 444
class, 25, 432, 447
Classical era, of music, 218
cloning, 418
close textual scrutiny, 254
Club,The, 48–49, 50
cognitive fluidity, 589
cognitive tools, 209, 210, 211, 213, 224, 227,
228, 243–44
Cohen, H. Floris, 400
coherent sense, 417
Coliseum, 27–28
Cologne, 305
Columbia University, 265–66
Columbus, Christopher, 33, 337, 363
combustion, 124
comedy, 354
comets, 438
Coming of the Golden Age:A View of the End of
Progress,The (Stent), 438–39
commerce, 77
meta-inventions in, 229
commercial centers, 399
Communism, 422–23
comparative anatomy, 123
complexity, 360
composers:
significant vs. other, 429
unnamed, 259
composition, rules of, 64
compositional logic, 421
computers, 159, 599
“Concerning the System of the Earth”
(Hutton), 160
concert music, 453
concreteness, 290
Condorcet, Marie, 316
Confederacy, 305
Configurations of Culture Growth (Kroeber), 261,
354
Confirmation of the Rule of St. Francis (Giotto),
214
Confucianism, 41–42, 131, 224, 228, 236, 324,
397, 398, 456
Confucius, 26, 42, 70, 71, 223, 260, 262, 324
INDEX • 645
ethics of, 227, 228
as first in inventory, 120, 131, 132, 133, 139,
143, 144
Congreve,William, 48, 412
Connections, 156
Conrad, Joseph, 427
consciousness, 224
consensus, 68, 452
conservation of matter, law of, 124, 160
Constable, John, 85
construction, 162
Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis, De (Fracastoro),
314
content, choice of, 393–94
controlled data, 238–40
control variables, 344
Cook, James, 42–44
Cook, Philip, 443
Cooper, Anthony Ashley, 48
Copenhagen, 357
Copernican Revolution, 151, 155
Copernicus, 61, 62, 122, 150, 151, 161, 255,
413–14, 597
Copland, Aaron, 262
correlation coefficient, 75, 469–71
correlations, 75, 467–71
Cortez, Hernando, 337
cosmology, 381
Couperin, François, 48, 319
craft, 410, 411, 425
creative personalities, 360
creativity:
predictors of, 354–55
vocation and, 407
credit, 229
assignment of, 242–43
Crete, 338
crime, 430
Critique of Judgment,The (Kant), 69
Croce, Benedetto, 70
Cromwell, Oliver, 9
Csikszentmihalyi, Mikhail, xvii, 388–89
Cubism, 216, 424
cultivated crops, 229
cultural attributes, meta-inventions vs., 210
cultural diversity, 360
culture, 433
autonomy and, 395
cumulative advantage, 353
Curie, Marie, 159, 267, 290
Curie, Pierre, 159
Cush, 16
cutoff point, 111–13
Cuvier, George, 123
Cuzco, 20
Cybele, 31
cyclic quadrilaterals, 230
Czech Republic, 300
Daily Telegraph (London), 431
Dammonis, Innocentius, 108
dance, 77
pre -800, 14
Dandin, 140, 325
Dante Alighieri, xvi, 142, 412
Dao-de Jing (Laozi), 223, 396
Daoism, 41, 210, 223, 236, 324
purpose and, 396–97
Darby, Abraham, 44
Dark Ages, 9, 14, 32, 33, 262
Darwin, 123, 143, 148–49, 157, 255, 407, 457
Darwinian Revolution, 155
Davy, Edmund, 116
Davy, Humphrey, 116, 124
Dawson, Christopher, 405
dead white males, 25, 265
debate, 452
Debussy, Claude, 120, 458
De Caelo (Aristotle), 232
Decameron (Boccaccio), 147
Dechend, Hertha von, 21–22
decimal fractions, 414
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,The
(Gibbon), 26
declining accomplishment, 14–16, 82, 329,
428–47
in the arts, 440–47, 441
epochcentrism in, 431–32
growing de facto population and, 432–35,
434
in science and technology, 435–40
declinists, 446–47
decorative arts and crafts, 77, 261
deductive reasoning, 226, 231
de facto population, 432–35, 434, 447
deference, 397–99
Defoe, Daniel, 412
De Fu, 39–40
Delacroix, Eugene, 75
delayed recognition, 82
Della Pittura (Alberti), 215, 412
De Magnete (Gilbert), 239
democracy, 343, 361, 363
liberal, 228, 361, 371, 372, 373, 375
Democritus, 30, 316, 333
demographics, 331
646 • INDEX
Demos, Raphael, 457–58
De Motu (Galileo), 237, 239, 299
Denmark, 85, 297
polyphony in, 218
Dennis, Wayne, 93
dependent variables, 340, 345, 365
depth, 214
“De Ratioiniis in Ludo Alea” (“Of reasoning
with random lots”) (Huygens), 232–33
Derby, 44
de Santillana, Giorgio, 21–22
Descartes, René, 144, 255, 300, 313, 316, 339
as polymath, 115, 130
despotic governments, 375, 377
detachment, 66
de Vries, Hugo, 339
De Vulgari Eloquentia (Dante), 412
Dewey, John, 70
Diamond, Jared, xvii
Diaspora, 292
diatonic scale, 217
Dickens, Charles, 318
Dictionary of Scientific Biography (DoSB), 108,
257–58, 258, 268–71, 272, 273, 284–85,
603
Diderot, Denis, 316
difficulty explanation:
for arts and sciences, 105–6
for golf, 103–4
diffraction grating, 411
Dimanche Après-Midi à l’Île de la Grande Jatte, Un
(Seurat), 206–7
discount effect, 82
disinterestedness, 65–66
dissection, 314
diversity, 360
divination, 234
Divine Comedy (Dante), 59, 412
diving, 97
division of labor, 229
DNA, 123, 292
Dobecki, Thomas, 23
Donatello (di Betto Bardi), 74
Dong Qichang, 398
Don Quixote (Cervantes), 221
Dorn, Harold, 254–55
Dos Passos, John, 116
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 318
Doyle, Arthur Conan, 444
drama, 138, 140, 412, 600
as meta-invention, 211, 219–20, 244
popular, 447
drawing of three-dimensional objects, 414
Dream of the Red Chamber (Cao Zhan), 222
Dream Pool Essays (Shen Gua), 39
Dreiser, Theodore, 116
Du Bois,W. E. B., 446
Duccio, Agostino, di, 214
Du Fu, 139, 143, 144, 323
dummy variables, 343
for cities, 368
for country, 373–75
for time, 344, 375
Durandus of Saint Pourçain, 238
Durbin-Watson statistic, 614
Dürer, Albrecht, 74, 75, 89, 144, 317
duty, 406–7, 452
Dyck, Anthony van, 317, 339
dynamite, 315
earth sciences, 60, 153, 414
central events in, 160, 161, 176–78
database for, 76
earth sciences inventory, 121, 125, 143, 311
East Asia, 381, 452
art forms of, 260
autonomy in, 397–99
purpose in, 396–97
science in, 257, 275
Eastern Europe:
Jews from, 281, 291
totalitarian states in, 362
wars in, 335
eclipses, 39, 234
economic conditions, 331
economics, statistical analysis in, 233
economy, 17C European, 403
Ecstasy of Saint Teresa (Bernini), 205
Edison, Thomas, 121, 126, 129, 143, 393
as Brick Layer, 153
education, 432, 433
university, 433
effectance, 388
Egypt, ancient, 10, 14, 16, 21, 23–24, 70, 222,
228
artistic conventions in, 212–13
astronomy in, 399
climate in, 23
gods in, 234
government in, 14
mathematics in, 228
number system in, 228, 231
technological puzzles of, 17–20
written language in, 211
-800, accomplishment as of, 13–24
-800 to 1400, events during, 262–63, 263
INDEX • 647
-8000, conditions in, 3–7
1848 revolutionary movements, 446
1812 Overture (Tchaikovsky), 386
eikos, 232
Eine Kleine Nachtmusik (Mozart) 72
Einstein, Albert, 7, 59, 126, 130, 143, 144, 254,
419, 455, 457
Einsteinian Revolution, 155, 453
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 8
Eitoku, 327
Electra (Euripides), 26
electrical charge, 414
electrical conduction, 414
electric technology, 315
electromagnetic fields, 122
electron microscopy, 123
elements, 124, 414
Elements (Euclid), 231
Elert, Piotr, 108
Elgin marbles, 26
Eliade, Mircea, 21, 590
Eliot, George, 207
Eliot, T. S., 422
elite cities, 355–61, 356, 359, 379, 399, 409,
613
regression analyses for, 367–70, 369, 370
elites, 447
elitism, 86
Elizabethan drama, 48
Elizabeth I, 8, 44, 442
Ellington, Duke, 115
eminence, 59, 73, 450
current fashion and, 81–83
distribution of, 87–90, 88, 92, 94
giants in, 119–54
index scores for, 79–80, 151–52, 152, 475–93
as measure, 249
measurements of, 73–75
significant figures as measure of, 78–79
emotion, 66
empiricism, 226
Enciclopedia Universale dell’Arte, 108
encyclopedic sources, 108–9, 110, 602–3
Encyclopédie Philosophique Universelle, 108
Endeavor, 42–44
End of Science,The (Horgan), 439
engineering, 228
statistical analysis in, 233
women in, 286
England, 27, 297, 335, 403
Elizabethan, 440–42
Enlightenment in, 49–50
industrial cities of, 360
Jewish emancipation in, 276
the novel in, 220–22
as parliamentary monarchy, 371
railroads in, 255
Renaissance in, 71
Southeast, 298, 375
Southwest, 298
see also Britain
English Historical Review, 156
enjoyment, 386, 388
Enlightenment, xviii, 142, 300, 316, 405, 407,
447, 457
in England, 49–50
in France, 50, 357
in Scotland, 50
environment:
biology vs., 285
women and, 286–87
Epicurus, 316
epistemology, 61, 224, 225
epochcentric bias, 82, 431–32, 434, 436,
437–38, 445, 447
equality, excellence and, 450
equations, indeterminate, 230
equinox, 22, 39
Erasistratus, 29
erosion, 39
Essai sur L’Inégalité des Races Humaines
(Gobineau), 446
Essay Concerning Human Understanding (Locke),
49
ethics, 61, 224, 226–28, 418
as meta-invention, 211
ethnicity, 432
ethnic minorities, 265
Euclid, 127, 130, 230, 231, 255
Eudoxus, 333
Euler, Leonhard, 127, 143, 449
Eurasia, 14
Euripides, 26, 220, 260, 333, 354
Eurocentric hypothesis, 247–48
Eurocentrism, 84–85, 603
in arts inventories, 248–51, 249
meditation and, 225
in scientific inventories, 251–58, 252
Europe, 34, 299, 346, 451
anonymous art in medieval, 260
architecture in, 260–61
autonomy in, 401
calibration of uncertainty in, 232–33
Christianity in, 275, 295, 338, 402–5
cities in, 367–70, 433
core area in, 295–99, 296, 297, 298
648 • INDEX
Europe (continued)
decline in dominance of, 264
declinism in, 446–47
decorative arts and crafts in, 261
de facto population in, 432–35
domination of inventories by, 143, 247–64,
248, 265
famines in, 47
Jews in, 276, 278, 291
major wars in, 334–35, 420
medieval, 260, 420, 458
the novel in, 220–22
population and accomplishment in, 310
post-Roman, 14
Protestant, 407
purpose in, 401
science in, 275, 299–300
scientific method in, 235–43
secularization of, 405
significant figures in, 299–300, 301–3
Western civilization as, 262
Euthymedes, 213
evolution, 30, 123, 148–49
beauty in, 419
of earth, 160
gender and, 289, 290
of landforms, 414
Neptunist theory of, 53
evolutionary psychology, 64
excellence:
in the arts, 62–72
capacity for, 389, 391
differences in, 95
equality and, 450
fame vs., 94, 95–96, 101, 106
identification of, 59–86
importance vs., 62
operational measures of, 72–75
opinion and, xvi, 59–60
reality of, 449–50
in science, 60–62
in sports, 97–101, 98, 99, 100, 102
work involved in achieving, 392–93
excellent, direct vs. indirect measures of,
102–3
existentialism, 422
expected values, 342–43
experimental psychology, 387
experimentation, 237–39, 299, 414
expertise, judgment and, 66–68
explanatory variables, 379
Expressionism, 216
Eyck, Jan van, 75, 412
fables, 140
face validity, 80
Lotka curve and, 95–96
factory system, 315
Fahrenheit, Daniel, 339
falsification, principle of, 238, 601
fame:
excellence vs., 94, 95–96, 101, 106
in literature, 95
families, accomplishment in, 114–15
familism, familial constraints, 395, 397, 452
famine, 47
Faraday, Michael, 126, 353, 432, 436
Faulkner, William, xix, 422, 423
Fauvism, 216
Federalist Papers, 228
Fedin, Konstantine, 362
Ferdinand, King of Spain, 364
Fermat, Pierre de, 232, 313
Feynman, Richard, 440
Fichte, Johann, 316
Fielding, Henry, 45, 48, 221, 412
Fifth Symphony (Beethoven), 54, 155, 207
film, 114, 221, 429–30, 442, 453, 454
findings, dissemination of, 242–43
Finer, S. E., 362, 371
Finland, 298
fire, 3, 4, 155
Fischer, Bobby, 104
Five Women Who Loved Love (Ihara), 222
fixed-effects model, 373, 610
fixed-effects option, 375–77
Flatland (Abbott), 209
Flaubert, Gustave, 318, 427
Fleming, Alexander, 149–50
Florence, 27, 215, 296, 305, 368, 433
Renaissance, xix, 333, 337, 339, 350
as republic, 362
Florence cathedral, 205, 214
flow, 388
folklore, 260
foreshortening, 213
form, 240
Fox, James, 49
Fracastoro, Girolamo, 314
fractions, decimal, 414
France, 73, 85, 251, 266, 307, 309, 317
accomplishment in, 296–98, 310–11, 338
autocracy in, 363
Baroque, 357
cities in, 357, 358, 359
Enlightenment in, 50, 357
existentialism in, 423
INDEX • 649
famine in, 47
Florence invaded by, 333
Jews in, 276, 280–81
La Belle Époque in, 333
musical polyphony in, 217–18
population density of, 344
troubadors from, 260
university students in, 433
wars and civil unrest in, 335, 346–47
writers from, 251
Franco-Prussian war, 333
Frank, Robert, 443
Frederick the Great, 9
freedom, order vs., 411
freedom of action, 361–64, 379, 380, 409
de facto, 373–75, 374
regression analysis for, 371–75, 372, 374, 377
free will, 458
French Revolution, 9, 28, 50, 9, 28, 50, 312, 371
frequency distribution, 461–66, 462
explanation of, 462–63
standard deviation and, 463
frescoes, 214, 215
Freud, Sigmund, 128, 149, 407, 457
Freudian Revolution, 155
Fujiwara Teika, 328
functional objects, 261
Gabbey, Alan, 241
Gabirol, Solomon ibn (Avicebron), 275
Gainsborough, Thomas, 48
galaxy, size of, 160
Galen, 29, 128, 415
Galileo, 122, 126, 143, 237, 239, 240–41, 255,
299, 312
telescope of, 242–43
Galois, Evariste, 313
Galton, Francis, 73, 93, 94
gambling, 232, 242
game, 59
Gansu, 37
gardening, 65, 66
Gardner, Helen, 74–75
Gardner, Howard, xvii
garment industry, 315
Garrick, David, 49
gas lighting, 315
Gates of Paradise (Ghiberti), 205
Gauss, Carl, 127, 231, 265, 313, 449
Gay, Peter, 50
Gay 100,The, 287
Gehrig, Lou, 104
genes, 123
genetics, 123, 130, 440
research in, 418
Geneva, 357
genius, 93
undiscovered, 109
geocentric solar system, 30, 161
geography, 399, 439, 505–11, 508
Geography of Thought,The (Nisbett), 397
Geological Society of America, 23
geologic history, 414
geologic map, 414
geology, 53, 125, 399, 440
geometry, 127, 214, 230
analytic, 313
non-Euclidean, 228
Georgian Britain:
comfort in, 45–46
medicine in, 46–47
physics in, 45
transportation in, 45
Georgian London, xix, 25, 42–51
astronomy in, 42–43
as center of Western civilization, 44
drama in, 48
dynamism of, 51
illiteracy in, 51
intellectual life in, 48–49
literature in, 47
music in, 47, 48
painting in, 47–48
physical conditions of, 44–45
policing in, 45
right to vote in, 51
theater in, 47
wealth and poverty in, 45, 51
women’s rights in, 51
Gericault,Theodore, 205
Germany, 73, 85, 251, 375
accomplishment in, 296–98, 300, 338
cities in, 357, 358, 359, 613
earlier borders of, 300
Jews in, 275, 276, 280–81, 307
Nazi, 277, 281, 307, 371
pre-unification, 363, 373
university students in, 433
wars and civil unrest in, 332, 335, 336, 340,
357
World War II and, 332
writers from, 251
germs, 314
Ghiberti, Lorenzo, 205
giants, 119–54
Gibbon, Edward, 26, 31, 32, 49, 455
650 • INDEX
Gide, André, 424
Gilbert, William, 239, 312
Giotto di Bondone, 74, 89, 214, 421
Giza, 18–19, 20, 23–24
Glasgow, 44, 297
glasses, 129
Glorious Revolution (England), 50, 371
Gluck, Christoph, 48
go (game), 619
Gobineau, Arthur de, 446
God, as Clockmaker, 49
Goethe, Johann, 142, 147, 259, 318
Gogh,Vincent van, 89, 206
Gogol, Nikolay, 318
Goldberg, Steven, 289
Golden Ass (Apuleius), 220
Goldsmith, Oliver, 48, 49
Goldstein, Thomas, 399
golf, 97, 107
bell curve in basic skills, 97–98, 98, 99,
595–96
component skills of, 97
difficulty explanation in, 103–4
Majors in, 100–101, 100, 103
tournament wins in, 97–101, 99, 100
Gombrich, Ernst, 145, 213
Goncourt brothers, 114
Gongora y Argote, Luis de, 318, 338
goodness, 416, 417, 418, 422, 452, 456
in the arts, 421–22
existentialism vs., 423
in science, 418
Gorky, Maxim, 423
Gothic cathedrals, 458
government, 14, 77
consent of the governed, 229
as contractual, 229
despotic, 375
limited, 361
meta-inventions in, 229
purpose of, 229
Goya, Francisco, 89, 338, 421
Grafton, Sue, 443, 444–45
gravity, 161, 414
Gray, Elisha, 148
greatness fatigue, 445–46
Great Pyramid, 17–19, 23
Great Revolution (Netherlands), 347
Great Sphinx of Giza, 23–24
Greco, El (Domenikos Theotokopoulos), 216,
338
Greece, ancient, xvi, 16, 26, 30, 360, 399
aesthetics in, 70
art in, 230
artistic realism in, 212–13, 600
drama in, 219–20, 354, 600
ethics in, 226–28, 244
individuality in, 210, 401–2
linear perspective in, 213–14
logic in, 54
mathematical proofs in, 228–31
mathematics in, 161
music in, 217
myths of, 260
number system in, 231
painting and sculpture in, 26, 27, 136, 137,
213–14, 322
philosophy in, 78, 223–24, 354, 399, 400,
416, 456
poetry in, 266, 393
sculpture of, 398
secular observation of nature in, 234–35,
244
wars in, 335, 346
Greek chorus, 219
Grimm brothers, 114
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 339, 346,
349–51, 376, 381
Grosseteste, Robert, 237–38
Groundhog Day, 45
Grout, Donald, 109–10, 109
Grun, Bernard, 157
Grunebaum, G. E. von, 400
Gu Kaizhi, 135, 136, 143
Guldin, Paul, 275
Gulf War, 8
gunpowder, 155, 255
Gutenberg, Johannes, 157, 159
Gutenberg Bible, 412
gymnastics, 97
habit formation, 444–45, 623
haikai, 141
haiku, 141, 212, 410, 411
Hale, George Ellery, 122
Halley, Edmond, 43
Hals, Frans, 317, 339
Hamburg, 357
Hamilton, William, 313
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 155
Hamlet’s Mill (de Santillana and von Dechend),
21–22
Handel, George Frideric, 48, 63, 207, 319
Han Gan, 322
Hangzhou, in Song Dynasty, see Song Hangzhou
happiness, 224
INDEX • 651
hard sciences:
fashion and assessment of, 82
organizing structures in, 413–14
statistical analysis in, 233
statistical significance in, 342
truth in, 60, 453
hard sciences inventories, 121, 130, 251
accomplishment rate in, 311, 312, 312
women in, 266, 270
Hardy, Thomas, 427
harmonic systems, 319
harmony, tonal, 217, 218, 410, 413
Harte, Bret, 116
Harvard Biographical Dictionary of Music, 109–10
Haydn, Joseph, 48, 134, 319
Heaney, Seamus, 431
heating, 45–46
Hegel, G. W. F., 70, 133
Heine, Heinrich, 318
heliocentrism, 62, 161
Hellenistic age, 399, 402
Helvetius, Claude, 316
Hemingway, Ernest, 116, 445
Heraclitus, 225, 316
Herder, Johann, 275, 316
Hereditary Genius (Galton), 73
heredity, 437
Herman, Arthur, 446
Herodotus, 19, 26, 333
Herschel, Caroline, 266
Herschel, William, 122, 150–51, 266
as Brick Layer, 153
Hertz, Gustav, 605
high aesthetic quality, 62–63, 68, 420
high culture, alienation of, 424–25
high-value culture pattern, 354
Hinduism, 41, 132, 140, 144, 223, 230, 231,
326, 402
meditation in, 224–25
Hipparchus, 22
Hippocrates, 128, 143, 234, 333
as System Builder, 152, 153
Hisab al-jabr w’al-musqabalah (al-Khwarizmi),
231–32
Histoire de la Musique, Une (Rebatet), 109–10
histories, 112, 151–52, 152, 205
of American art, 250
biographical dictionaries vs., 109, 157
literary vs. art and music, 142
historiography, 237
historiometry, 60, 73, 92
history:
laws of, 446
of science, 206
History of Art (Janson), 74–75
History of Western Music (Grout), 109–10, 109
Hitler, Adolf, 281
Hittite civilization, 16
Hobbes, Thomas, 133, 300, 316
Hogarth,William, 45, 48
Holocaust, 277
Homer, 10, 26, 63, 114, 140, 142, 219, 222
Homo erectus, 3
Homo sapiens, xix–xx, 3, 4, 5, 154, 224
homosexuality, 287
Hon’ami Koetsu, 136, 327
Honolka, Kurt, 109–10, 109
Hope, Bob, 155
Hopper, Edward, xvi
Horace, 31
Horgan, John, 439
Horner’s method, 230
How Much Is that Doggy in the Window, 72
Huangzhou, 25, 32–42
Hubble, Edwin, 122
Hubble’s Law, 122
Hubei, 37
Huckleberry Finn (Twain), 421
Hugo,Victor, 318, 421
human capital:
in the arts, 428, 440–42
in cities, 358–60
population vs., 428, 435
in science, 435
human condition, 421
Humani Corporis Fabrica, De (Vesalius), 314
humanism, 402–3
Hume, David, 63–64, 68, 70, 71, 72, 316
humors, 415
Hunan, 37
Hungary, 251, 298, 335
Hutton, James, 53, 125, 160, 236
Huygens, Christiaan, 129, 130, 232–33, 313,
333, 339
Hypatia of Alexandria, 266
hyperbolic curve, 99, 103
see also Lotka curve
Hypocrites (Answerer), 219
hypothesis, 237–38
Iberian peninsula, 363
Ibsen, Henrik, 121, 318
Ihara Saikaku, 222
Ikeno Taiga, 327
Île de France, 298
Iliad (Homer), 10, 26, 114, 219
652 • INDEX
immigration, 305–7
importance, 59
excellence vs., 62
Impressionism, 206, 216, 317, 411
Imru’ al-Qays, 321
Incas, 20, 337
independent variables, 340, 365, 375–76
separate analysis of, 345–46
indeterminate equations, 230
indexes, 597–98
index scores, 79–80, 88–89, 95, 311, 312, 436
creation of, 481–86
distribution of, 89–90, 89
for eminence, 79–80, 151–52, 152, 475–93
face validity of, 80
as not comparable across inventories, 120
relativity of, 120–21
same vicinity of, 120
statistical reliability of, 80–81
top 20, 119–21
value of, 487–90
of women, 267–68, 269
India, 9, 33, 381
aesthetics in, 70
anonymity in art of, 78, 260
Arabic numerals invented in, 231–32
arts inventories for, 250, 251, 262
astronomy in, 399
cultural activity hiatus in, 135, 140, 141
drama in, 219–20, 244
ethics in, 226–28, 244
family in, 401
inventories for, 84
literature in, 221–22
mathematics in, 161, 228, 256, 399
meditation in, 224–25, 244
Mughal empire in, 140
music notation lacking in, 217
number system in, 228, 231–32, 244
philosophy in, 223, 224, 324
science in, 253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 259, 284
Indian literature inventory, 78, 140, 143, 147,
320
accomplishment rate for, 325, 325
Indian philosophy inventory, 78, 121, 132, 133,
143, 144, 320
accomplishment rate of, 326, 326
Indic civilization, 14, 16
indirect proofs, 231
individualism, 401, 452
Christianity and, 210, 402–5
Greek, 210, 401–2
Jewish, 210, 404
Stoic moral, 402
Western, 210, 401–5
inductive proof, 231
Indus-Sarasvati civilization, 224–25
industrial chemistry, 315
industrial processes, statistical analysis in, 233
Industrial Revolution, xviii, 44, 300, 315, 357,
414, 447
Inevitability of Patriarchy,The (Goldberg), 289
infectious diseases, 128, 314, 415
inflation, 337
influenza, 46
information storage, punch cards in, 159, 599
innovation vs. tradition, 395, 397–99, 452
inoculation, 47
Inquisition, 363, 373, 375
intellect, 404
intellectual fashion, 67–68
intelligence, 93
interchangeable parts, 315
internal combustion engine, 315, 435
Introduction to the History of Science (Sarton), 256
inventories, 76–80
construction of, 475–90
sources of, 491–503
inventory-specific issues, 485–86
invertebrate zoology, 123
Invisible Hand, 50
IQ:
Jews and, 291–92
in men vs. women, 289
Iran hostage crisis, 8
Ireland, 298
iron, 38, 315
irrigation, 7, 162
Isabella, Queen of Spain, 364
Isis, 31
Islam, 41, 321
autonomy and, 401
golden age of, 399–401
and Greek philosophy, 400
Orthodox Christianity and, 402
purpose in, 400
see also Arabs, Arab world
Israelites, 16
Istituto per la Collaborazione Culturale, 108
Italy, 85, 307, 373
accomplishment in, 296–98, 338
cities in, 357, 358, 359, 613
city-states in 12C, 34
Jewish emancipation in, 276
INDEX • 653
linear perspective in, 213–15
Papal States in, 298
pre-unification, 373
Renaissance in, 299, 337, 357, 407, 417, 420
Spanish Hapsburg rule in, 357
Jacquard, Joseph-Marie, 159
Jacquard loom, 159, 599
James, Henry, 68, 69, 427
James, William, 60
Janson, H. W., 74, 75
Japan, 9, 85
arts inventories for, 250, 251, 262
family in, 397, 398
inventories for, 84
literature in, 221–22, 328
philosophy in, 78
purpose in, 396–97
science in, 255, 284, 399
technology in, 399
World War II and, 332
Japanese art inventory, 78, 121, 136, 143, 147,
320
accomplishment rate in, 327, 327
Japanese literature inventory, 78, 141, 143, 147,
267
accomplishment rate for, 328, 328
Jarir, 321
Java, 33
Jenner, Edward, 47
Jerusalem, 27
Jesus, 10, 132, 223, 353
jewelry, 77
Jews, Judaism, 41, 275–83, 364, 605–6
in Antonine Rome, 29
Ashkenazi, 265, 291–93
culture of, 292–93
Diaspora of, 292
disproportionate representation by, 278–82,
279, 280, 285–86, 291–93
emancipation of, 266, 276, 278
emergence of achievement by, 276–77, 277
genetics and, 292
immigration of, 281, 307
individualism in, 210, 404
IQ and, 291–92
learning valued by, 291–93
legal restrictions on, 276
in literature inventory, 275
at Masada, 32
in mathematics inventory, 275
monotheism in, 226
in music inventory, 275, 277
Nobel Prizes of, 281–82, 282, 283
Oriental, 291
in philosophy inventory, 275, 277
population of, 278
since 1950, 281–82, 282, 283
Jiangxi, 37
Jin Pingmei, 222
Jocho, 327
Johnson, Samuel, 44, 49, 51, 61
London of, xix, 25, 42–51
Jones, William, 49
Jonson, Ben, 318
Joyce, James, 422
judgment, xvi, xviii, 64, 68–69
consistency of, 72
expertise and, 66–68
knowledge and, 65–66
objective aesthetic, 69–70
“judgmental,” 60, 71
Juizhang Suanshu, 228
Julius Caesar, 10, 32, 398
Julius Caesar (Shakespeare), 8
Jung, Carl, 21, 590
Jupiter, 242–43
Kabalevsky, Dmitry, 362
Kac, Mark, 153–54
Kafka, Franz, 431
Kaifeng, 37
Kalf,Willem, 215–16
Kalidasa, 140, 143, 144, 147, 220, 325
Kandinsky,Vasily, 425
Kano school, 327
Kant, Immanuel, 61, 65–66, 69, 70, 71, 133, 316
Katayev,Valentin, 362
Kazantzakis, Nikos, 431
Keats, John, xx, 54, 318, 419
Kennedy, John F., 8
Kepler, Johannes, 143, 255
Kern, Jerome, 115
Khafre, 23
Khrushchev, Nikita, 8
Khufu, 17, 23
King, Helen Dean, 270, 272
King Lear (Shakespeare), 207
Ki no Tsurayuki, 328
Kinsay, see Song Hangzhou
Kleine Chirugia, Die (Paracelsus), 314
knowledge, judgment and, 65–66
known unknowns, 17–20
Koch, Robert, 128
654 • INDEX
Koch’s postulates, 128
Kokei, 327
Kokinshu, 328
Korean War, 8
Kovalevskaya, Sonya, 265–66
Kreisler, Fritz, 443, 622
Kreutzer sonata (Beethoven), 76
Kroeber, A. L., 261, 354, 381
Kuhn, Thomas, 155
Kulturfahrplan (Stein), 157
labor, division of, 229
Lafayette, Madame de, 221
lagged variables, 365, 614
Lamarck, Jean, 123
Lamarckism, 123
Lamentation,The (Giotto), 421
Landes, David, 253
landscapes, 212
Lang, Paul, 83, 146, 207, 411
language:
development of, 5
written, 210–11
Laocoön, 26
Laozi, 131, 133, 139, 210, 223, 324, 396
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 122
Last Judgment (Michelangelo), 54
Last Supper (Leonardo), 205, 333
Latin, 412
Latin America, Nobel Prizes and, 282
La Tour, 317
Lavoisier, Antoine, 53, 124, 130, 143, 159, 436
law, 14, 32
legends, 114–15
Lehner, Mark, 18, 19
Leibniz, Gottfried, 130, 206, 228, 313, 316
Leipzig, 305, 368, 419
Le Nain brothers, 114
Leonardo da Vinci, 74, 75, 129, 144, 155, 205,
287, 315, 317, 333, 414
as polymath, 114
as System Builder, 152–53
Léonin (Leoninus), 218
Lesage, Alain, 412
Lessing, Doris, 431
Letters on the English (Voltaire), 50
Leucippus, 30, 234
lever, 30, 129
Lewis, Sinclair, 116
Lewis, Wyndham, 423
Lexikon der Kunst (Stadler), 74–75
liberal democracy, 228, 361, 371, 372, 373, 375
Li Bo, 259, 323
Libyans, 16
Life of an Amorous Man,The (Ihara), 222
light:
shading of, 213
spectra of, 411
Limbourg brothers, 114, 205
limited monarchy, 343
Limoges, France, 218
Lindgren, Astrid, 431
linear perspective, 211, 213–15, 299, 411, 412
Lippmann, Walter, 105
Li Qingzhao, 39–40
literary criticism, 254
literature, 44, 452, 455
craft of, 411
database for, 76
delayed recognition in, 82
environment for, 429
fame in, 95
as meta-invention, 219
organizing structure in, 410
other inventories and, 366–67, 367
polymaths in, 114
popular, 447
pre -800, 14
principles of, 411
structural changes and, 412
television and film vs., 429–30, 442
tools of, 411, 412
transcendental goods in, 422–23
truth in, 421
Western vs. non-Western figures in, 259
women in, 271, 274, 274, 290
literature inventories, 494–97
Jews in, 275, 282
women in, 266
see also specific inventories
Liu Jo, 236
Lobachevsky, Nikolay, 228, 313
Locke, John, 49–50, 133, 144, 229, 316
logarithms, 313
logic, 225–26, 450
Aristotelian, 231
Boolean algebra and, 228
formal, 54
mathematical, 230, 231
as meta-invention, 211, 224
logical fallacies, 226
logograms, 211, 599
London, 35, 216, 299, 300, 305, 357, 360, 431
Great Fire of 1666 in, 44
Samuel Johnson’s, see Georgian London
in 12C, 34
INDEX • 655
London, Jack, 116
Lope de Vega, 318, 338
Lorenzetti, Ambrogio, 214
Lorrain, Claude, 317
Lotka, Alfred James, 90–91, 99, 105, 107
Lotka curve, 91–96, 92, 99, 100, 101, 102–7,
102, 112, 119, 158, 353
bell curve vs., 93
Top Five in, 96
women in, 267–68, 269
Louis XIV, King of France, 9, 363
Low Countries, 317
Lucian, 30–31
Lumière brothers, 114
Luther, Martin, 403, 405
Lutheranism, 404
Lyell, Charles, 121, 125, 143, 148
Lysippos, 333
Lysistrata (Aristophanes), 26
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 207, 421
McClellan, James, 254–55
Machiavelli, 133
Machu Picchu, 264
Madhvamika, 326
Madonna of the Stairs (Michelangelo), 333
Madrid, 338, 357, 368
Magnete, De (Gilbert), 312
Mahabharata, 114, 140, 219, 325
Mahayana Buddhism, 132
Mailer, Norman, 431
Maimonides, Moses, 275
Maine, 304
major figures, classifying of, 478–80
Malacca, Straits of, 33
Mallarmé, Stéphane, 318
Manchester, 44
Manet, Édouard, 206, 216, 411
Mannerism, 299
Man’yoshu, 328
maps, 214, 599
Marconi, Guglielmo, 129
Marcus Aurelius, 26, 28
markets, winner-take-all, 443–44
market saturation, 428, 435–36, 442–44
Marlowe, Christopher, 95, 104, 106, 318, 442
Mars, 150
Marseilles, 46, 297
Martel, Charles, 156
Martindale, Colin, 92, 95, 104
Maruyama Okyo, 327
Masaccio (Cassai), 54, 74, 215, 412, 600
Maslow, Abraham, 387
mass production, 229
Masters tournament, 100, 101
mathematical induction, 414
mathematical notation, 414
mathematical proofs, 211, 414
mathematics, 60, 235, 399, 440
beauty in, 419
central events in, 160, 161, 188–93
database for, 76
discovery of truth in, 60
fashion and assessment of, 82
golden age of, 313
logic in, 230, 231
meta-inventions in, 211, 228–33
organizing structure of, 414
principle of, 414
as structure of nature, 241–42
tools for, 414
mathematics inventory, 121, 127, 130, 143, 251,
449
accomplishment rate for, 313, 313
Jews in, 275, 279
women in, 265–66, 270
Mather, Cotton, 46–47
matter, 240
law of conservation of, 124, 160
Matthew, Gospel of, 93
Matthew effect, 353, 443
Maxwell, James, 144
Maya, 21
number system of, 228
Mayer, Maria Goeppert, 605
May Laws of 1882, 276
Meaning of Meaning,The (Ogden and Richards),
70
measures, of excellence, 72–75
mechanics, 45, 387
Medea (Euripides), 26
medicine, 60, 399, 414
application of truth in, 60–61
central events in, 160, 161–62, 194–97
database for, 76
empirical observation in, 234
fashion and assessment of, 82
organizing structure of, 415
System Builders in, 152
medicine inventory, 121, 123, 128, 130, 143,
251, 314, 314
accomplishment rate for, 314, 314
women in, 266
Medici Venus, 27
Medieval Technology and Social Change (White),
155
656 • INDEX
meditation, 211, 224–25, 244, 458
Mediterranean, 14, 33
government in, 14
Mee, Charles, 337
melody, 217
Melville, Herman, 444
men:
IQ and, 289
mathematical and visual-spatial skills of,
289
Mencius, 131, 139, 223, 324
Mendelssohn, Moses, 275, 316
Meninas, Las (Velazquez), 147–48, 205
mental illnesses, 128
mental shelf space, limited, 443–45
Merton, Robert, 403
Merton, S. K., 93
Mesolithic period, 6
Mesopotamia, 16, 70
meta-inventions, 157, 209–44, 412
Arabic numerals as, 211, 231–32, 244, 414
artistic abstraction as, 211, 215–16
artistic realism as, 211, 212–13
calculation of uncertainty as, 211, 232–33
characteristics of, 210
as cognitive tools, 209, 210, 211, 213, 224,
227, 228, 243–44
in commerce, 229
cultural attributes vs., 210
drama as, 211, 219–20, 244
ethics as, 211, 226–28
in government, 229
linear perspective as, 211, 213–15, 412
logic as, 211, 224, 225–26
mathematical proofs as, 211, 228–31, 414
meditation as, 211, 224–25, 244
novel as, 211, 220–22, 244
polyphony, 211, 217–18, 413
scientific method as, 121, 233–43
secular observation of nature as, 211, 233,
234–35, 244
Western prevalence in, 244
written language as, 210–11
metaphysics, 61, 224, 416
Méthode de Traicter les Plaies (Paré), 314
Metonic cycle, 17
Mexico, written language in, 211
Michelangelo, 31, 54, 74, 75, 79, 88, 90, 135,
145, 146, 149, 205, 230, 259, 287, 317,
333, 392, 398
as first in inventory, 120, 137, 143, 144
microbes, 314
microscope, 312
Middle Ages, medieval:
anonymous arts in, 260
Christianity in, 401, 403
Europe in, 260, 420, 458
middle class, 447
Middle East, 275
Middlemarch (Eliot), 207
Milan, 305, 357
Miletus, 230
Milky Way, 151, 160
Minghuang, Emperor of China, 322
Minoan civilization, 14, 16
Misérables, Les (Hugo), 421
Mises, Ludwig von, 116
Mises, Richard von, 116
Missa Solemnis (Beethoven), 146
Mississippi, 304
Mithraism, 31
Moby Dick (Melville), 444
models, 353–55, 379, 409
regression analyses of, 365–67, 365, 366, 367
molecules, 439
Molière, 363
Mona Lisa (Leonardo), 155
monarchy, 363
absolute, 371, 372, 373
parliamentary, 371, 372, 373, 375
Monet, Claude, 85, 89, 206
money, 229
monomyth, 21–23
monotheism, 226, 599
Montagu, Mary, 46
Montaigne, Michel de, 275
Mont Blanc, 240
Montesquieu, Charles, 316
Monteverdi, Claudio, 299, 319
Montgolfier brothers, 114
Mont Puy-de-Dôme, 240
moons, planetary, 242–43, 438
Moorish Spain, 275
Moors, 364
Morgan, Augustus de, 231
Morgan,Thomas Hunt, 123
Morocco, 338
morphology, 123
Morrison, Toni, 431
Morse, Samuel F. B., 129
Mosaic Law, 226
Moscow, 357
Moses, Grandma, 90
Moses (Michelangelo), 54
motherhood, 287–88
motion, laws of, 161
INDEX • 657
“Motivation Reconsidered: The Concept of
Competence” (White), 388
motor nerves, 29
Mount Wilson, 122
Mozart,Wolfgang Amadeus, 48, 54, 64, 83, 120,
134, 143, 146, 319, 392, 447, 454
Muhammad, 132, 223, 321
multiculturalism, xviii, 63, 244
multiple regression, 331, 472–73
multivariate time-series analysis, 354–55, 451
Munch, Edvard, 205
Murasaki Shikibu, 141, 220, 222, 259, 267, 328
music, 212, 386, 455
academic, 454
Baroque in, 299, 417
beauty in, 417
cities and, 360
craft of, 411
creation of, 55
database for, 76
delayed recognition in, 82
diatonic scale in, 217
environment for, 429
instruments in, 413
non-Western, unnamed composers in, 259
notation in, 217
organizing structure in, 410
polyphony in, 211, 217–18
popular, 261
pre -800, 14
principles of, 411
scales in, 217
structural changes and, 413
tonal harmony in, 217
tool of, 411
transcendental goods in, 423, 424–25
truth in, 421
women in, 271, 274–75, 274, 290
musical compositions, 453–54
music inventories, 266, 499–500
Jews in, 275, 277
for the West, 78, 85
Music in Western Civilization (Lang), 207
Myron, 333
mysteries, 443, 444–45
Nabtian Pluvial, 23
Nagarjuna, 132, 223, 326
Naples, 297, 357, 373
Napoleonic Wars, 312, 357
narrative, conventions of, 422
National Gallery, London, 216
natural philosophy, 215, 239, 266
natural selection, 148–49
nature:
mathematical structure of, 241–42
secular observation of, 211, 233
Nature, 105
“nature of the chemical bond, The” (Pauling),
439
Near East, 6
nebulae, 150
Needham, Joseph, 236, 256, 259
needs hierarchy, 387
Nefertiti, 212
negative binomial model, 343
neo-Confucianism, 42, 324
Neolithic period, 6, 7
Neptunist theory, 53
Nero, 32
nerves, 29
Netherlands:
accomplishment in, 296–98
art in, 339, 365, 366
golden age in, 333, 339
Jewish emancipation in, 276
philosophy in, 339
as republic, 361, 371, 373
science in, 339
significant figures in, 365
university students in, 433
wars and civil unrest in, 347
neuroscience, 130, 440
Newcastle & London Post Coach, 45
Newcomen, Thomas, 129
New England, 305
New Jersey, 304, 305
New Testament, 49
Newton, Isaac, 7, 9, 49, 50, 126, 127, 143, 161,
206, 228, 230, 237, 241–42, 254, 255, 300,
313, 414, 449
Newtonian physics, 312
Newtonian Revolution, 155, 453
New World, 332, 337, 338, 364
New York, 305
New York, N.Y., 430
New Yorker, 7
New York marathon, 101, 102
Nicklaus, Jack, 100, 101, 104
Nicomachean Ethics (Aristotle), 227, 385, 416,
457
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 133, 393, 407, 446
Night Watch,The (Rembrandt), 54, 206
nihilists, nihilism, 391, 393, 423, 456
Nike of Samothrace, 26
Ninety-five Theses, 403
658 • INDEX
Ninth Symphony (Beethoven), 147
Nisbett, Richard, 397
Noah, 21
Nobel Prizes, 115, 129, 150, 282
of Jews, 281–82, 282, 283
of non-whites, 283–84, 284
of women, 267, 273–74, 273, 290
Noble Savage, xviii
Noether, Emmy, 265–66
non-Euclidean geometries, 228
non-European accomplishment, lack of, 258–61
nonjudgmental stance, 68–72
non-whites:
Nobel Prizes of, 283–84, 284
recent trends for, 283–85
normal distribution, see bell curve
Norse sagas, 260
North Africa, 14
North America, science in, 253, 254, 259
Norway, 298
Norwegian Book Clubs, 431
notation:
mathematical, 414
musical, 217
novels, 318, 411, 412, 453
as meta-invention, 211, 220–22, 244
Novum Organum (Bacon), 299
nuclear reaction, 126
number systems, 228, 244
objectivity, 65
observation, 236, 299
oceanography, 125
Ockham’s Razor, 238
Odets, Clifford, 115
Odyssey (Homer), 10, 26, 114, 219
Oedipus plays (Sophocles), 26
“Of the Standard of Taste” (Hume), 63–64
Ogata Kenzan, 136
Ogata Korin, 136
Ogden, C. K., 70
Ogilvie, Marilyn, 272
oil paint, 411, 412
Old Testament, 10, 49, 226
Olesha,Yuri, 362
oligarchy, 371
“100 Best Novels in the World,” 431
On the Construction of the Heavens (Herschel),
150–51
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 157
opera, 299, 411
opinion, xvi, 59–60
optics, 399
order, freedom vs., 411
ordinary least squares (OLS), 609
Oresteia (Aeschylus), 26
organa, 218
organizing structure, 409–15, 425, 451–52
age of, 411–12
in hard sciences, 413–14
in literature, 412
in mathematics, 414
in medicine, 415
in music, 413
richness of, 410–11
in technology, 414–15
in visual arts, 412
Organon (Aristotle), 226
Orthodox Christianity, 402, 403
Orwell, George, 424
Ostia, 27
Ottoman Empire, 335, 363–64, 373
Ovid, 10, 31
Paccioli, Luca, 232
Pacey, Arnold, 254–55, 256
Pachelbel, Johann, 207
painters, painting, 452, 453
Greek, 214–15
in Renaissance, 411
significant vs. other, 429
see also visual arts
Paleolithic era, 5, 6
Palmer, Arnold, 100
Palomar Observatory, 122
Pamela (Richardson), 221, 412
panel data, 608
Panini, 326
paper, 37–38
paper money, 229
Papin, Denis, 129
Paracelsus, 314
paradigm, truth vs., 155
parallax, 43
Paré, Ambroise, 314
Paris, xix, 44, 300, 305, 357, 358, 613
art in, 366
in 12C, 34
Parker, Dorothy, 115–16
parliamentary monarchy, 371, 372, 373, 375
Parmenides, 30, 225, 316, 333
Parrhasius, 27
parsimony, rule of, 102, 238, 289
particle physics, 440
INDEX • 659
Pascal, Blaise, 232–33, 240, 313, 316
Pascal’s Triangle, 232, 233
passivity, 396
past:
condescension towards, 25
reverence for, 395
Pasteur, Louis, 123, 128, 143
Patai, Raphael, 276–77
Patanjali, 225, 326
pattern rupture, 354
Pauling, Linus, 439
Pausanias, 26
peace, 331–32, 333, 379
see also war and civil unrest
Peale, Charles Wilson, 250
Peloponnesian Wars, 223, 332
pendulum, 129
penicillin, 149
Pennsylvania, 305
“Peony” (Xu Xi), 40
percentiles, 466
Percy, Bishop, 49
performing arts:
market saturation in, 442–43
product differentiation in, 444
Pergolesi, Giovanni, 48, 54
permutations and combinations, 230
Pérotin, 218
Persia:
anonymous visual arts in, 260
mathematics in, 399
Persian language, 138, 321
Peru, 20
Peter the Great, 9
Petrie, Flinders, 18
petroleum industry, 315
Petronius, 27, 30, 220
Petty,William, 46
PGA Championship, 98, 100, 101
PGA tour events, 100
pharmacology, 399
Phidias, 26, 27, 31, 260, 333, 398
Philistines, 16
Philo Judaeus, 275
philosophers, undiscovered, 109
philosophes, 50
philosophy, 61, 440, 457–58
Arabic, 78, 399
biographic sources in, 108
Catholic humanism in, 402–3
database for, 76
definition of, 223
in Europe, 299–300
Japanese, 78
meta-inventions in, 211, 222–28
nihilism in, 393
polymaths in, 114
philosophy inventories, 84, 121, 492–94
accomplishment rate in, 311
for China, 78, 79
for India, 78
Jews in, 275, 277, 279
for the West, 78, 85
women absent from, 266
Phoenicia, 16
photography, 216, 315, 386
physics, 60, 66, 267, 439, 440, 449
beauty in, 419
central events in, 160, 161, 179–87
database for, 76
fundamental laws of, 61
Newtonian, 312
organizing principle of, 414
particle, 440
principles of, 414
tools in, 414
women in, 272
Physics (Aristotle), 237
physics inventory, 121, 126, 130, 143, 279, 311
physiology, 62, 123
Piazzi, Guiseppe, 449
Picasso, Pablo, xix, 74, 75, 89, 137, 144, 259, 398
pictographs, 228
pictorial images, 212
Pindar, 333
Pizarro, Francisco, 337
plagues, 46–47
planetaria, 39
planetary movements, 160, 234
planets, moons of, 438
plastics, 315
Plato, 26, 61, 70, 133, 144, 213, 217, 224, 225,
241, 260, 316, 333, 402, 415–16
Platonic ideal, 415–16
Platonism, 457
plays, 453
pleasure, 385, 386
Pleistocene era, 3–4
Pliny the Elder, 27, 30
Plutarch, 26, 31
Poe, Edgar Allan, 318
poetry, 138, 140, 446, 453–54
pogroms, 276
Poincaré, Henri, 265–66
660 • INDEX
pointillism, 207, 410
Poland, 297, 298, 300, 349
authors from, 251
Jews in, 276, 291, 307
under Russian rule, 373
polis, 402
political conditions, 331
political freedom, 361
political systems, significant figures and, 371–72,
372
political theory, 227
Polo, Marco, 33, 34, 35, 39, 41
Polygnotus, 27, 260, 333
Polykleitos, 333
polymaths, 114–15, 129, 130, 232, 242
polyphony, 211, 217–18, 413
polyvinyl chloride, 156
Pompeii, 27, 29
Pompey, 32
popular culture, 447, 454
popular music, 261, 447
population, 367, 376, 381, 505
accomplishment rate and, 427, 429
of cities, 367, 376, 381
of country, 344, 381
cutoff point in, 111–13
density of, 344
determining and estimating of, 511
human capital vs., 428, 435
literature and, 429
narrowing of, 109–10, 111
outer boundaries of, 107, 108–9
significant figures vs., 111–13
Porter, Cole, 115
Portland, Maine, 304
Portugal, 298
Posterior Analytics (Aristotle), 237
posterity, 445
Post-Impressionism, 216, 317
postmodernism, 70–71, 623–24
Pound, Ezra, 422
Poussin, Nicolas, 317
Praxiteles, 333
prayer, 405
pre-Christian era, 161
“Precious Mirror of the Four Elements” (Zhu
Shijie), 233
pre-Columbian America, art of, 260
predestination, 618
predictors of creativity, 354–55
preserved foods, 315
preventative medicine, 162
Price, Derek de Solla, 16, 91–92, 99
Price’s law, 91–92
Pride and Prejudice (Austen), 71–72
primary qualities, 240
Princesse de Clèves, La (Lafayette), 221
Principia Mathematica (Newton), 49, 237, 414
principles, 410, 411, 414, 425
printing press, 155, 157, 159, 412, 413
probability theory, 232–33, 313
product differentiation, 444
production line, 156
Professional Golf Association (PGA), 97–101
Promissory Oaths Act of 1871, 276
proofs:
indirect, 231
inductive, 231
propositions, analysis of, 226
prosperity, 331–32, 379
see also wealth
Protagoras, 316, 333
Protestant Christianity, 403–5, 407, 618
meditation in, 225
“Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,
The” (Weber), 403
proton, 126
Prussia, 298, 300, 373
Jewish emancipation in, 276
psychoanalysis, 129
psychology, psychologists, 93, 129, 387–88, 392
behavioral, 387
experimental, 387–88
Ptolemy, Claudius, 30, 61, 162, 214, 236, 255
public health, 128, 162
punch cards, 159, 599
punctuated equilibrium, 81
Purcell, Henry, 48
purpose, 391–94, 406, 407, 409, 417, 451, 453
choice of content and, 393–94
in Christianity, 407–8
in East Asia, 396–97
in Europe, 401
in Islam, 400
saintliness vs., 394
work, 392–93
Pushkin, Aleksander, 318
p values, 341–42
Pynchon,Thomas, 81
Pythagoras, 228, 241
musical scales discovered by, 217
Pythagorean Theorem, 85
Pythagorean triangle, 228
qasida, 321
Quakers, 405
INDEX • 661
qualified sources, 79
qualitative arguments, 331
quality, 452
quantitative arguments, 331, 451
quantitative chemistry, 124, 160
quantum theory, 233
Quetelet, Adolphe, 73
Quevedo y Vallegas, Francisco de, 338
race, 25, 295, 432
Racine, Jean, 454
racism, 86
radiation, 126
radio, 129, 315, 437
radium, 159
Raft of the Medusa (Gericault), 205
railroads, 255, 315
Ramanujan, 132, 153–54
Ramayana, 114, 140, 219, 325
Rameau, Jean, 48, 319
Ramses II, 11
random-effects model, 373, 610, 615
random-effects option, 375–77
Raphael (Sanzio), 74, 75, 89, 137, 144, 317, 333,
353
rare events, 430
rationality, 401–2
ratios, 310
Rawls, John, 385–86
raw scores, 79
realism, 138, 211, 212–13, 216, 327, 600
realistic change, 433
realized capacities, 389, 401
reason, 49
Rebatet, Lucien, 109–10, 109
recession, 337
Redi, Francesco, 240
reductio ad absurdum, 231
Reformation, 299, 407
refraction, 237
refrigeration, 315
regression analysis, 340–43, 379, 608–9
elite cities, 367–70, 369, 370
fixed-effects option in, 375–77
freedom of action, 371–75, 372, 374
full model, 375–77, 376
interpreting results of, 341–42
for models, 365–67, 365, 366, 367
random-effects option in, 375–77
for war and civil unrest, 346–48, 348
regression coefficients, 471–72
regression equations, 310
regression techniques, Poisson family of, 344
reinforcement, 387
relativism, 70, 360
relativity, theory of, 59, 148, 455
reliability, 81
religion, 6, 418
arts and, 455–57
in prehistoric era, 6
see also specific religions
Rembrandt van Rijn, xvi, 54, 72, 75, 89, 206,
317, 333, 339
Remington, Frederic, 115, 250
ren, 41–42
Renaissance, 8, 29, 161, 232, 235, 305, 379, 410,
434
architecture in, 260–61
art of, 48, 317
Christianity in, 403
Copernicus’ heliocentric model in, 62
English, 71
experiments in, 238
in Florence, xix, 333, 337, 339, 350
Italian, 299, 337, 357, 407, 417, 420
painting in, 411
physics in, 161
tonal harmony in, 218
Renaissance Catholicism, 618
Renoir, Pierre Auguste, 206
republics, 361–62, 371, 372, 373
oligarchical, 371
reputations, 73
shifting, 83, 207, 445
Restoration, 9
résumé of human species, 76
Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium, De (Copernicus), 150, 413–14
Reynolds, Joshua, 48, 49
rhythm, 218
Ribera, Jusepe de, 317
Richards, I. A., 70
Richardson, Samuel, 48, 221, 412
Richard the Lion-heart, 9
richness, 260, 452
of structure, 410
rights, constitutional, 361
right triangles, 228
Rig Veda, 224–25
Rimpa school, 136
risk management, 229, 233
roads, 162
Robin Hood, 9
Rodgers, Richard, 115
Rojas, Fernando, 275
Roman Britain, 10
662 • INDEX
Roman Britain (continued)
comfort in, 46
transportation in, 45
Romanticism:
in literature, xx, 48, 142
in music, 218
Rome, xviii, 9–10, 14, 27, 29, 33–35, 357, 235,
399, 455
Antonine, see Antonine Rome
fall of, 34, 260
law in, 30–31
Republican, 30, 32
slavery in, 32
Rossi, Salamone, 275
Rouge et le Noir, Le (Stendhal), 421
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 50, 133, 142, 316, 412
as polymath, 115
rubber, 315
Rubens, Peter Paul, 74, 89, 317, 339
Ruisdael, Jacob van, 339
running, 101, 102
Rushdie, Salman, 431
Ruskin, John, 69
Russell, Bertrand, 133, 223
Russia, 255, 362, 373, 374
accomplishment in, 296–98
as autocracy, 363
Jews in, 276–77, 281, 291, 307
Orthodox Christianity in, 403
property rights in, 363
war and civil unrest in, 33, 347
see also Soviet Union
Russian Revolution, 281, 362
Rutherford, Ernest, 126, 130
Sachs, Hans, 275
Sacsayhuaman, walls at, 20
Sagan, Carl, 105
Saikaku, 141
St. Martial monastery, 218
St. Paul’s Cathedral, 28
St. Petersburg, 357
Sandburg, Carl, xvi
Sankara, 132, 133, 143, 144, 326
Sanskrit literature, 325
Santa Maria, 33
Santa Maria Novello, 215
Sappho, 266, 290
Sarton, George, 256, 275
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 393
Satyricon (Petronius), 27, 220, 221
Saunders, J. J., 400
Saving Private Ryan, 454
Savonarola, Girolamo, 333
Saxony, 298, 363
Sayili, Aydin, 400
Scandinavia, 21
Scarlatti, Alessandro, 319
Scarlatti, Domenico, 48, 319
scatter diagrams, 467–68, 468, 470
scatter plots, 299–300, 301–3
Scheele, Carl, 124
as Brick Layer, 153
Schiller, Johann, 70, 318
Schoch, Robert, 23
Schoenberg, Arnold, 64, 424
Scholasticism, 237
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 133
Schubert, Franz, 54
science:
accomplishment past 1950 in, 453
autonomy and, 394–95
biographical sources in, 108
chronologies of, 157–58, 158
cities and, 360
collegiality of, 395–96
complexity in, 437–38
craft in, 410
declining accomplishment in, 435–40
difficulty explanation for, 105–6
discovery as building block of, 207
environment for, 429
in Europe, 275, 299–300
excellence in, 60–62
history of, 85, 206, 440
human capital in, 428, 435
importance vs. excellence in, 61–62
individuals vs. teams in, 436
market saturation in, 428, 435–36
meta-inventions in, 211, 233–43
as natural philosophy, 215
organizing structure in, 410
principles in, 410
System Builders vs. Brick Layers in, 147, 151,
152–53
tools in, 410–11
transcendental goods in, 418–29, 422
truth in, 148, 419, 453
women in, 268–71, 274, 274, 275, 286, 290
see also hard sciences; specific sciences
Science and Technology Firsts, 158
Science and Technology in World History (McClellan
and Dorn), 254–55
sciences combined inventory, 130, 143
scientific inventories, 121, 143, 147–53,
500–503
INDEX • 663
accomplishment rate in, 311
combined chart, 121
Eurocentrism and, 84–85, 251–58, 252, 258
for events, 78
industrial cities and, 369–70
Jews in, 282
misleading, 438
1950 cutoff for, 81–82
non-whites in, 283–85, 284
number of significant figures in, 345
organizing structures in, 413–15
of persons, 78
polymaths in, 114
purpose of, 435
significant events in, 157–62
women in, 266
scientific literature, 90–91, 92, 105
scientific method, 403, 410, 413, 453, 601, 619
as meta-invention, 211, 233–34, 244, 599–600
as organizing method, 410
scientific reports, 242–43
scientific research, 400
scientific revolution, 226, 617
scientists, 107
Lotka’s study of, 90–91
significant vs. other, 429
undiscovered, 109
Scotland, 44, 298
Enlightenment in, 50
Lowland, 298
Scott,Walter, 142, 318
Scream (Munch), 205
sculpture, 212, 333, 453
anonymity of Chinese, 78
see also visual arts
scurvy, 46
Sebokht, Severus, 231
secondary qualities, 240
Second Treatise of Government (Locke), 49
secularization, 405, 407, 422
secular observation of nature, 211, 233, 234–35,
244
sedimentation, 39
Sei Shonagon, 328
self-actualization, 387–89
self-expression, 420
self-sufficiency, 402
semiotics, 70
sensationalism, 421, 423
sensory nerves, 29
sentiment, 63–64, 68–69
September 11, 8
Sesshu, 136, 143, 260, 327
Seurat, Georges, 206–7
sex, 25, 289, 432
Shaftesbury, Lord Ashley, seventh earl of, 278
Shakespeare, William, 8, 9, 54, 59, 95, 104, 106,
114, 144, 145–46, 155, 259, 287, 299, 318,
399, 431, 442
as first in inventory, 120, 142, 143, 207, 421
postmodernist criticism of, 71
ups and downs in reputation of, 83
Shakuntala (Kalidasa), 147
Shanxi, 37
Shapin, Steven, 242
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 318
Shen Gua, 39, 236
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, 48, 49
Shockley, William, 93
Sholokhov, Mikhail, 362
Shostakovich, Dmitri, 362
Siberia, 363
Sicily, 373
Siemens, Charles, 129
Siena, 9, 433
significant events, 157–207, 259, 312
in the arts, 205–7
determination of, 158, 158
roster of, 159–62
in scientific inventories, 157–62
significant figures vs., 159
significant figures, 79, 107–17, 113
amount of recent, 428
classifying of, 478–80
decline in production of, 380
distribution of, 248
in elite cities, 360–61
in Europe, 299–300, 301–3
freedom of action and, 374–75, 374
lagged value of, 365, 365, 366
least, 116–17, 117
non-significant figures vs., 115–17
origins of, 301–3, 355–58, 356
in other domains, 365–67, 367
political systems and, 371–72, 372
ratio of, 429
roster of, 513–88
significant events vs., 159
upward climb of, 379
in U.S., 304–5, 304, 306
variance in, 345, 379–80, 380
war and, 332–36, 340–41, 348, 351
wealth and, 349–51, 350
women as, 267, 268, 269
Silesia, 297, 300
Simon, Herbert, 93, 392
664 • INDEX
Simonton, Dean, xvii, 82, 92, 94, 207, 344,
354–55, 360, 381, 431
Simpsons,The, 454
Sinclair, Upton, 116
Sistine Chapel, 54, 59, 90, 145, 149, 205, 289,
392
Sivin, Nathan, 253, 254–55
Skeptical Chymist (Boyle), 414
Skinner, B. F., 387
Slovakia, 300
smallpox, 46–47
Smeaton, John, 129
Smith, Adam, 49, 50–51, 229
Smith,William, as Brick Layer, 153
Smollett,Tobias, 45
Social and Cultural Dynamics (Sorokin), 335, 346
social conditions, 331
social construction, 70
sex differences and, 289
socialism, 422–23
social sciences, 77, 331, 450
statistical analysis in, 233
statistical significance in, 342
Socrates, 10, 223–24, 287, 316, 333, 354, 402
Socratic dialogues, 225
solar system, 30, 62, 150, 161
Solomon, Maynard, 146
solstices, 160
Song China, 25, 32–42, 235, 322, 324, 381
art in, 39–40
astronomy in, 38–39
bureaucracy in, 40–41
census in, 34
earth science in, 39
economic organization in, 38
examination system in, 40–41
experimentalism in, 235–37
industrial, 37–38
literature in, 40
mathematics in, 38
medicine in, 39, 46
national economy in, 37
philosophy in, 41–42
religion in, 41
tribute system of, 33
water system and shipping in, 37
see also Huangzhou
Song Hangzhou, 46, 51, 262
administration in, 36
arts in, 47
cleanliness of, 34
food and restaurants in, 36–37
peaceful character of, 41
public amenities in, 35
wealth and poverty in, 35
Sophism, 225
Sophocles, 26, 220, 260, 333, 354
Sorokin, Pitirim, 335, 346, 446
Sotatsu, 136, 143, 327
South America, 254
South Asia, 452
art forms of, 260
science in, 275
Southeast Asia, art forms of, 260
Soviet Union, 362, 422, 620
literature in, 362
music in, 362
science in, 362–63
as totalitarian, 371
visual arts in, 362
Spain, 20, 85, 298, 307, 333, 337–39
art from, 338
Inquisition in, 364, 373, 375
literature from, 338
Moorish, 275
music from, 338
wealth of, 337–38, 339, 364
Spanish Armada, 335
spectroheliograph, 122
Spengler, Oswald, xvii, 82, 446, 623
Spenser, Edmund, 318
Spinoza, Baruch, 275, 316, 339
spontaneous generation, 240
sports, excellence in, 97–101, 98, 99, 100, 102
Sputnik, 8
stability, 81
Stadler,Wolf, 74–75
Stalin, Joseph, 281, 362
Stamitz, Johann, 48
standard deviations, 88, 366, 461–66
computation of, 463–64
frequency distribution and, 463
need for, 461
percentiles vs., 466
staphylococcus, 149
stars, 150
binary, 150
composition of, 411
formation, 122
maps of, 160
statistics, 68, 74, 120, 233
explanation of, 461–73
objectivity and, 65
reliability of, 80
INDEX • 665
significance in, 341–42
see also specific terms
steam engine, 44, 50, 129, 315, 414–15
Steamer in a Snowstorm (Turner), 216
steamships, 315
steel, 315
Stein, Werner, 157
Steinbeck, John, 116
Steinberg, Saul, 7
stem cell research, 418
Stendhal, 318, 421
Stent, Gunther, 438–39
Stephenson, George, 129
sterilization, 128
still life paintings, 215–16
stirrup, 155–57
Stoics, 31, 402
Stove, David, 601
Strabo, 30
Strato, 30
Strauss, Johann, Jr., 444
Stravinsky, Igor, 425
string quartets, 411
string theory, 81
Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Kuhn), 155
Strutt, John, 116
Strutt, Robert, 116
Studies in Medieval and Renaissance History, 157
Study of History,A (Toynbee), 446
Sukenick, Ronald, 393
Sumatra, 33
Sumer, 10, 14, 16, 21, 222, 599
artistic conventions in, 212
mathematics in, 228
money and credit in, 229
number system in, 228
written language in, 211
sunspots, 38, 122, 234
Surrealism, 216
surveying, 228
Swammerdam, Jan, 339
Sweden, 298
authors from, 250–51
Swift, Jonathan, 412
Switzerland, 298, 357, 390
Jewish emancipation in, 276
as republic, 371, 373
syllogism, 226
symphonies, 212, 410, 446
Syria, 231
Syriac civilization, 16
systematic investigation, 236, 451
System Builders, 147, 151, 152–53
tabula rasa, 49
Tagore, Rabindranath, 140
Tahiti, 42, 43
Taiko Josetsu, 327
Tailleferre, Germaine, 266
Tale of Genji,The (Murasaki), 141,
220, 221, 222, 267, 328
Talmud, 233, 276, 292
Tartaglia, Niccolò, 242
Tartuffe (Molière), 363
taste, 62, 63, 66, 69
Tate Gallery, 216
Tawney, Richard, 338
taxonomic systems, 61–62
Tchaikovsky, Piotr, 287, 386
technology, 60, 153, 300
application of truth in, 60–61
brothers in, 114
central events in, 160, 162, 198–204
chronologies of, 157–58, 158
complexity in, 437–38
database for, 76
declining accomplishment in, 435–40
fashion and assessment of, 82
organizing structures for, 414–15
principles of, 415
System Builders in, 152–53
tools for, 414
technology inventory, 121, 129, 130, 143, 251,
264, 315, 315
accomplishment rate for, 315, 315
women in, 266
Technology in World Civilization (Pacey), 254–55
telegraph, 315, 449
Telemann, Georg Philipp, 48, 319
telephone, 148
telescope, 122, 312, 414, 438
television, 429–30, 442
tennis, 97, 101, 102
Grand Slam in, 101, 102
Terman study of gifted children, 291–92
testosterone, 289
textiles, 5, 315
Thackeray,William, 86
Thales, 230–31, 234–35
theaters, ancient, 219
Themistius, 219
Theophrastus, 333
“Theory of Human Motivation, A” (Maslow),
387
666 • INDEX
Theory of the Earth,With Proofs and Illustrations
(Hutton), 160
thermometer, 414
Thespis, 219
Third of May, 1808,The (Goya), 421
Thirty Years’War, 333, 335, 336, 340
Thomas Aquinas, 223, 402–3, 404, 416, 457, 618
Thornton, Bruce, 401–2
Thucydides, 26, 333
Thurber, James, 115–16
Tiberius, Emperor of Rome, 353
Tikhy Don (Sholokhov), 362
time, understanding scale of, 7–12
timekeeping, 129
time-series analysis, 354–55
Timetables of History,The (Grun), 157
Timetables of Science,The, 157–58
Tipitaka, 227
Titian (Vecellio), 63, 66–67, 69, 71, 72, 74, 89,
144, 317, 458
Tohaku, 327
tolerant autocracy, 373
Tolstoy, Leo, 155, 207, 318, 444
Tom Jones (Fielding), 221, 412
Tom Sawyer (Twain), 421
tonal harmony, 217, 218, 410, 413
tools, 3, 4–5, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 425
Torah, 226
totalitarian states, 343, 362–63, 371, 372, 373
Tour de France, 120
Toynbee, Arnold, xvii, 446, 623
trade routes, 399
tradition, innovation vs., 395, 397–99, 452
Traité Élémentaire de Chemie (Lavoisier), 159
transcendental goods, 409, 415–25, 451–52
in the arts, 420–22, 453
changes in role of, 422–25
in science, 418–19
transcendentals, 416
transcontinental traffic, 315
transportation, 162
traumatic injuries, 314
Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry, Les (Limbourg
brothers), 205
trial and error, 235
triangles:
Pythagorean, 228
right, 228
trigonometry, 414
Trilling, Lionel, 220
Trinity (Masaccio), 412
Trojan War, 10
Trojan Women,The (Euripides), 260
truth, xix, 60–61, 416, 417, 418, 422, 452, 453,
456
in the arts, 420–21, 453
paradigm vs., 155
in science, 419, 453
tuberculosis, 128
Turgenev, Ivan, 318
Turkey, 400
Turner, J. M. W., 85, 216
Tuscany, 298, 299, 433
Twain, Mark, 68, 116, 262, 421, 427
twenty-first century, 453
typhus, 46
Uffizi gallery, 27
uncertainty, calibration of, 211
Union of Soviet Writers, 362
United States, 73, 85, 307, 347
artists from, 250, 261–62
cities in, 367–70
declinism in, 446–47
figures significant only in, 116, 261–62
Jews in, 276, 278, 280–81, 291
Ph.D. rate in, 433
population and accomplishment in, 310, 429
religion in, 407
science in, 261, 363, 433
significant figures in, 304–5, 304, 306
South in, 304–5
wealth of, 349, 350
universe, history of, 160–61
universities, 615, 623–24
elite, 358, 368, 369, 370, 376
growth in, 433
non-elite, 368
Unkei, 327
unweighted accomplishment rate, 310–11
Upanishads, 132, 133, 223, 224
uplift, 39
Uranus, 150
U.S. Open, 100, 101
Valmiki, 114, 140
vase paintings, Greek, 213, 214
Veda, 132
Vega, Garcilaso de la, 20
Velazquez, Diego, 74, 147–48, 205, 317, 338
Velleius Paterculus, 353–54, 381
Venetia, 298
Venice, 9, 296, 339, 371
as authoritarian republic, 361–62, 371
Venn diagrams, 109, 109, 110
Venus, transit of, 42–43
INDEX • 667
Venus de Milo, 26, 155
Venus of Urbino (Titian), 63, 66–67, 71, 72
Verlaine, Paul, 318
Vermeer, Jan, 317, 333, 339
vernacular writing, 412
Vesalius, Andreas, 314
Vida de Lazarilla de Tormes, La, 221
Vietnam War, 8
Vikings, 21
violence, 421
Virgil, 10, 26, 31, 142
virtue, 224, 227
visual arts, 212, 260–61, 455
achievement in, 54–55
anonymity in, 78, 260
auction prices for, 454
Baroque in, 299
cities and, 360
craft, 411
database for, 76
delayed recognition in, 82
environment for, 429
organizing structure in, 410
pre -800, 14
principles in, 411
structural change in, 412
tools in, 411, 412
transcendental goods in, 417, 420–21, 423–25
Western vs. non-Western figures in, 259
visual arts inventory, 88
for China, 78, 84
for Japan, 78
for West, 78, 79, 84, 85
women in, 266, 274–75, 274, 290
Vital, David, 275–76
Vivaldi, Antonio, 48, 85, 319
Vivarini family, 114
vocation, 393, 406–7, 452
volcanos, 30
Voltaire, 50, 142, 316
vulcanization, 315
Vyasa, 114, 140
Wagner, Richard, 68, 134
Wales, 298
polyphony in, 218
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 148–49
Wallis, John, 313
Wang Wei, 322
war and civil unrest, 332–36
major European, 334–35
regression analysis for, 346–48, 348, 351, 377
War and Peace (Tolstoy), 155, 207, 444
Warhol, Andy, 69, 81
Watergate, 8
Watson, John, 387
Watt, James, 44, 50, 129, 143, 414
wealth, 332, 336–40, 380, 409, 432–33, 612
regression analyses of, 349–51, 350
Wealth of Nations (Smith), 50–51
Weber, Max, 403
weighted accomplishment rate, 311
welfare state, 229
Weltgeschicte der Musik (Honolka), 109–10, 109
Wen Shu, 266
West:
aesthetics in, 70
arts inventories for, 250
mathematics in, 230
meta-inventions of, 244
philosophy in, 224, 324
popular culture of, 454
significant figures in, 259–61
Western accomplishment rate, decline in, 329
Western art, 299
biographical sources for, 108
borderline figures in, 115
brothers and families in, 114
calculating eminence in, 74–75, 88–90
significant events in, 205–7
women in, 274–75, 274
Western art inventory, 78, 79, 84, 85, 89, 91,
120, 121, 137, 143, 144, 320, 322
accomplishment rate for, 311, 317, 317
American artists in, 250, 251
number of significant figures in, 345
people vs. works, 205–6
Western civilization, 262, 381
decline in, 446
models in, 354–55
Western Europe, 403
cultural coherence in, 447
Western individualism, 210
Western literature:
accomplishment rate in, 427, 429–30
borderline figures in, 115
brothers in, 114
lost, 260
women in, 274, 274
Western literature inventory, 78, 85–86, 142,
143, 250–51
accomplishment rate for, 311, 318, 318
number of significant figures in, 345
Western music:
borderline figures in, 115
lost, 260
668 • INDEX
Western music (continued)
women in, 274–75, 274
Western music inventory, 78, 85, 110, 120, 134,
143
accomplishment rate for, 311, 319, 319
number of significant figures in, 345
Western philosophy inventory, 78, 85, 121, 133,
143, 144, 262
accomplishment rate for, 311, 316, 316
significant figures in, 345
wheel, 14, 155
Whistler, James McNeill, 262
White, Lynn, 155–57
White, Robert, 388
Whitehead, Alfred North, 144, 223
white males, 84, 451
dead, 25, 265
Whitman,Walt, 262, 287, 318
Why Men Rule (Goldberg), 289
Wilde, Oscar, 287
Will, George F., 105
willfulness, autonomy vs., 395
William of Ockham, 238
Williams,Ted, 104
Wilson Chronology of Science and Technology,The,
158
winner-take-all markets, 443–44, 623
Winner-Take-All Society,The (Frank and Cook),
443
Winter’s Tale,A (Shakespeare), 54
Wolfe, Thomas, 116
women, 86, 265–75, 432
achievement since 1950, 273–75, 274
biology and, 288–91
in DoSB, 268–71
environment and, 286–87
exclusion and emancipation of, 267
index scores of, 267–68, 269
in inventories, 266, 267–69
IQ and, 289
low numbers of, 143, 285–91
motherhood and, 287–88
Nobel Prizes won by, 273–74, 273
rights of, 51
verbal skills of, 289
Women in Science:Antiquity through the Nineteenth
Century (Ogilvie), 272
women’s studies, 271–72
Wood, Grant, 250
Woods,Tiger, 596
Wordsworth, William, 318
work, in achieving excellence, 392–93
World War I, xviii, 281, 300, 357, 358, 420, 422
World War II, xviii, 300, 358, 360, 420
Wright brothers, 114, 159
Writers Guild, 442
written language, 210–11, 589, 598–99
Wu Daozi, 135, 322
Wyndham,William, 49
Xerxes, 332
Xu Xi, 40
Yeats, William Butler, xix, 422
Yoga, 225, 326
Yoga-sutras, 326
Yongle, Emperor of China, 33–34
Yosa Buson, 327
Yule, George, 92
Zeitgeist, 429
Zeno of Elea, 225
zero, 9, 161, 231–32
Zeuxis, 27, 136, 260, 333
Zhang Xuan, 322
Zhao Mengfu, 135, 143, 260
Zhejiang, 37
Zheng He, 33, 34, 262
Zhuangzi, 210, 223, 324
Zhu Shijie, 233
Zhu Xi, 42, 131, 324
Zola, Émile, 318, 423, 427
zoology, 123, 399
invertebrate, 123
Zoshchenko, Mikhail, 362
Zurbaran, Francisco de, 317, 338
Zurich, 371
About the Author
Charles Murray is the W. H. Brady Scholar in Culture and Freedom at the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research
in Washington, D.C. He is the author of seven other books, including Losing Ground and The Bell Curve, with Richard J. Herrnstein.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information
on your favorite HarperCollins author.
PRAISE FOR
Human Accomplishment
“In Human Accomplishment, Charles Murray has hugely widened his sphere of operations to
include the whole of human achievement from 800 B.C. to 1950 A.D., identifying the
4,002 most eminent individuals in fourteen vital areas of human achievement, and analyzing them to discover what, if anything, they have in common. The result is nothing less
than ‘a resume of our species,’ packed with lessons that are as valuable as they are controversial.... Murray’s methodology, supported by an astonishing amount of factual data and
bibliography, helps make this the greatest countercultural tract of the decade.”
—Andrew Roberts, Times Literary Supplement (London)
“An impressively well-argued account of magnificent achievements of human history. For
all his statistics, Murray does not promise or deliver certainty on the conditions for human
accomplishment. Rather, he supplies data on which informed opinions, by him or by his
critics, might be based.... Murray does not glibly assume the reality of lasting values: he
argues for them, scrappily, provocatively, with energy and conviction.”
—Dennis Dutton, The New Criterion
“Murray is a master mariner of data.... The science of statistical analysis supplies his tool
kit—his sounding line and sextant—but his passion is for the numbers, and the truths that
lie hidden in their dim green depths. Fortunately Murray is a fluent and engaging writer
[and] he has the knack of anticipating each question just as it forms in the reader’s mind.”
—John Derbyshire, National Review
“Even in this age of subversive websites and 24-hour news channels, few things create quite
as many ripples in the intellectual pond as the arrival of a thick tome with Charles
Murray’s name on the spine.... Murray is challenging Western educationalists to shed their
collective post-imperial guilt complex and acknowledge ‘the way things really are.’ Which
is that Europe’s contribution to the Ascent of Man is too overwhelming to be placed
anywhere except right at the heart of our engagement with history and culture.”
—Richard Morrison, The Times (London)
“In this age of specialization, experts are said to know more and more about less and less....
However, the grand study of sweeping events has not died out entirely. What could be
more sweeping than a book titled Human Accomplishment? It is Charles Murray’s latest book
and it is dynamite.... This study of landmark achievements is itself a landmark achievement.” —Thomas Sowell, columnist
“This is a remarkable tour de force: a rigorously analytic, quantitative study of what is
generally thought to defy such a mode of analysis—the heights of creativity, the manifestations of pure genius. Charles Murray has given us the subject for endless parlor games:
How would we rank the top five greatest literary figures in all of history? More important,
he has confronted us with such weighty and provocative questions as:Why has creativity
been so disproportionately present in the West and not the East? Why among men and not
women? Why among Jews—in philosophy and science but not the arts? And, most important, why are we now experiencing what Murray regretfully sees as a decline in creativity? Thanks to Murray, we shall be debating these questions for a long time to come.”
—Gertrude Himmelfarb, author of One Nation,Two Cultures
“Consider this claim: that the greatest human accomplishments require mastery of rigorous
constraints first achieved almost exclusively by white Western European males. One might
guess that it would be Charles Murray making such an argument. In his latest book ...
Murray steps back up to the plate after Losing Ground and The Bell Curve with a thesis sure
to irritate most of America’s thinking class.Yet the book is, more often than not, brilliant.”
—John McWhorter, Washington Post
“Murray’s mission is to cut through the confusion about how humanity was pulled from the
muck by a tiny handful of individuals.... The audacity of Murray’s effort is that he sees all
of the questions as answerable, and he joyfully and enthusiastically tackles them one by one.
Along the way, he launches little fireworks of surprises in the forms of asides, anticipating
questions about everything from homosexuality to the nature of excellence itself.... Human
Accomplishment is a glistening example of excellence, and we should all be grateful to stand
on Murray’s shoulders.” —Jonah Goldberg, The Weekly Standard
“At last Charles Murray has found a Himalayan task worthy of his great talents as a preeminent social thinker of our time, that of opening up for us a new science of human accomplishment. His subject and his treatment of it ennoble us.”
—Michael Novak, author of The Fire of Invention
“Defining and measuring the topology of excellence in the arts and sciences over a span of
some three millennia, Charles Murray’s Human Accomplishment scales the alpine peaks of
human achievement and then plumbs their foundations. In a world of cultural relativism
and sentimental diversity, he dares expound a theory of hierarchy founded on enduring
structures of thought and objective ideals. He presents alarming evidence that with the
rise of relativism and subjectivism the West is rapidly losing its ability to generate enduring artistic and scientific creations. Joining the titans he celebrates, Murray’s tome displays
both the ‘intellectual structure’ and the ‘transcendental goods’ that mark a work of genius.”
—George Gilder, author of Wealth & Poverty and
Telecosm, and editor of the Gilder Technology Report
“Few figures in American intellectual life more admirably combine ambition and modesty
than data maestro Charles Murray. Every decade or so, Murray delivers a big book full of
graphs and tables that audaciously but judiciously illuminates a vital topic.... In 1997,
Murray quietly began a huge project to rank objectively history’s most important discoverers and creators so that he could examine the causes and correlates of greatness. The
result is his gracefully written and enthralling Human Accomplishment:The Pursuit of Excellence in the Arts and Sciences, 800 B.C. to 1950.” —Steve Sailer, The American Conservative
also by charles murray
Losing Ground: American Social Policy 1950–1980
In Pursuit: Of Happiness and Good Government
The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life
(co-author, with Richard J. Herrnstein)
What It Means to Be a Libertarian: A Personal Interpretation
Credits
Design and composition by Robert Bull Design
Copyright
HUMAN ACCOMPLISHMENT. Copyright © 2003 by Cox and Murray, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded,
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any
information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means,
whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without
the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader February 2007 ISBN 978-0-06-136985-8
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com 