ower
21st Anniversary Edition
Best
INTERNATIONAL
Seller
Dr. Warren Farrell
Advance praise for The Myth of Male Power
The Myth of Male Power
Copyright
Dedication
Acknowledgments
2014 Personal Introduction
Original Introduction, 1993
Part I: The Myth of Male Power
Chapter 1: Is Male Power Really a Myth? A First Glance
Chapter 2: Stage I to Stage II: How Successful Men Freed Women (But Forgot
to Free Themselves)
Chapter 3: Are “Power,” “Patriarchy,” ‘Dominance,” and “Sexism” Actually
Code Words for Male Disposability?
Part II: The “Glass Cellars” of The Disposable Sex
Chapter 4: The Death Professions: ‘My Body, Not My Choice’
Chapter 5: War Hero or War Slave?: The Armed Prostitute
Chapter 6: The Suicide Sex: If Men Have the Power, Why Do They Commit
Suicide More?
Chapter 7: Why Do Women Live Longer?
Chapter 8: The Insanity Track
Chapter 9: Violence against Whom?
Chapter 10: If We Cared As Much about Saving Males As Saving Whales, Then
. . .
Part III: Government As Substitute Husband
An Overview
Chapter 11: How the System Protects Women, Or . . . Two Different Laws We
Live In
Chapter 12: Women Who Kill Too Much and the Courts That Free Them: The
Twelve ‘Female-Only’ Defenses
Chapter 13: The Politics of Sex
Chapter 14: The Politics of Rape
Chapter 15: From Husband Sam to Uncle Sam: Government as Substitute
Husband
Part IV: Where do we go from here?
Conclusion
Notes
Bibliography 2014
Back Cover
Advance praise for The Myth of Male Power
“A BOMBSHELL…Forces us to see our everyday world from a fresh perspective.”
—CAMILLE PAGLIA, The Washington Post
“Beg, borrow, or steal to get The Myth of Male Power. This book is vital for every
woman and man—but especially for every man. I was amazed at how many myths
about women and men I bought into until I read The Myth of Male Power.”
—DAVID HOROWITZ, National Public Radio
“Intellectual dynamite! By asking new questions, proposing new paradigms, and
giving us a deeper insight into the forces that have shaped us, Dr. Farrell continues to
open genuine communications between the sexes.
—ANTHONY ROBBINS, author of Unlimited Power and Awaken the Giant Within
“If you can imagine Sherlock Holmes investigating men and women and presenting
his arguments with the clarity of a Perry Mason, the political irreverence of a
Camille Paglia, and the compassion of a therapist, you have an image of The Myth of
Male Power. There is no more brilliant and original book ever written on men, or on
how we can move from gender war to gender love.”
—BOB BERKOWITZ, former Men’s reporter, the Today show.
“I have never read a manuscript more likely to be a bestseller. It will change forever
the way men view their position in society. I wish I were its publisher.”
—JEREMY P. TARCHER, Publisher
“Read The Myth of Male Power if you truly want to understand the man you hold
dear. It is a rock solid and authentic decimation of the myth of male advantage that
sweeps aside stereotyped assumptions to uncover a deeper and truer truth.”
—SUSAN DEITZ, Los Angeles Times Syndicate
“I cannot think of another book I have read in the past decade that has stimulated a
comparable amount of new thinking in me…It is one of the most challenging,
stimulating, and mind-blowing books I have ever read.”
—NATHANIEL BRANDEN, Ph.D., author, The Psychology of Self-Esteem
“The single most important book I’ve ever read on male-female relationships. It is
compelling, powerful, and seminal.”
—WARREN BENNIS, Ph.D., Distinguished Professor of Business Administration at the
University of Southern California; author of On Becoming a Leader
“More riveting than most novels, The Myth of Male Power is brilliant, insightful, and
devastating. If you thought Robert Bly and Camille Paglia shook up gender discourse
. . . prepare for a major earthquake! Farrell’s truths explode like bombshells. No one
who reads this book with an open mind will ever look at men—or women—in the
same way. It is a quantum leap into a more humane future.”
—EUGENE R. AUGUST, Ph.D., Professor of Literature, University of Dayton; author of
Men’s Studies: A Bibliography
“Explosive…”
—Kirkus Reviews (starred review)
“The gravity and significance of Farrell’s fierce challenge to conventional wisdom
about gender is matched by his compassion, passion, courage, careful research, and
absence of acrimony. This book is irreplaceable.”
—LIONEL TIGER, Ph.D., author of The Decline of Males
“This is one terrific book. Highly original, compelling and compassionate. As ground
breaking and provocative as The Feminine Mystique was decades ago.”
—CAROL CASSELL, Ph.D., Past president, American Association of Sex Educators,
Counselors, and Therapists
“Extraordinary power and eloquence, which derive from the author’s ability to retain
his compassion for women while identifying with male suffering…”
—The Vancouver Sun
“Every few decades, a book comes along that so shatters and rearranges our way of
seeing the world that it gives us a kind of ideational vertigo. Such a book is Warren
Farrell’s The Myth of Male Power. There are little bombshells on every page. Our
view of men and women throughout history and in our current society will never be
the same..”
—HOWARD M. HALPERN, Ph.D., past president, American Academy of
Psychotherapists
THE
MYTH
OF MALE
POWER
WHY MEN ARE
THE DISPOSABLE SEX
Warren Farrell, Ph.D.
Copyright © 1993 by Warren Farrell, Ph.D.
All rights reserved including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any
form.
Manufactured in the United States of America
Grateful acknowledgment is given to the following for permission to reproduce art
and quote from previously published material:
“Do You Love Me” from Fiddler on the Roof by Joseph Stein (New York: Crown,
1964); music by Jerry Bock, lyrics by Sheldon Harnick.
Illustration “The Evolution of Power.” Oatmeal Studios, Box 138, Rochester, VT
05767.
Illustration “The Buckets.” Reprinted by permission: Tribune Media Services.
“OSHA Safety Inspector.” By permission of Mike Luckovich and Creators Syndicate.
Photographs “Girl playing with doll; Boy holding rifle” AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS.
To Dad, Mom, Lee,
Gail, and Wayne
Acknowledgments
My father (Tom), “new” mother (of twenty-four years, Lee), and sister, Gail, offer a
base of love and stability from which all my writing flows. Watching my father
traverse his eighties with skis and tennis racquets offers me hope; seeing him support
my mother through bouts of cancer teaches me love; feeling us grow closer as we
grow older brings me peace. Watching my mother go from a hospital bed to a church
organ strengthens my own faith and courage; experiencing the way she listens has
modeled for me the glue that unites a family while allowing each member to feel
heard. Knowing that my sister has patience and compassion for the children whose
lives she touches through teaching lightens my worry for our future.
Joyce McHugh has managed my in-home offices, computers, and speaking
engagements, and served as a closet editor—weaving precision, clarity, and flow
through every page of this book during its dozen or so drafts over the past four years.
Marilyn Abraham, my editor, has the soul of an earth mother and the editorial axe of
a warrior, and seems to know exactly when to use each. Her faith in this book
remained steadfast even as it became its own child.
Every chapter of this book has haunted me as I saw how my observations
conflicted with what is considered politically correct (PC). The support of three
people—Nathaniel Branden, Jeremy Tarcher, and Elizabeth Brookins—helped me
past the political cowardice that is PC. Nathaniel’s intellectual strength, Jeremy’s
creative social consciousness, and the balanced insight and love of Liz combined to
remind me that although I beat a different drum, it brings balance to the orchestra.
The letters from hundreds of men who wrote that Why Men Are the Way They Are
put their feelings into words assured me that the direction I was taking was helping
men open up; and letters from hundreds of women who wrote that Why Men Are . . .
allowed them to feel closer to men reassured me that I was deepening love rather
than dividing families.
Lisa Broidy and Dayna Miller searched thousands of publications and doublechecked the accuracy of the more than 1,000 sources in this book. When in the future
I read their writings, I will trust what I read. Thanks also go to Marla Robb and Mary
Colette Plum for their research assistance, as well as to Julianna Badagliacca,
Monika Chandler, Melissa Rosenstock, Karen Wilson, and to Richard Doyle for his
careful legal research in his publication The Liberator.
Special thanks are due Steve (Goss) Asher for his daily supply of clippings; to
Steve Collins for thoughtful commentary and tireless double-checking of data; to
Eugene August for his balanced commentary to most every chapter; to Donna
Morgan and Spring Whit-beck for bringing their gifts of gentle peace to office
management; and to Keith Polan for introducing me to the computer.
This book was greatly enhanced by the insights of thirty additional readers,
including the in-depth commentary of Suzanne Frayser, Ron Henry, Natasha
Josefowitz, Aaron Kipnis, Judy Kuriansky, and Sari Locker, as well as to the chapter
reviews of Rob Becker, Randy Burns, Tom Chadbourne, Ferrel Christensen, Deborah
Corley, Greg Dennis, Sam Downing, David Gilmore, Herb Goldberg, Bruce Hubbard,
Rikki Klieman, Ziva Kwitney, Alex Landon, John Macchietto, Roman Mathiowetz,
R. L. Mc-Neely, Becky and Tony Robbins, Chris Ruff, Jim Sniechowski, and Bill
Stephens.
Consultants such as Devors Branden, Helen Fisher, Maurice Friedman, Fred
Hayward, John Hoover, Joseph Kinney, Michael Mills, Marilyn Milos, Jim Novak,
Joe Pleck, Jon Ryan, Murray Straus, Ivan Strauss, Robert Wade, and Richard Woods
have all added to both my knowledge and the book.
Finally, in addition to Marilyn Abraham, I wish to acknowledge the dedicated
efforts of these other “Simon & Schuster Women”: Dawn Marie Daniels, Joann
DiGennaro, Marie Florio, Eve Metz, Victoria Meyer, Carolyn Reidy, Isolde C. Sauer,
and Jennifer Weidman.
2014 Personal Introduction
The year 2014 marks the 21st Anniversary of Simon and Schuster’s publication of
The Myth of Male Power in 1993. In 1994 it reached international best-seller status.
I am delighted that The Myth of Male Power is suddenly being “rediscovered.”
What’s motivating this rediscovery?
More than in 1993, we are sensing the destructiveness of fatherlessness, and
witnessing boys all around us who are experiencing a “failure to launch.” As we
experience one more young man perpetrating a Sandy Hook-type massacre, we are
sensing that while male energy channeled well is our most constructive energy
(inventors, CEOs, firefighters), male energy channeled poorly is our most destructive
(mass murderers, rapists, serial killers).
Our compassion for the struggles of our sons, or for the men who are homeless and
unemployed is limited by the belief that “men have the power…if they can’t make it
in a system designed by men to benefit men, then that’s their problem.” The Myth of
Male Power shifts that paradigm.
We are also distracted from boys’ and men’s struggles by the rise of paradoxes.
For example, as we observe the increase of father involvement (e.g., dads playing
with their children in parks), it distracts us from the increase in fatherlessness; we
are similarly distracted from the increase in twenty-somethings who are “failures to
launch” (e.g., living off their parents) by twenty-somethings who are successfully
launching multimillion dollar change-the-world start-ups who dominate the
headlines.
For the last half-century the industrialized world’s binoculars were focused on
maximizing female empowerment. In the process, a boy crisis emerged that,
although it has been around us and growing for decades, is just now beginning to be
acknowledged. Like the financial crisis, ignoring it predicts disaster. Attending to it
can create the first opportunity in human history for our sons to have real power—
control-over- their-life power; and pursuit-of-happiness power. Neither sex had
control-over-their-life power until millions of women in industrialized nations
attained it in the past few decades.
To this day, we still don’t associate men and powerlessness. So with the increased
freedom of an e-book, I experimented with covers that might offer at least a second’s
glimpse of male powerlessness. I began with an image of men making sacrifices for
their families as coal miners; or making sacrifices for their nation, whether at the
former World Trade Center towers, or at war.
Each of those illustrates the experience of powerlessness that some men
experience. However, none is the men we generally consider powerful.
The men we consider powerful (although this book redefines power) tend to have
in common one form of Kryptonite. Presidents Obama and Sarkosy are within range
of that form.
Of course, President Clinton was immune!
No culture is better at poking fun at male vulnerability to a beautiful woman than
the French. So let me give you a chance to laugh thoroughly at these brief French
vignettes before I spoil them with my analyses.
http://safeshare.tv/w/GnFzeOCVZF
Now, for that analysis I warned you about…
Of course each vignette is a laugh-out-loud yet poignant look at the power of a
beautiful woman over men. The beautiful woman is, in essence, a “genetic
celebrity.” That is, her beauty—largely genetic—gives her a type of celebrity status.
Since the only thing we know about the genetic celebrity is her good looks, an
equal playing field between the sexes would imply the good looking men in the
vignettes would be her equal. But even the two good looking men who have more
than good looks to offer—they also have success—are not her equal until they risk
rejection by taking the sexual initiative. In the process, they are either physically
hurt, financially hurt, and/or emotionally humiliated because their initiation was
inadequate.
Thus the cover of this e-book edition is designed to tastefully recall heterosexual
boys’ and men’s feelings of powerlessness when our eyes behold a genetic celebrity.
In contrast, the genetic celebrity does not have to initiate and therefore worry
about looking like a fool by doing it inadequately. She doesn’t have to worry about
people feeling she deserves to be physically hurt, financially hurt, and/or
emotionally humiliated because her initiation was awkward. Her genetic celebrity
status gives her freedom from responsibility and accountability—and financial,
physical and emotional pain. True? Yes. But not the whole truth…
Women experience their own versions of powerlessness. To illustrate this, I
considered another cover—of Marilyn Monroe. Yes, Marilyn Monroe was certainly a
genetic celebrity next to whom grown men felt like groupies, but when millions of
other women looked in their mirror, they felt inadequate by comparison. And
Marilyn committed suicide—the ultimate statement of powerlessness. The point?
Just because a man feels powerless does not mean a woman feels powerful.
And just because a woman—or man—is perceived by others to have power, does
not mean she or he feels powerful inside of themselves. This is a crucial message
of this book because a core flaw of feminism was the assumption that because a
woman felt powerless that the man must feel powerful.
Back, though, to what seems to be catalyzing The Myth of Male Power’s increased
attention:
New laws are being passed about sexual assault on college campuses, but only
with women’s experience in mind;
New laws are being passed to punish bullying rather than redirecting male
energy more constructively;
The damage to our sons’ brains from concussions in football is making
headlines
On a deeper level, suspicion of the women good/men bad dichotomy is allowing
deeper questions to surface:
Why, for millions of years, love and marriage was dominated not by a
patriarchy, but by the need to survive;
Why, for the first time in history—in the industrialized world, among the
middle class—survival can be balanced with fulfillment. Couples have the
opportunity to be soul mates, not just role mates.
Why the belief that men made the rules to benefit men at the expense of women
is not only inaccurate, but distorts the essence of both masculinity and
femininity;
Why the historic “battle of the sexes” is now a war in which only one side
shows up—men put their heads in the sand and hope the bullets will miss;
Why boys and men today are more than a quarter century behind girls and
women;
The way women can support men to preserve the best of traditional masculinity
and reweave a new masculinity that insures the transition from role mate to soul
mate.
The need for answers to these questions is enduring. In this book, you’ll find many
new concepts—from “genetic celebrities” to “glass cellars.” Once you get the
principle, you can update the 1993 examples. Examples of Marilyn Monroe as a
genetic celebrity may become Scarlett Johansson. That said, your personal updated
examples from your world would be a great contribution to the message board for
The Myth of Male Power on www.warrenfarrell.com.
In a moment, I’ll look at some of what has changed since 1993. But first, since
every author’s lens is colored by his or her personal experience, I’ll continue my
commitment to always make part of my Introductions personal…
Shortly after The Myth of Male Power was published, I met Liz Dowling, who
would become my future wife. Her daughters, Erin and Alex, were six and seven, so
I’ve had the good fortune to both be in love and be what society inadequately calls a
“step dad” for about twenty years.
Living in a “house of estrogen” obviously made female needs prominent on my
radar in a way quite different from when I was on the Board of the National
Organization for Women in New York City. For example, working through the
complexities of step-parenting heightened my need for communication skills. The
more I loved Liz and the girls, the more vulnerable I felt, and the more difficult it
was to hear personal criticism without becoming defensive. So I worked on a way to
associate being criticized with an opportunity to be loved (as opposed to an
opportunity to “kill the criticizer”!) That personal growth became a part of Women
Can’t Hear What Men Don’t Say—and evolved into what is now my most gratifying
workshop.
Shortly after, I began research on what became Father and Child Reunion. I was
hoping that the research would show that, as a step-dad, I could be as valuable as a
biological dad. Perhaps. But unlikely. The research made it clear that my most
valuable contribution would be to get the biological dad more involved. Fortunately,
he did become more involved, to the benefit of Alex, the biological daughter.
It was, though, more complex for Erin, who had been adopted by Liz and her
former husband. Perhaps the power of the biological dad—and bio parents—is most
poignantly explained by this experience one evening over dinner with a rancher who
was visiting us from New Zealand.
The rancher told us about how his newborn baby ducks had lost their parents, and
how touched he was to see a chicken come to the rescue to “mother” them. Then he
smiled, “But one day, as the ducks grew, I saw the chicken escort the ducks as they
wobbled down a hill. Everything was looking fine until they got to our lake. The
ducks immediately jumped into the lake, swimming with delight. The “mom”
chicken went berserk—squawking, screeching, scolding, petrified they would
drown.”
Erin looked up from dinner. “That’s my life. I feel like a duck, raised by a
chicken.”
So just below, as I share some of the ways the challenges in The Myth of Male
Power are being magnified by the surge in fatherlessness and the boy crisis, you’ll
have some sense of how the blend of my parenting research and personal experience
informed it.
In the past two decades, technological development and women’s progress has
been miraculous. Yet even as women changed, our understanding of men regressed.
Before we see what is not understood about men, let me offer my perspectives on
four questions:
What’s changed in two decades?
What’s remained the same?
How are male-female relations likely to evolve if The Myth of Male Power
readers do not become effective leaders?
What are the most potent strategies that readers who are leaders can affect in
the next decade?
WHAT’S CHANGED IN TWO DECADES?
Here’s a handful of starters…
More “dad-rich” children—a result of the increased involvement of dads,
usually in married families;
More “dad-poor” children—a result of the decreased involvement of dads,
usually in non-intact families;
The image of “deadbeat dad” decreasing; respect for dads who fight for shared
parenting increasing;
The decline of boys, particularly in dad-poor families;
Young boys today will be the first in U.S. history who will have less education
than their dads;
The evolution of jobs from muscle to mental—with the growth careers being in
the mental—more likely to exclude boys who are less academically oriented;
The recognition of the vulnerability of the male-dominated manufacturing and
construction industries to recession, and the projected growth of the femaledominated health and service industries;
The decline of vocational training in high schools, which used to give less
academically-oriented boys a feeling of productivity and competence;
Recess, so crucial to boys, being cut back and feminized (no dodge ball, etc.);
TV series increasingly portraying overvalued men and undervalued women
(e.g., Mad Men) or men as serial killers and traitors (e.g., Breaking Bad;
Homeland; Dexter);
School serial shootings by white males on the increase, with no recognition of
why our sons—and not our daughters—are the killers;
VGA—Video game addiction: Our sons are far more likely to be addicted to
video games, thus stimulating dopamine when they win in the virtual world and
blocking motivation to win in the real world;
Gay rights have become the most successful current civil rights movement;
“Hooking up” and other social permissions for women to either be sexual
without commitment, or take the sexual initiative;
Among couples with college educated women, more than 90% of the divorces
initiated by women;
The on-line availability of millions of free video porn options, decreasing boys’
willingness to risk sexual rejection with real women;
There are new government programs for women only, such as the White House
Council on Women and Girls, but no White House Council on Men and Boys.
WHAT’S REMAINED THE SAME?
Aside from the fundamentals in The Myth of Male Power remaining the same, here
are examples of what should have changed but has remained essentially the same…
We still believe that men earn more than women for the same work; my
research and analysis in Why Men Earn More: The Startling Truth Behind the
Pay Gap—and What Women Can Do About It that in effect disproved that
nevertheless created but a micro-shift in the public consciousness;
A men’s birth control pill is still asleep in bed, bumped its head, and can’t get
up in the morning.
The only university courses on male-female relations— women’s and “gender”
studies—do not teach the sexes to love, but to view men as women’s
oppressors;
Human resource divisions in corporations and government are still a gender
monologue rather than dialogue—men put their heads in the sand and hope the
bullets will miss;
The image of men vs. women. Google “men as jerks” and you get twenty
million results; Google “women as jerks” and you get about fifteen million
results: mostly women-as-victim-of-men-as-jerks;
Popular Hollywood adult romantic comedies continuing the negative images of
dads and step-dads (e.g., in 2013, The Spectacular Now and The Way, Way
Back).
Media accounts of war, or terrorism, still highlight the deaths of “women and
children” to sell the depth of the tragedy;
In contested custody battles, moms start out with the right to children; dads
have to fight for the children—leaving the children whose dads cannot afford
lawyers to also be “dad poor”;
The social ostracism risked if any woman-as-victim assumption is questioned:
for example, women as victim of domestic violence; sexual harassment; date
rape; the glass ceiling; the pay gap; an unfaithful husband…
The gap in female vs. male sexual worth: a 2012 survey found women valued
their virginity at 10,000 times greater than men valued theirs. The more things
change…
The gap in government help exclusively for women, but not men. Google
“federal programs for women:” get two hundred million results. Google
“federal programs for men:” get almost no programs for men except for men of
color.
The hundreds of domestic violence studies that find women and men to be about
equal perpetrators of domestic violence have not replaced the assumption of
male-as-perpetrator/female-as-victim. The result? Few programs that empower
both sexes with communication skills to avoid domestic violence;
All ten of the most dangerous occupations—what I call the “glass cellars”— are
occupied almost exclusively by men (e.g., roofers, steel workers, truck drivers)
Although men, who in 1920 died one year sooner than women, are today dying
five years sooner, there are still multiple federal offices of women’s health, and
no federal offices of men’s health.
HOW ARE MALE-FEMALE RELATIONS LIKELY TO EVOLVE IF THE MYTH OF
MALE POWER READERS DO NOT BECOME EFFECTIVE LEADERS?
Basically, trends that have already been set into motion will worsen. For
example…
Billions of boys throughout the industrialized world will be adrift with a sense
of purposelessness, depression and destructiveness—a “failure to launch”;
The gap between the economically rich vs. poor will be more a function of
families that are dad-rich vs. dad-poor (dad-rich families being those in which
paternal influence is about equal to maternal influence);
The percentage of U.S. women under 30 having children without being married
will increase to more than 60%;
Our daughters will increasingly feel like they must choose between a life of
loneliness and life with a “loser.”
WHAT ARE THE MOST POTENT STRATEGIESTHAT READERS WHO ARE
LEADERS CAN AFFECT IN THE NEXT DECADE?
The Myth of Male Power embodies thousands of possible strategies. The emphasis
here is on the most potent strategies—ones with the most ripple effect…
Father involvement. For example, instead of increasing government support for
single moms, reward moms for living with—or near—equally-involved dads;
Find companies willing to perfect and distribute a male birth control pill;
Lobby for a White House Council on Boys and Men to study the world’s most
effective programs for boys and men—and to develop those programs more
universally;
Develop alliances between schools and scouting programs, Y’s, Boys and Girls’
Clubs, Little League, etc. for each child to:
Be both a mentor and a mentee
Learn how to handle criticism without becoming defensive at the same
time their parents and teachers are learning the same;
Be involved in both a team sport and a solo sport (track; swimming,
gymnastics)
Participate in pick-up team sports
Be contributing to the community or those less fortunate
Be constantly exposed to participating in earning money and job training at
different levels each year
Organize university students to petition for genuine men’s and boys’ studies
programs, and, if stonewalled, to sue the university for a violation of the 14th
Amendment’s equal protection clause;
Educate parents and teachers as to how to identify which children might benefit
from single gender or co-ed classes, and how to evaluate the best single sex
schools;
Lobby or sue for the end of male-only draft registration due to its violation of
the 14th
 Amendment’s equal protection clause;
Develop a MANstream media, such as A Voice for Men, in which the issues in
this book can be discussed even as compassion for women is retained.
The importance of most of these bullet points becomes apparent as we read The
Myth of Male Power, but because my research on father involvement did not get
published until 2001 (in Father and Child Reunion), and my research on a book to be
called The Boy Crisis is still in-process, (to be co-authored with John Gray), I’ll use
boys and fathers as examples of how what’s both changed and remained intransigent
might enrich what you discover in The Myth of Male Power.
BOYS AND FATHERS
Boys first. When The Myth of Male Power was published there was little
agreement with my assessment of male vulnerability. Today, throughout the entire
industrialized world, male vulnerability among boys is apparent.
Our sons’ far greater likelihood to suffer from ADHD, VGA (video game
addiction), and addiction to video porn; and our sons being two to three years behind
our daughters in two of the greatest predictors of success—reading and writing (to
say nothing of emotional intelligence)—have led to our sons being more medicated
and less educated.
Parents and teachers see the symptoms, but there is little awareness of the ten
underlying causes (ones I will articulate in The Boy Crisis) creating a “perfect
storm.” One of those causes is the increasing absence of dads: the families that are
“dad poor.”
FATHERLESSNESS
One out of every three children in America lives in father-absent homes.
Even more startling is the trend: As mentioned above, for the first time in U.S.
history, more than 50% of children born to mothers under 30 were born outside
marriage.
i
 (Almost two-thirds of children in the U.S. are born to mothers under 30.)
What’s the relationship between being born outside of marriage and being fatherdeprived? A big one. Already by age five, nearly 40% of children born outside of
marriage have had no regular contact with their dads for the preceding two years
ii
Doesn’t fatherlessness (or father involvement that is mom-controlled) do about as
much damage to our daughters as our sons? Yes. Both our sons and daughters are
damaged in almost all thirty developmental areas—from social development (e.g.,
lack of empathy, aggressiveness, disobedience, temper tantrums) to psychological
health (e.g., depression, ADHD, nightmares); physical health, and academic
achievement.
However, it is our sons who are more likely to be experiencing the “failure to
launch” and being adrift with little sense of purpose.
What’s the connection between father involvement and a boy’s sense of purpose?
“Who will be my role model, now that my role model is gone?” — Paul Simon
What a boy misses when he misses his dad is conveyed best on an emotional level
by Daniel Beaty in this video (“Knock Knock”). [Please give this link a few seconds
to register]
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9eYH0AFx6yI
Whether his dad is a positive or negative role model, a boy uses his dad to
discover the half of him that is the genes of his dad. He may do this by looking in the
mirror and seeing his dad’s nose and eyes. If he doesn’t know his dad, his dad
becomes a “straw dad.”
A dad may inspire him to be like his dad, or to avoid being like his dad. But if he
doesn’t know his dad, or feels his dad has rejected or abandoned him, or just doesn’t
care, life’s journey is often about either his wounds, or the way he covers his
wounds. When his dad is but a straw man, the half of himself that is his dad becomes
a “straw son.” If he becomes successful on the outside, his success can blind others
to his emptiness inside.
THE IMPACT OF TWO MORE DECADES OF “WOMEN GOOD/MEN BAD”
The past two decades have widened the gap between the ways industrialized
countries have responded to our daughters vs. our sons since the late ‘60s.
For our daughters, when the prosperity of industrialized countries allowed for the
option of divorces in the ‘60’s and 70’s, women became liberated from marriage and
motherhood as the sole definition of feminine purpose. Fortunately, feminism proactively filled women’s “purpose void” with visions of careers, liberation and
equality. A woman’s new sense of purpose was to “discover herself;” to feel “the
wind beneath her wings”; to be whoever she wished to be: head of a company or head
of a family; single mom or just single. Or some combination of all of the above.
Of course, this is wonderful. And had we simultaneously guided our sons through
the same process we would have had a “gender transition movement”—or a “gender
liberation movement”—helping both our sons and daughters make a transition from
the rigid roles of the past to more flexible roles for the future.
Instead, billions of women world-wide were told that they got 59 cents—now 75
cents—to men’s dollar for the same work. This understandably made women feel
undervalued, used and oppressed. Since this turns out to not be accurate, how did the
truth stay off the radar?
In part, because studying how women could liberate themselves from their
oppression promised a pioneering career. In contrast, few people wished to devote
their career to examining the feelings of the “oppressor.” And anyone who sought
such a career would soon discover that neither universities, nor government, nor
private foundations would finance anyone’s career to study those “oppressors”
(except, perhaps, as part of the problem). After all, they already filled every history
book. No one saw they filled history books as human doings, not human beings.
So one of my core themes in The Myth of Male Power—that history’s controlling
force was not patriarchy, but survival—is still ignored. Instead, the leading
universities’ women’s studies and “gender studies” courses still emanate from the
Marxist and Civil Rights model of oppressor vs. oppressed. We’ll see in this book
exactly why the dichotomy of oppressor/oppressed is both inaccurate and, more
important, undermines love and women’s empowerment.
In virtually every leading university this leads to a demonizing of men and
masculinity that distorts the very essence of traditional masculinity—being
socialized to be a hero by being willing to sacrifice oneself in war or in work. The
possibility that being socialized to be disposable is not genuine power is, to this day,
either considered radical, heretical, or, most frequently, not considered.
With this women good/men bad attitude, we proudly watch our daughters find “the
wind beneath their wings” and sadly witness our sons experiencing a “failure to
launch.” The good news is that if societal attitudes can have such an impact on our
daughters in a half-century, revisiting our attitudes may help us revive our sons.
How do we do this?
REDEFINING A BOY’s SENSE OF PURPOSE
Previously, boys defined themselves as a man in three ways: preparing for war;
preparing for work; being a dad who is a provider-protector. Together these created a
man’s “sense of purpose.”
Today, boys see that preparation for war is not necessary; and that being a sole
breadwinner is no longer synonymous with masculinity.
What about a boy’s sense of purpose as a future dad? With the majority of young
women having children on their own, and either his own dad or many of his
classmates’ dads being marginalized, he can see his probable disposability as a dad
even as a boy.
In brief, he sees no purpose as a dad; no purpose as a warrior; no purpose as
sole breadwinner. Neither killer-protector nor nurturer-connector.
Yes, today’s boy has freedom. But for some boys it feels like freedom in the Kris
Kristofferson/Janis Joplin sense of “freedom is just another word for nothing left to
lose.”
In the past two decades, even as our sons are the “new disadvantaged” in almost
every area, boys see the scholarships—in the past designed to aid the disadvantaged
—still going to girls. They see their sex being identified as the discriminators,
rapists, date rapists, deadbeat dads, wife-batterers, sexual harassers, serial killers,
greedy “banksters,” and unfaithful cheaters. It can feel as if they are at the top,
bottom and middle of women’s “enemy list.”
As for a woman, men “falling from grace all over the place” means she can’t trust
a man any more than she can trust a stroll on a starry night thru Manhattan’s Central
Park. Seeing men as jerks and oppressors has served only one purpose: it has given
women a unifying force.
Men don’t have a unifying force of women-as-jerks or oppressors. Men’s purpose
in being trained to kill was, ironically, at least in part to protect the sex that now
considers them the “oppressor.” To die for a woman’s love is one thing. To die for
women who think of him as a jerk, enemy, or “oppressor” feels more like saving the
enemy.
The challenge is to guide boys toward a new sense of purpose without using
“women bad” as a unifying force.
WHY FATHERING WILL BE A NEW MALE SENSE OF PURPOSE
Worldwide, billions of our sons will earn less than our daughters. If a woman who
wishes to be a mom does not consider a young man who earns less to be marriage
material, then more and more women will have children outside of marriage and
without dad.
That can change only as parents and teachers help our sons and daughters value
young men who are likely to be better at raising children than raising money. In
well-educated, single mom families, maternal protection often catalyzes in boys the
propensity for sensitivity but not the will to succeed. Many of these young men have
much more potential raising children than money. But our attitudes have to change.
Instead of our silently seeing them as losers, we can prepare them for fathering as a
new sense of purpose.
Young men of every class and background are inspired by the possibility of having
their values and their lives serve a purpose for their children. I saw this in 2003,
when I spoke at prisons while running for Governor of California.
I neither expected nor desired to be governor; I wanted only to put on the ballot
the rationale for every child having both parents. It was shortly after Father and
Child Reunion had been published, and as the prisoners listened to me about the
importance of fathers, one after the other shared with me, in effect: “I’ve made so
many mistakes; I wish I could help my children prevent those mistakes. Knowing I
can help my children learn from my experience gives me a reason to get out of
prison. It gives my life a purpose.”
THE FUTURE: FATHERING ASTHEONLY CAREER THAT WILL LAST A
LIFETIME
In the past, men’s careers-as-purpose lasted a lifetime. In the future, careers will
rarely last a lifetime; it is preparing our son to be a dad that will give him a
sense of purpose for a lifetime.
Only a small fraction of men feel their souls nurtured by their career. For most
men, the road to high pay is a toll road.
iii There are few men who, on their
deathbed, say, “I wish I had spent more time at the office.” In contrast, dads who
offer dad richness receive the gift of a nurtured soul.
Part of what motivates a boy, though, is feeling he has something unique to
contribute. A mission. For many boys, this will continue to be as “the” breadwinner.
And it is important to encourage our sons to have that option in life’s toolkit. But for
billions of boys worldwide, respect needs to be found in more options than being the
killer-protector. Yet no force—neither parents, nor teachers, nor faith based
institutions—is teaching boys about their unique contributions as a dad.
Dads typically bring to the parenting table a propensity for game-playing, roughhousing, cat-and-mouse chasing, and coaching. This joyful and energizing tension
creates a father-child bond that a dad can use as leverage for a child to take
responsibility; or to successfully encourage his child to “get up and try again” after
a set back.
And most important, it creates leverage for boundary enforcement. Boundary
enforcement is not just related to the development of postponed gratification, but
also to lower rates of ADHD.
iv
As a boy in a dad rich home rough-houses, is coached, or is read to at bed time, his
experience of how a dad’s love and support feels becomes part of him, as syrup
becomes part of a pancake. It informs the dad he will become.
WILL THE THEMES IN THE MYTH OF MALE POWER EVER BE INTEGRATED
INTO THE MAINSTREAM?
The bad news is that when an adult man complains, women hear whining—and no
woman’s hero is a man who whines. For millions of years women got protection by
choosing Alpha males, not whining males. A woman’s instinct to seek a killerprotector husband was part of her instinct to protect her children.
The good news is that although our binoculars haven’t yet focused on the “boy
crisis” part of the problem, the boy crisis will be the first area of male vulnerability
that receives empathy. Why?
A vulnerable son taps into his mom’s protector instinct. When a mom sees her son
unable to concentrate on his homework, or his only smiles emerge after he wins a
video game, or she senses his fear of rejection should he ask a girl out, her protector
instinct surfaces.
If you are that mom—or a dad—let me share with you from the thousands of
reader emails since the publication of The Myth of Male Power, what has deeply
touched my heart: young men who said that they read it at a moment in their life
when their loneliness and feelings of powerlessness found them envisioning suicide,
but added, “as I read The Myth of Male Power, I knew that someone understood; I
didn’t feel isolated…I had a reason to live.”
However, if a guy who reads The Myth of Male Power does feel less isolated, but
he asks another guy—or a woman with whom he is “testing the waters"—to read it,
and no one does read it, the feelings of isolation return. Fortunately, he has a much
better chance of getting a friend to play a game than read a book. For this reason I’ve
developed a game based on The Myth of Male Power—an app called Who Knows
Men—to serve as a bridge. No man is an island.
(An aside: an e-book and app are quite a change from writing much of this book’s
first draft by hand—on 3” by 5” index cards!)
It is my hope that the reader of The Myth of Male Power will be fortified by the
data, but will share it largely through personal stories that also make it apparent our
daughters win when our sons win.
If you dare be more than a reader—but a reader who makes a difference—know
that you will be distorted and demonized. You will have to confront bureaucracies
that have tried to stuff the round peg of gender relations into the square hole of
oppressor vs. oppressed that was appropriate for slavery, but not for families. You
will be guiding an “evolutionary shift.” Fortunately, we’ll see why industrialization
has made that shift not only possible, but necessary.
It is my hope, if you are both reader and leader, that just as the women’s
movement redefined women and expanded our daughters’ future, you will employ
The Myth of Male Power to redefine men and expands our sons’ future—thus
preparing our sons to become the men our daughters will be proud to love.
Warren Farrell, Ph.D.
Mill Valley, California
www.warrenfarrell.com
www.warrenfarrell.org
January 24, 2014
Original Introduction, 1993
In the quarter century that I have worked on women’s and men’s issues, there has
never been a moment when I have seen men feeling more gagged, and more ready to
remove their gags, than now. I see men searching for ways to explore the only space
men have been unwilling to explore—their inner space. The next quarter century will
provide an opportunity for thousands of men and women to be pioneers in this
exploration. The discoveries will assist men out of isolation—and, therefore, out of
the drugs, divorce, depression, suicide, and the early deaths that are isolation’s
legacy.
Male anguish is not the concern of men alone. A man’s suicide affects his wife,
children, parents, colleagues, friends. So does his early death, his alcoholism, his
addiction to beautiful young women. . . . Each affects corporate profits and national
productivity. When men are victims, we are all victims.
The Myth of Male Power is not a return to the 1950s man; it is a leap forward to
the 2050s man. And the 2050s woman. It is about why male-female roles that were
functional for the species for millions of years have become dysfunctional in an
evolutionary instant.
WHAT DOES IT TAKE TO SPEAK UP FOR MEN?
For three years I served on the board of directors of the National Organization for
Women in New York City. As I explained women’s perspectives to men, I often
noticed a woman “elbow” the man she was with, as if to say, “See, even an expert
says what a jerk you are.” I slowly became good at saying what women wanted to
hear. I enjoyed the standing ovations that followed.
The fact that my audiences were about 90 percent women and 10 percent men
(most of whom had been dragged there by the women) only reinforced my
assumption that women were enlightened and men were “Neanderthals”; that women
were, after all, Smart Women stuck with Foolish Choices. I secretly loved this
perspective—it allowed me to see myself as one of America’s Sensitive New Age
Men. A New Top Gun. Feminists who asked me, “How can we clone you?” or “What
in your background made you so secure?” reinforced that secret pride. And the three
or four invitations for new engagements following each speech allowed for some
financial security.
Years passed. As most of the women who were my strongest supporters got
divorced, I could only assume the problem was their husbands. The women agreed.
But I observed something my feminist womenfriends had in common: an increasing
anger toward men, a restlessness in their eyes that did not reflect a deeper inner
peace.
Then one day (in one of those rare moments of internal security) I asked myself
whether whatever impact I might have had was a positive one; I wondered if the
reason so many more women than men listened to me was because I had been
listening to women but not listening to men. I reviewed some of the tapes from
among the hundreds of women’s and men’s groups I had started. I heard myself.
When women criticized men, I called it “insight,” “assertiveness,” “women’s
liberation,” “independence,” or “high self-esteem.” When men criticized women, I
called it “sexism,” “male chauvinism,” “defensiveness,” “rationalizing,” and
“backlash.” I did it politely—but the men got the point. Soon the men were no longer
expressing their feelings. Then I criticized the men for not expressing their feelings!
I decided to experiment with ways of getting men to express feelings. I noticed
men were often most open about their feelings on the first date. On the first date, the
woman often used what I came to call “awe training”—those looks of “Wow, that’s
fascinating” in her eyes (if not in her words). The men felt secure and opened up.
So when men in my men’s groups spoke, I exercised some awe training. It worked.
I heard things I had never heard before—things that forced me to reexamine my own
life and motives. The combination created a new dilemma. . . .
Now when women asked, “Why are men afraid of commitment?” or feminists
said, “Men have the power,” my answers incorporated both sexes’ perspectives.
Almost overnight my standing ovations disintegrated. After each speaking
engagement, I was no longer receiving three or four new requests to speak. My
financial security was drying up.
I would not be honest if I denied that this tempted me to return to being a
spokesperson only for women’s perspectives. I liked writing, speaking, and doing
television shows. Now it seemed that all three were in jeopardy. I quickly discovered
it took far more internal security to speak on behalf of men than to speak on
behalf of women. Or, more accurately, to speak on behalf of both sexes rather than
on behalf of only women.
Fortunately there is another side. Although it was women’s standing ovations that
had tapered off, it was also mostly women who wrote me that these new perspectives
were helping them feel much more loving toward their husbands or fathers, their
sons, or a man at work. And it was mostly women who said it would help them if
these new perspectives were in writing.
HOW TO CHERISH FEMINISM’S BABY, BUT NOT ITS BATHWATER
I will be saddened if this book is misused to attack the legitimate issues of the
women’s movement—issues for which I spent a decade of my life fighting. The
challenge is both to go beyond feminism and to cherish its contributions. And
feminism’s contributions are many.
Without feminism, fewer companies would have experimented with part-time
workers, flexible schedules, child-care options, and improved safety standards.
Without women in police work, few police forces would have discovered that 95
percent of conflicts are not resolved by physical strength; without women doctors,
few hospitals would be cutting back ninety-hour work weeks for doctors; without
women therapists, short-term counseling and couple counseling would be much less
available. . . . The feminist movement has allowed thousands of workplace
assumptions to be reexamined; feminism brought into the workplace not only
females but female energy.
When I see girls playing baseball, my eyes well up with tears of happiness for
what I know they are learning about teamwork, and tears of sadness for what the girls
I grew up with missed. Without the feminist movement, those girls would be on the
sidelines. Without the feminist movement, millions of girls would see only one
dimension of their mothers and, therefore, of themselves. They would have to marry
more for money than for love. They would be even more fearful of aging.
I am often asked what made me so empathetic with the early feminist movement.
It was often assumed my mother or former wife must have been an active feminist,
but neither was. That is, my mother wasn’t a “movement feminist,” but I can recall
coming home after being elected seventh-grade class president, proudly announcing
it to my mother, and saying, “Our class meetings are on Fridays. . . . I was wondering
if maybe I could have an ironed shirt just on Fridays when I have to preside in front
of the class.” She said “sure” and without missing a beat, took out the ironing board
and showed me how to iron my shirts.
At the time, my mother’s response seemed consistent only with her oft-repeated
statement, “I’m your mother, not your slave.” But as I get older I reframed those
experiences both as preparation for my comfort with feminism in its initial
egalitarian form and as one of my mother’s ways of expressing love—not by doing
for me but by teaching me to do for myself. Predictably, I have grown up seeing that
my way of expressing love is to endorse that part of the feminist movement that
empowers women to support themselves and to withdraw from that part that blames
and plays victim.
The Myth of Male Power is not designed to create popularity. Unlike most selfimprovement books, it is not a female self-assurance book; it loves women in a
different way.
WHY DO WE NEED TO STUDY MEN—ISN’T HISTORY ONE BIG STUDY OF
MEN?
The most common justification for studying women without studying men is that
“history is men’s studies . . . women’s studies is just an attempt to give women
something equivalent to what men already have.” True? No. Women’s studies
questions the female role; nothing questions the male role. History books sell to boys
the traditional male role of hero and performer. Each history book is 500 pages of
advertisements for the performer role. Each lesson tells him, “If you perform, you
will get love and respect; if you fail, you will be a nothing.” To a boy, history is
pressure to perform, not relief from that pressure. Feminism is relief from the
pressure to be confined to only the traditional female role. To a boy, then, history is
not the equivalent of women’s studies; it is the opposite of women’s studies.
Women’s studies does more than question the female role—it tells women they
have rights to what was the traditional male role. Nothing tells men they have rights
to what was the traditional female role—rights to stay home full-time or part-time
with the children while his wife supports him. . . .
Just as, from a girl’s perspective, history books are filled with men, from a boy’s
perspective, school itself is filled with women. It is women teaching him how to be a
boy by conforming to what women tell him to do after he’s been trained to conform
to what his mother tells him to do. On the one hand, history books show him that his
role is to be a hero who takes risks and, on the other, his female teacher is telling him
not to take risks—to not roughhouse, not shout out an answer spontaneously, not use
swear words, not refer to sex, not get his hair mussed, his clothes dirty. . . . Just as
women’s studies helped women see they have a right to female teachers in business
school, so men’s studies will help men see they have a right to male teachers in
grade school.
WHY FEMINISM HAS INTENSIFIED THE NEED FOR STUDYING MEN
Feminism suggested that God might be a “She” but not that the devil might also be a
“she.” Feminism articulated the shadow side of men and the light side of women. It
neglected the shadow side of women and the light side of men. And neglected to
acknowledge that each sex has both sides within each individual. When the issue of
sexual harassment surfaced, then, we were told “men don’t ‘get it’ ” when, in fact,
neither sex “gets” it. Men don’t get women’s fears of harassment that stem from the
passive role; women don’t get men’s fears of sexual rejection that stem from the
initiating role. Each sex is so preoccupied with its own vulnerability that neither sex
“gets” the other’s vulnerability.
The difference? Feminism has taught women to sue men for sexual harassment or
date rape when men initiate with the wrong person or with the wrong timing; no one
has taught men to sue women for sexual trauma for saying “yes,” then “no,” then
“yes,” then “no.” Feminism left women with three sexual options—their old role, the
“male” role, and the “victim” role. Men were left with less than one option—they
were still expected to initiate, but now, if they did it badly, they could go to jail. For
an adolescent boy who barely knows what sex is, this is a scary half-option.
Feminism justified female “victim power” by convincing the world that we lived
in a sexist, male-dominated, and patriarchal world. The Myth of Male Power explains
why the world was bi-sexist, both male- and female-dominated, both patriarchal and
matriarchal—each in different ways. It explains why “patriarchy” and “male
dominance” doubled as code words for male disposability.
By the 1980s and ’90s, feminism’s ability to articulate women’s light side and
men’s shadow side led to women’s magazines, talk shows, “self-improvement”
books, and TV specials all equating “progressive” with women as victims and men as
victimizers but rarely with men as victims (of false accusations, emotional abuse,
visitation deprivation . . .) and women as victimizers. It was soon considered
progressive to critique “male legislators” for making war but not to credit them for
making democracy. We saw TV specials titled Does the Man Next Door Molest
Girls? but not Does the Man Next Door Save Girls? In our everyday lives we might
see six firefighters saving women, but no TV special titled Men as Saviors points out
that all six were men—or that firemen who save women’s lives are far more
ubiquitous than men who jeopardize women’s lives.
To acknowledge the full truth was no longer considered progressive, but
regressive. Women bought the books and the publishers pandered to women the way
politicians pander to interest groups. Women became Women Who Love . . . and men
became Men Who Hate . . . (women’s light side, men’s dark side). The pandering
transformed a female strength—understanding relationships—into a female
weakness: misunderstanding men.
In the past quarter century, feminism has been to the daily news what bacteria is to
water—we consumed it without knowing it, both the good and the bad. From the
male point of view, feminism turned the Battle of the Sexes into a “War in Which
Only One Side Showed Up.”1
Men have not been perfect listeners during the last quarter century as women
articulated what they wanted, but men did listen enough to absorb dozens of new
concepts (“sex object,” “glass ceiling,” palimony, the “Battered Woman Syndrome,”
“deadbeat dads,” the “feminization of poverty”), heard dozens of slogans focused on
female concerns (“a woman’s right to choose,” “equal pay for equal work,” “our
bodies, our business”), and to see their sexuality blamed for most everything (sexual
harassment, sexual molestation, pornography, incest, rape, date rape).
Men not only listened but accepted as truth dozens of assumptions of
discrimination against women (women are the victims of most violence; women’s
health is neglected more than men’s; women are paid less for the same work;
husbands batter wives more; men have more power; we’ve lived in a patriarchal,
sexist, male-dominated world). Many men condemned these “discriminations against
women” even as they accepted the “necessity” for discrimination against men
(affirmative action for women; government-subsidized women’s commissions in
almost every state and county; women’s studies; women-only clubs; government
programs for women, infants, and children [WIC] . . .).
THE COURAGE TO CONFRONT: WOMEN CANNOT HEAR WHAT MEN DO NOT
SAY
Have we been misled by feminists? Yes. Is it feminists’ fault? No. Why not? Men
have not spoken up. Simply stated, women cannot hear what men do not say. (Women
Can’t Hear What Men Don’t Say became the title of my next book—in 1999.) Now
men must take responsibility to say what they want—to turn a “War in Which Only
One Side Shows Up” into a “Dialogue in Which Both Sexes Speak Up.”
I am often astonished at how men collude in turning relationship issues into
women’s issues. When a book like The Myth of Male Power arrives in a newsroom,
male journalists often reflexively say, “This is for Mary over at the Family Page—
she specializes in ‘women’s’ issues.” It is time for men to take responsibility to end
the “Era of Relationship-Issues-as-Women’s-Issues.”
Looking at relationships as if women were the center is like looking at the solar
system as if Earth were in the center. But as Galileo discovered, only half the job is
in the discovery; the other half is in the courage to present the findings. Most men
are still invested in getting women’s love by protecting women. And many women
are still invested in receiving the special protection we accord the victim.
Adjusting our relationship assumptions almost always rubs like sandpaper on our
psyches. But just as the key to real estate is “location, location, location,” the key to
relationships is “listen, listen, listen.” How well we listen to men will determine
whether the result is a civil dialogue or a civil war.
If women listen in the future better than men did in the past, men will not need to
speak for a quarter of a century; if women withdraw emotionally, interrupt with “yes,
buts,” respond with personal accusations (“You must hate women”), or tell men,
“I’m receptive, you just chose the wrong time to speak,” men will clam up and it will
take more than a quarter of a century for them to gain an equal hearing. It never feels
like the right time to listen to what we might be afraid to hear (it always feels like
sandpaper on our psyches).
Women have contributed a tone. Men must contribute theirs before we are ready
for a synthesis.
IS THE MYTH OF MALE POWER THE FLIP SIDE OF FEMINISM?
It will be tempting to see The Myth of Male Power as the flip side of feminism. It is
not. Feminism says, “The world is patriarchal and male-dominated.” The flip side is,
“The world is matriarchal and female-dominated.” I explain why it is both
patriarchal and matriarchal, both male- and female-dominated. The book explains
male disposability without denying female disposability (e.g., when a man turns in
his wife of forty for two twenties). That is an integrated approach.
How has feminism gotten us to see a one-sided approach as integrated? By telling
us not that “women see the world as patriarchal, sexist, and male-dominated” but
rather that “the world is patriarchal, sexist, and male-dominated.” Whenever
feminism portrays itself as the whole picture, it is a form of sexism—in the same
way a “masculist” approach would be sexist if it portrayed itself as the whole
picture.
AM I A MEN’S LIBERATIONIST? A FEMINIST? BOTH? OR NEITHER?
Like everyone else, I prefer to be listened to rather than labeled. But labels do give
us a foothold in a complex world. And any movement that has impact develops an
identity—or label—in the public mind. So . . .
I am a men’s liberationist (or “masculist”) when men’s liberation is defined as
equal opportunity and equal responsibility for both sexes. I am a feminist when
feminism favors equal opportunities and responsibilities for both sexes. I oppose
both movements when either says our sex is the oppressed sex, therefore, “we
deserve rights.” That’s not gender liberation but gender entitlement.
Ultimately I am in favor of neither a women’s movement nor a men’s movement
but a gender transition movement. However, I oppose skipping past a men’s
movement until men have equally articulated their perspective. Then we will be
ready for a synthesis.
A MESSAGE TO MEN . . . MOSTLY
It will be tempting to discuss this book with a feminist because that’s probably the
person you know who’s most interested in sex roles. But this is like a man bringing a
book that questions the Bible to a born-again Christian because that’s the person you
know who’s most interested in religion. The person who studies their bible daily is
the least likely to question their bible fairly.
If your “family” has many feminists, you will have to confront yourself about the
degree to which you need their approval. This book will put you in touch with a lot of
new feelings. You will have to be secure enough to handle the possibility that
perhaps it wasn’t your feelings that were desired but rather your agreement.
Start a support group of other men with whom you can explore these feelings.* As
men, we tend to place all our emotional eggs in the basket of the woman we love and
then become fearful of saying anything that might crack those eggs. A group allows
an alternate source of emotional support. And a place to sort out feelings worth
discussing before you say what you later wish you hadn’t.
Exactly what do men discover when they share their feelings with other men?
Here’s an example. In the past few years, I have asked more than 10,000 American
and Canadian men from all walks of life if they would prefer to take off work for six
months to a year after each child was born to be involved with the child full time.
More than 80 percent of the men said that full-time involvement with their children
would be their preference—but only if their wives approved and they weren’t hurting
their families economically. (About 17 percent of the men prefer part-time
involvement; about 3 percent prefer to remain working full time.)
But notice that the men I surveyed had to have this question asked of them. And
even then, many felt inhibited about raising their hands. As men express feelings
with other men, they begin to ask questions like this of themselves. They are shocked
to discover that so many of them want something for which they have never asked.
Which stimulates them to wonder why they never asked.
Why? Unconsciously, men feel it is a waste to be in touch with feelings because,
well, “If I tell my wife I want to take off from work to care for the children while she
pays the bills, it would just create an argument, I’ll lose, and she’ll withdraw; so
what’s the use?” Why was the “courageous sex” so afraid of their wives’
withdrawal? Exactly because all their emotional eggs were invested in one basket—a
problem a support group helps solve.
This book will create growth. But growth is a personal challenge. It can be in
conflict with love—a relationship challenge. Your next challenge is getting the
women you love to feel receptive to your genuine feelings. The trick is in learning to
grow without turning those who love us into the enemy. Start by reading to her
excerpts from this book that reflect the values you both share. (Don’t introduce The
Myth of Male Power to a woman by saying, “You need to read this.”) Be sure your
tone reflects your understanding that almost everything in this book will ultimately
empower her and deepen your love.
A MESSAGE TO WOMEN . . . MOSTLY
The challenge to women will be to be as open to the man’s experience of
powerlessness as you would to the woman’s—to care as much about a man who joins
the army for money as about a woman who has sex for money. Men will compound
that challenge because they have not had a lifetime of practice in knowing how or
when to express those feelings to you. So when they read a book that makes them
start wanting to create changes, they might express themselves in an angry tone of
voice or choose the wrong time. The trick is in knowing that even if the anger is
directed partly at you, if it is heard and acknowledged (rather than argued with and
discounted with “yes, buts”) he will quickly see you as his ally rather than his
enemy. When he knows he has a safe environment for his feelings, his anger toward
you will be short-lived and his love for you will be deepened.
Women tell me these new perspectives on men help them soften their attitudes
toward men if they keep reminding themselves, “This is his perspective—not
necessarily mine. . . . I have to think of myself as reading about a foreign culture.”
Almost everything in this book has passed the “rings true” test with men; despite the
statistics, the book reflects men’s feelings. The data are there only to help you know
he’s not crazy.
The professional woman—or a powerful woman—often has the most difficulty
understanding male powerlessness. Why? The powerful woman tends to connect with
a powerful man. (The less powerful man—like the garbage man—is invisible to her.)
And what she sees of the powerful man is deceptive: the powerful man is best at
repressing his fears.
The professional woman is more likely to know the name of her secretary than of
her garbage man. And therefore more likely to know how her secretary experiences
men than how her garbage man experiences women. Because a less powerful woman
tends to work in the office and a less powerful man tends to work outside the office
(e.g., in hazardous jobs), she is more conscious of the dilemmas of the less powerful
woman around whom she works.
The powerful woman doesn’t feel the effect of her secretary’s miniskirt power,
cleavage power, and flirtation power. Men do. The powerful woman tends to use
these forms of power much more cautiously in the workplace because she has other
forms of power.
Taken together, all of this blinds the professional woman to the powerlessness of
the great majority of men—who are not at the tip of the pyramid but at its base. And
without the sexual power of many of the females at its base.
Some women, when they get a glimpse of the degree to which they have
misjudged men, feel a bit overwhelmed, as in “What can I do?” Fortunately, most of
the solution is fairly simple. Most men want little more than to feel appreciated and
understood—from the male perspective (not the Cosmopolitan or Glamour version of
the male perspective). So just allow time for him to reveal his version of himself by
providing a safe environment (not withdrawing) even when those feelings involve
criticism of you. I have never had a man come up to me and say, “I want a
divorce; my partner understands me.”
I have repeatedly heard from women that when they are, for example, at a party
and they share these perspectives with men, they soon find themselves surrounded by
men who are pouring out their feelings to them! Thus they begin to see men in a new
way. It is at that point the woman begins really loving men. Prior to that, she was
loving an image of men. (Or maybe not loving men.) It was not her fault she loved
only that image—that was all he showed; it was not his fault he showed that image—
that was what he thought she would love.
The more a man is deprived of expressing feelings, the more he feels loved when
he finally does feel heard. The woman who experiences this new view of men
becomes special, in part, exactly because so few women do.
TO BOTH SEXES . . .
The Myth of Male Power violates both sexes’ biologically inherited instinct to
protect the female. Protecting the female implied listening to her needs and
repressing his own—even to the point of dying. It will therefore literally be natural
to find flaws as a defense against hearing the male world view. There are flaws
enough to find, but I will ask you not to make your ability to hear men dependent on
my perfection.
When a statistic seems unbelievable, check out the endnote. I have eliminated
more than a hundred statistics from my initial drafts that illustrated my point but did
not prove reliable under scrutiny. However, if I missed something, don’t let my
oversights allow you to miss the deeper understanding.
• • •
Men can be thought of as in search of their inner perestroika. Just as it happened
for Soviet citizens when they were watching the world around them become freer, it
began happening for men as they watched the women around them become freer. In
the same way Soviet citizens began to question whether their perception of
themselves as a “powerful nation” was really a distraction from facing their
powerlessness, so men are on the verge of questioning whether their perception of
themselves as the “powerful sex” is really a distraction from confronting their
powerlessness. Men are appropriately beginning to see themselves for what they’ve
become—a Third World sex. Or so I am asserting . . . but I haven’t yet backed up
that assertion. Is male power really a myth? Let’s look. And as we’re looking, share
your own insights with me so I can grow from you and return that growth in my next
book.
Warren Farrell, Ph.D.
Encinitas (San Diego), CA, 1993
PART I
THE MYTH OF MALE POWER
CHAPTER 1
Is Male Power Really a Myth? A First Glance
The weakness of men is the facade of strength; the strength of women is the
facade of weakness.
1
There are many ways in which a woman experiences a greater sense of powerlessness
than her male counterpart: the fears of pregnancy, aging, rape, date rape, and being
physically overpowered; less socialization to take a career that pays enough to
support a husband and children; less exposure to team sports and its blend of
competitiveness and cooperation that is so helpful to career preparation; greater
parental pressure to marry and interrupt career for children without regard for her
own wishes; not being part of an “old boys” network; having less freedom to walk
into a bar without being bothered. . . .
Fortunately, almost all industrialized nations have acknowledged these female
experiences. Unfortunately, they have acknowledged only the female experiences—
and concluded that women have the problem, men are the problem. Men, though,
have a different experience. A man who has seen his marriage become alimony
payments, his home become his wife’s home, and his children become child-support
payments for those who have been turned against him psychologically feels he is
spending his life working for people who hate him. He feels desperate for someone
to love but fears that another marriage might ultimately leave him with another
mortgage payment, another set of children turned against him, and a deeper
desperation. When he is called “commitment-phobic” he doesn’t feel understood.
When a man tries to keep up with payments by working overtime and is told he is
insensitive, or tries to handle the stress by drinking and is told he is a drunkard, he
doesn’t feel powerful, but powerless. When he fears a cry for help will be met with
“stop whining,” or that a plea to be heard will be met with “yes, buts,” he skips past
attempting suicide as a cry for help, and just commits suicide. Thus men have
remained the silent sex and increasingly become the suicide sex.
Since this chapter is only an overview, it will generate more of those “yes, buts”
than any other. The rest of the book is about answering those “yes, buts.” So this
chapter is offered with the trust that you will go beyond it. This chapter is a case of
“a little knowledge is a dangerous thing.” But staying with the book until the end will
leave us more balanced in our view of the sexes—not because this book is balanced,
but because the book balances what we now know. Here goes. . . .
A MAN’S GOTTA DO WHAT A MAN’S GOTTA DO
ITEM. Imagine: Music is playing on your car radio. An announcer’s voice
interrupts: “We have a special bulletin from the president.” (For some reason,
you decide not to switch stations.) The president announces, “Since 1.2
million American men have been killed in war, as part of my new program
for equality, we will draft only women until 1.2 million American women
have been killed in war.”
In post offices throughout the United States, Selective Service posters remind men
that only they must register for the draft. If the post office had a poster saying “A
Jew’s Gotta Do What a Jew’s Gotta Do” . . . Or if “A Woman’s Gotta Do . . .” were
written across the body of a pregnant woman . . .
The question is this: How is it that if any other group were singled out to register
for the draft based merely on its characteristics at birth—be that group blacks, Jews,
women, or gays—we would immediately recognize it as genocide, but when men are
singled out based on their sex at birth, men call it power?
The single biggest barrier to getting men to look within is that what any other
group would call powerlessness, men have been taught to call power. We don’t call
“male-killing” sexism; we call it “glory.” We don’t call the one million men who
were killed or maimed in one battle in World War I (the Battle of the Somme
2
) a
holocaust, we call it “serving the country.” We don’t call those who selected only
men to die “murderers.” We call them “voters.”
Our slogan for women is “A Woman’s Body, A Woman’s Choice”; our slogan for
men is “A Man’s Gotta Do What a Man’s Gotta Do.”
ITEM. In 1920 women in the United States lived one year longer than men.3
Today women live seven years longer.
4 The male-female life-span gap
increased 600 percent.
We acknowledge that blacks dying six years sooner than whites reflects the
powerlessness of blacks in American society.5 Yet men dying seven years sooner
than women is rarely seen as a reflection of the powerlessness of men in American
society.
Is the seven-year gap biological? If it is, it wouldn’t have been just a one-year gap
in 1920.
If men lived seven years longer than women, feminists would have helped us
understand that life expectancy was the best measure of who had the power. And they
would be right. Power is the ability to control one’s life. Death tends to reduce
control. Life expectancy is the bottom line—the ratio of our life’s stresses to our
life’s rewards.
If power means having control over one’s own life, then perhaps there is no
better ranking of the impact of sex roles and racism on power over our lives
than life expectancy. Here is the ranking:
Life Expectancy
6
 As a Way of Seeing Who Has the Power
Females (white) 79
Females (black) 74
Males (white) 72
Males (black) 65
The white female outlives the black male by almost fourteen years. Imagine the
support for affirmative action if a 49-year-old woman were expected to die sooner
than a 62-year-old man.
SUICIDE AS POWERLESSNESS
Just as life expectancy is one of the best indicators of power, suicide is one of the
best indicators of powerlessness.
ITEM. Until boys and girls are 9, their suicide rates are identical;
—from 10 to 14, the boys’ rate is twice as high as the girls’;
—from 15 to 19, four times as high; and
—from 20 to 24, six times as high.7
ITEM. As boys experience the pressures of the male role, their suicide rate
increases 25,000 percent.
8
ITEM. The suicide rate for men over 85 is 1,350 percent higher than for women of
the same age group.
Here is the breakdown:
THE INVISIBLE VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
ITEM. When Rodney King was beaten by police, we called it violence against
blacks, not violence against men. Had Regina King been beaten, would no one
have mentioned violence against women?
Myth. Elderly women are the most susceptible to violent crime.
Fact. Elderly women are the least susceptible to violent crime. The U.S.
Department of Justice finds that a woman over 65 is less likely to be a victim
of violent crime than anyone else in any other category. And she is less than
half as vulnerable as a man her own age.
10
Myth. Women are more likely than men to be victims of violence.
Fact. Men are almost twice as likely as women to be victims of violent
crimes (even when rape is included).
11 Men are three times more likely to be
victims of murder.
12
When Time magazine ran a cover story of each of the 464 people shot in a single
week, it concluded: “The victims were frequently those most vulnerable in society:
the poor, the young, the abandoned, the ill, and the elderly.”13 When you read that,
did you think of men? One had to count the pictures to discover that 84 percent of the
faces behind the statistics were those of men and boys. In fact, the victims were
mostly poor men, young men, abandoned men, ill men, and elderly men. Yet a
woman—and only a woman—was featured on the cover. Men are the invisible
victims of America’s violence.
NET WORTH POWER
ITEM. The U.S. Census Bureau finds that women who are heads of households
have a net worth that is 93 percent of the net worth of men who are heads of
households.
14
(The value of the net worth statistic is that it allows us to see what he and
she have left when their different liabilities are subtracted from the different
assets. Male householders had a median net worth of $24,659; female
householders: $23,028. [Married couple households: $91,218]. This is
because although male heads of households have higher gross incomes and
assets, they have much higher spending obligations. They are much more
likely to support wives [or ex-wives] than wives are to support them and thus
their income is divided among themselves, a wife, and children—not only for
food and housing but for tuition, insurance, vacations. Divorces often mean
the woman receives the home the man pays for and also gets custody of the
children the man pays for. A woman’s obligation to spend more time with the
children leaves her earning less and the man earning more but paying out
more.)
ITEM. Among the wealthiest 1.6 percent of the U.S. population (those with
assets of $500,000 or more), women’s net worth is more than men’s.
15
How can so many of the wealthiest people be women when women hold none of
the top corporate jobs? In part, by selecting the men who do and outliving them. And
in part by having greater spending power and lower spending power obligations. . . .
SPENDING POWER
A study of large shopping malls (including men’s shops and sporting goods stores)
found that seven times as much floor space is devoted to women’s personal items as
to men’s.
16 Both sexes buy more for women. The key to wealth is not in what
someone earns; it is in what is spent on ourselves, at our discretion—or in what is
spent on us, at our hint.
Overall, women control consumer spending by a wide margin in virtually every
consumer category.17 With spending power comes other forms of power. Women’s
control over spending gives them control over TV programs because TV is dependent
on sponsors. When this is combined with the fact that women watch more TV in
every time slot,
18 shows can’t afford to bite the hand that feeds them. Women are to
TV what bosses are to employees.
The result? One example: Women-as-victim shows are becoming increasingly
popular. For example, Law and Order, featuring both sexes as victims, was among
TV’s most popular shows for ten years—until Law & Order: Special Victims Unit
came on the air. The “Special Victims” were 712% more likely to be women than
men. It took only two years for the Special Victims version—with 121 women and
17 men as victims—to surpass Law & Order in the ratings. For the next nine years it
surpassed Law & Order in the ratings every year. Finally, Law & Order dropped off
the air (in 2010).
19
Is this because more victims of murder are women? No. As we’ll
see, men are the more-likely victims of murder.
THE “SPENDING OBLIGATION GAP”
In restaurants, men pay for women about ten times as frequently as women pay for
men—the more expensive the restaurant, the more often the man pays.
20 Women
often say, “Well, men earn more.” But when two women go to a restaurant, they
don’t assume that the woman who earns more will pay the bill. The expectation on
men to spend more on women creates the “Spending Obligation Gap.”
I got a sense of this “Spending Obligation Gap” as soon as I thought about my first
date. As a teenager, I loved baby-sitting. (I genuinely loved kids, but it was also the
only way I could get paid for raiding a refrigerator!) But then I got to the dating age.
Alas, baby-sitting paid only fifty cents an hour. Lawn mowing, though, paid two
dollars an hour. I hated lawn mowing. (I lived in New Jersey, where bugs, humidity,
and noonday sun made mowing a lawn less pleasant than raiding a refrigerator.) But
as soon as I started dating, I started mowing lawns.
For boys, lawn mowing is a metaphor for the way we soon learn to take jobs we
like less because they pay more. Around junior year of high school, boys begin to
repress their interest in foreign languages, literature, art history, sociology, and
anthropology because they know an art history major will make less than an
engineer. Partially as a result of his different spending expectation (the possibility he
might have to support a woman but cannot expect a woman to support him), more
than 85 percent of students who take engineering as a college major are men; more
than 80 percent of the art history majors are women.21
The difference in the earnings of the female art historian vs. the male engineer
appears to be a measure of discrimination, when in fact both sexes knew ahead of
time that engineering would pay more. In fact, the woman who enters engineering
with the same lack of experience as the man averages $571 per year more than her
male counterpart.
22
In brief, the spending obligation that leads a man to choose a career he likes less
that pays more is a sign of powerlessness, not power. But when he takes that job,
women often assume he will pay because “after all, he earns more.” Thus both sexes’
expectations reinforce his powerlessness.
INFLUENCE POWER
The Catholic church is often quoted as acknowledging, “Give us a child the first five
years and we will shape its life.” We acknowledge the influence power of the church
over its youth; we often ignore the influence power of a mother over her children—
including her sons. But it is the mother who can make the child’s bedtime earlier,
take away desserts, or ground the child if it doesn’t obey. It is the hand that rocks the
cradle that creates the child’s everyday heaven or hell.
Few men have a comparable amount of influence. While theoretically the man was
“the master of the house,” most men felt they were visitors in their wives’ castle in
the same way a woman would have felt like a visitor had she entered her husband’s
place of work. From a woman’s perspective, a man’s home is his castle; from a
man’s perspective, a woman’s home is his mortgage.
Almost every woman had a primary role in the “female-dominated” family
structure; only a small percentage of men had a primary role in the “maledominated” governmental and religious structures. Many mothers were, in a sense,
the chair of the board of a small company—their family. Even in Japan, women are
in charge of the family finances—a fact that was revealed to the average American
only after the Japanese stock market crashed in 1992 and thousands of women lost
billions of dollars that their husbands never knew they had invested.23 Conversely,
most men were on their company’s assembly line—either its physical assembly line
or its psychological assembly line.
CONTROL-OVER-LLFE POWER
Influence power, though, is not real power. If we told mothers, “The more children
you have, the more power you will have,” they would laugh. If we then said, “The
more children you have, the more everyone will love you and respect you,” the
mother would feel pressured, not empowered. But when we tell men, “The more
people you supervise, the more power you will have,” they buy it. Real power does
not come from caving in to pressure to expand obligations, it comes from controlling
our own life.
Historically, a husband spent the bulk of his day under the eye of his boss—his
source of income; a wife did not spend the bulk of her day under the eye of her
husband—her source of income. She had more control over her work life than he had
over his.
SECURITY POWER
The prohibition against divorce gave a woman security in her workplace. Nothing
gave a man security in his workplace. His source of income could fire him; her
source of income could not fire her. Even today, if he quits his job, he doesn’t get
severance pay; if she initiates divorce, she takes half the “corporate stock.”
“MY BODY, MY CHOICE” POWER
In the 1990s, if a woman and man make love and she says she is using birth control
but is not, she has the right to raise the child without his knowing he even has a child,
and then to sue him for retroactive child support even ten to twenty years later
(depending on the state). This forces him to take a job with more pay and more stress
and therefore earlier death. Although it’s his body, he has no choice. He has the
option of being a slave (working for another without pay or choice) or being a
criminal. Roe v. Wade gave women the vote over their bodies. Men still don’t have
the vote over theirs—whether in love or war.
THE POWER OF APPRECIATION
ITEM. The Mike Tyson trial. The hotel in which the jury is sequestered goes
ablaze. Two firefighters die saving its occupants.
The trial of Mike Tyson made us increasingly aware of men-as-rapists. The
firefighters’ deaths did not make us increasingly aware of men-as-saviors. We were
more aware of one man doing harm than of two men saving; of one man threatening
one woman who is still physically alive than of dozens of men saving hundreds of
people and two of those men being dead. In the United States, almost one million
municipal firefighters volunteer to risk their lives to save strangers. Ninety-nine
percent of them are men.24
In exchange they ask only for appreciation. In exchange
they are ignored.
THE “WORK OBLIGATION GAP”
The media popularizes studies reporting women’s greater amount of time spent on
housework and child care, concluding, “Women work two jobs; men work one.” But
this is misleading. Women do work more hours inside the home, but men work more
hours outside the home. And the average man commutes farther and spends more
time doing yardwork, repairs, painting. . . . What happens when all of these are
combined? The University of Michigan’s study (reported in the Journal of Economic
Literature in 1991) found the average man worked sixty-one hours per week, the
average woman fifty-six.25
Is this just a recent change in men? No. In 1975, the largest nationwide probability
sampling of households found that when all child care, all housework, all work
outside the home, commuting, and gardening were added together, husbands did 53
percent of the total work, wives 47 percent.
26
THE UNPAID BODYGUARD
ITEM. Steve Petrix was a journalist who lived near me in San Diego. Every day
he returned home to have lunch with his wife. Recently, as he got near his
door, he heard his wife screaming. She was being attacked with a knife. Steve
fought the assailant off his wife. His wife ran to call the police. The intruder
killed Steve. Steve was 31.27
A friend of mine put it this way: “What would you pay someone who agreed that,
if he was ever with you when you were attacked, he would intervene and try to get
himself killed slowly enough to give you time to escape? What is the hourly wage
for a bodyguard? You know that is your job as a man—every time you are with a
woman . . . any woman, not just your wife.”28
What do men as women’s personal bodyguards and men as volunteer firefighters
have in common besides being men? They are both unpaid. Men have not yet begun
to investigate their unpaid roles. . . .
MAN AS “NIGGER”?
In the early years of the women’s movement, an article in Psychology Today called
“Women as Nigger” quickly led to feminist activists (myself included) making
parallels between the oppression of women and blacks.
29 Men were characterized as
the oppressors, the “master,” the “slaveholders.” Black congresswoman Shirley
Chisholm’s statement that she faced far more discrimination as a woman than as a
black was widely quoted.
The parallel allowed the hard-earned rights of the civil rights movement to be
applied to women. The parallels themselves had more than a germ of truth. But what
none of us realized was how each sex was the other’s slave in different ways and
therefore neither sex was the other’s “nigger” (“nigger” implies a one-sided
oppressiveness).
If “masculists” had made such a comparison, they would have had every bit as
strong a case as feminists. The comparison is useful because it is not until we
understand how men were also women’s servants that we get a clear picture of the
sexual division of labor and therefore the fallacy of comparing either sex to “nigger.”
For starters . . .
Blacks were forced, via slavery, to risk their lives in cotton fields so that whites
might benefit economically while blacks died prematurely. Men were forced, via the
draft, to risk their lives on battlefields so that everyone else might benefit
economically while men died prematurely. The disproportionate numbers of blacks
and males in war increases both blacks’ and males’ likelihood of experiencing
posttraumatic stress, of becoming killers in postwar civilian life as well, and of
dying earlier. Both slaves and men died to make the world safe for freedom—
someone else’s.
Slaves had their own children involuntarily taken away from them; men have their
own children involuntarily taken away from them. We tell women they have the right
to children and tell men they have to fight for children.
Blacks were forced, via slavery, into society’s most hazardous jobs; men are
forced, via socialization, into society’s most hazardous jobs. Both slaves and men
constituted almost 100 percent of the “death professions.” Men still do.
When slaves gave up their seats for whites, we called it subservience; when men
give up their seats for women, we call it politeness. Similarly, we called it a symbol
of subservience when slaves stood up as their master entered a room; but a symbol of
politeness when men stand up as a woman enters the room. Slaves bowed before
their masters; in traditional cultures, men still bow before women.30 The slave
helped the master put on his coat; the man helped the woman put on her coat. He still
does. These symbols of deference and subservience are common with slaves to
masters and with men to women.
Blacks are more likely than whites to be homeless; men are more likely than
women to be homeless. Blacks are more likely than whites to be in prison; men are
about twenty times more likely than women to be in prison. Blacks die earlier than
whites; men die earlier than women. Blacks are less likely than whites to attend
college or graduate from college. Men are less likely than women to attend college
(46 percent versus 54 percent) and less likely to graduate from college (45 percent
versus 55 percent).
31
Apartheid forced blacks to mine diamonds for whites; socialization expected men
to work in different mines to pay for diamonds for women. Nowhere in history has
there been a ruling class working to afford diamonds they could give to the
oppressed in hopes the oppressed would love them more.
Blacks are more likely than whites to volunteer for war in the hopes of earning
money and gaining skills; men are more likely than women to volunteer for war for
the same reasons. Blacks are more likely than whites to subject themselves to the
child abuse of boxing and football in the hopes of earning money, respect, and love;
men are more likely than women to subject themselves to the child abuse of boxing
and football, with the same hopes.
Women are the only “oppressed” group to systematically grow up having their
own private member of an “oppressor” class (called fathers) in the field, working for
them. Traditionally, the ruling class had people in the field, working for them—
called slaves.
Among slaves, the field slave was considered the second-class slave; the house
slave, the first-class slave. The male role (out in the field) is akin to the field slave—
or the second-class slave; the traditional female role (homemaker) is akin to the
house slave—the first-class slave.
Blacks who are heads of households have a net worth much lower than heads of
households who are white; men who are heads of households have a net worth much
lower than heads of households who are women.32 No oppressed group has ever had
a net worth higher than the oppressor.
It would be hard to find a single example in history in which a group that cast
more than 50 percent of the vote got away with calling itself the victim. Or an
example of an oppressed group which chooses to vote for their “oppressors” more
than it chooses to have its own members take responsibility for running. Women are
the only minority group that is a majority, the only group that calls itself
“oppressed” that is able to control who is elected to every office in virtually every
community in the country. Power is not in who holds the office, power is in who
chooses who holds the office. Blacks, Irish, and Jews never had more than 50 percent
of America’s vote.
Women are the only “oppressed” group to share the same parents as the
“oppressor”; to be born into the middle class and upper class as frequently as
the “oppressor”; to own more of the culture’s luxury items than the “oppressor”;
the only “oppressed” group whose “unpaid labor” enables them to buy most of the
fifty billion dollars’ worth of cosmetics sold each year; the only “oppressed” group
that spends more on high fashion, brand-name clothing than their “oppressors”; the
only “oppressed” group that watches more TV during every time category than their
“oppressors.”33
Feminists often compare marriage to slavery—with the female as slave. It seems
like an insult to women’s intelligence to suggest that marriage is female slavery
when we know it is 25 million American females
34 who read an average of twenty
romance novels per month,
35 often with the fantasy of marriage. Are feminists
suggesting that 25 million American women have “enslavement” fantasies because
they fantasize marriage? Is this the reason Danielle Steele is the best-selling author
in the world?
Never has there been a slave class that has spent a lot of time dreaming about
being a slave and purchasing books and magazines that told them “How to Get a
Slavemaster to Commit.” Either marriage is something different from slavery for
women or feminists are suggesting that women are not very intelligent.
The difference between slaves and males is that African-American blacks rarely
thought of their slavery as “power,” but men were taught to think of their slavery as
“power.” If men were, in fact, slavemasters, and women slaves, then why did men
spend a lifetime supporting the “slaves” and the “slaves’ ” children? Why weren’t
the women supporting the men instead, the way kings were supported by their
subjects? Our understanding of blacks’ powerlessness has allowed us to call what we
did to blacks “immoral,” yet we still call what we do to males “patriotism” and
“heroism” when they kill on our behalf, but “violence,” “murder,” and “greed” when
they kill the wrong people the wrong way at the wrong time.
By understanding that what we did to blacks was immoral, we were willing to
assuage our guilt via affirmative action programs and welfare. By thinking of men as
the dominant oppressors who do what they do for power and greed, we feel little
guilt when they die early in the process. By believing that women were an oppressed
slavelike class, we extended privileges and advantages to women that had originally
been designed to compensate for our immorality to blacks. For women—and only
women—to take advantage of this slavery compensation was its own brand of
immorality. For men to cooperate was its own brand of ignorance.
Did men do all this because they were more altruistic, loving, and less power
hungry than women? No. Both sexes made themselves “slaves” to the other sex in
different ways. Let’s look at why both sexes did that; at why neither sex can
accurately be called oppressed; at why we should be celebrating rather than blaming;
and at why institutions that don’t understand their new opportunities are adapting
divisively because they don’t understand how to adapt lovingly.
CHAPTER 2
Stage I to Stage II: How Successful Men Freed Women
(But Forgot to Free Themselves)
FROM ROLE MATE TO SOUL MATE
For thousands of years, most marriages were in Stage I—survival-focused. After
World War II, marriages increasingly flirted with Stage II—a self-fulfillment focus.
In Stage I, most couples were role mates: the woman raised the children and the man
raised the money. In Stage II, couples increasingly desired to be soul mates. Why?
As couples met their survival needs, they “upped the ante” and redefined love.
In Stage I, a woman called it “love” if she found a man who was a good provider
and protector; he called it “love” if she was beautiful and could take care of a home
and children. Love meant a division of labor which led to a division of female and
male interests. In Stage II, love meant common interests and common values. Love’s
definition is in transition.
Even before World War II, some parents began to redefine love. But they could
usually afford to do that only after their last child was “married off,” as with Tevye
and Golde of Fiddler on the Roof.
1
TEVYE: Golde. . . . Do you love me?
GOLDE: Do I love you?
For twenty-five years I’ve washed your clothes,
Cooked your meals, cleaned your house,
Given you children, milked the cow.
After twenty-five years, why talk about
Love right now? . . .
TEVYE: But my father and my mother
Said we’d learn to love each other. . . .
Do you love me?
GOLDE: For twenty-five years I’ve lived with him
Fought with him, starved with him
Twenty-five years my bed is his.
If that’s not love, what is?
The people with the most freedom to redefine love were women who had married
the most successful men. These women began asking Stage II questions, such as
“Why should I be married to a man who can show me his wallet but not show me his
love?”; “Why am I called Mrs. John Doe—who am I?”; “Why am I always serving
him, deferring to his opinions?”; “When the children are grown, will my life have
meaning?” She feared her own husband didn’t really respect her; then she chastised
herself for being so preoccupied with what he thought, anyway. She expressed her
concerns aloud. Her concerns were institutionalized: the women’s liberation
movement.
His concerns were repressed. He kept to himself his hurt that his wife seemed
more interested in the children, in shopping, and in herself than in him. That he felt
criticized for working late rather than appreciated for working late. To him, his wife
seemed to define communication as her expressing her negative feelings but not him
expressing his. She seemed to avoid sex more than enjoy it. He felt hurt that soon
after marriage his wife paid less attention to keeping weight off and started dressing
sloppily unless she was meeting other people.
Turned off and unappreciated, he rumbled internally, “What am I getting from this
marriage? Restaurants cook food better and give me a whole menu to choose from;
housekeepers don’t ask for half of my income; and my secretary is more attractive,
has more respect for me, and is more in tune with my work. And besides, selling
Product X is hardly what I call ‘identity.’ ” Unlike her, though, he failed to express
his concerns. His concerns became ulcers, heart attacks, cancer, and alcoholism.
When he did express his concerns, they were dismissed as his “male midlife
crisis.” Essentially, though, women’s liberation and the male midlife crisis were
the same search—for personal fulfillment, common values, mutual respect, love.
But while women’s liberation was thought of as promoting identity, the male midlife
crisis was thought of as an identity crisis. Similarly, women’s liberation was called
insight, self-discovery, and self-improvement—akin to maturity; the male midlife
crisis was called “playboy time” and selfishness—akin to immaturity. His crisis got
the bad rap.
WAS STAGE II LOVE UNCONDITIONAL OR MORE CONDITIONAL?
My mom used to say, “When the money stops coming in the door, the love
starts going out the window.”
—BRIAN, 41, discussing the unwritten rule of Stage I love
It is tempting to think of Stage II love as unconditional love. In practice, it is
more conditional. Couples now expect communication skills, joint parenting, shared
housework, sexual fulfillment, joint decision-making, a spiritual connection, mutual
attraction, and mutual respect. They want both stability and change; both
interdependence and a partner who is independent. They want time to grow and time
to discover each other’s growth. In Stage I, these pursuits would have taken time
away from raising the children, raising the crops, and raising the money.
“Discovering each other” was Stage I’s Trivial Pursuit. It threatened survival.
WHY DIVORCE WAS THE TRADE-OFF TO RELATIONSHIP PROGRESS
Couples who pursued Stage II values created a new set of problems: The very
qualities that made a “perfect couple” in a Stage I marriage made them “perfect for
divorce” in a Stage II marriage—she was seen as “preoccupied with the home and bo-r-i-n-g . . .”; he was seen as “preoccupied with work—and afraid of intimacy.” The
contrast between Stage I roles and Stage II goals and the resultant setup for divorce
becomes apparent in this table:
Many marriages consummated in Stage I, then, were suddenly held up to Stage II
standards. They failed. Marriages failed not only because the standards were higher,
but because the standards were also contradictory. For a Stage I woman, a lawyer
was an ideal candidate for husband. For a Stage II woman, the lawyer, often trained
to argue more than to listen, was an ideal candidate for divorce. The very qualities
that led to success at work often led to failure at home. Sex role training had always
been divorce training, but without the option to divorce. Stage II brought with it
the option. Thus the divorces of the 1960s-’90s.
HOW DIVORCES LED WOMEN TO REDEFINE DISCRIMINATION AND EQUALITY
Practically speaking, when more than 90 percent of women got married and divorce
was rare, discrimination in favor of men at work meant discrimination in favor of
their wives at home.
When workplace discrimination worked in favor of women at home, no one called
it sexism. Why? It was working for women. Only when discrimination switched from
working for women to working against women (because more women were working)
did it get called sexism. For example:
During the years I was on the board of directors of the National Organization for
Women in New York City, the most resistant audiences I ever faced in the process of
doing corporate workshops on equality in the workplace were not male executives—
they were the wives of male executives. As long as her income came from her
husband, she was not feeling generous when affirmative action let another woman
have a head start vying for her husband’s (her) income. To her, that seemed like
sexism. To her, my seminars on “Equal Opportunity for Women at Work” read
“Unequal Opportunity for Wives at Home.” And, to the executive’s wife, they still
do.
Reprinted with special permission of King Features Syndicate.
Why still? Almost 70 percent of the wives of male executives (vice-presidents
and above) do not hold paid jobs outside the home—not even part time.
2 They still
get their incomes completely from their husbands. An executive’s wife often opposes
a woman at work having an advantage over her husband, not only because it hurts her
income but also because it discounts her contribution: she usually works hard to
support her husband to support the company—that’s her job. She feels her efforts—
her job—have been discounted.
As soon as discrimination began to work against women, it led to measures to
protect women. Immediately—in 1963—the Federal Equal Pay Act was passed.3
Interestingly, the Equal Pay Act preceded the women’s movement. The U.S. Census
Bureau found that as early as 1960, never married women over 45 earned more in the
workplace than never married men over 45.4 Data like these—which implied a much
different view from “woman as victim”—never reached the public’s awareness
because only women’s groups organized.
Taking what had worked for most women and seeing it as a plot against them led
us to see men as “owing” women. This created Stage II Entitlement: women being
entitled to compensation for past oppression. Which prevented us from seeing the
need to make a transition from Stage I to Stage II together: the need not for a
women’s movement or a men’s movement, but for a gender transition movement.
In this book, I define power as having control over one’s own life. The male
obligation to earn more money than a woman before she would love him was not
control over his life; in Stage I, neither sex had control over her or his life. And, as
we saw in the opening chapter, both sexes had what was the traditional definition of
power (influence over others and access to scarce resources) via different means.
Sexism? Or Bisexism?
Am I suggesting that sexism was a two-way street? Yes. We think of sexism as
having kept women less powerful than men for centuries. In fact, for centuries
neither sex had power. Each had roles. Her role: create a family. His role: protect a
family. Her role: gather the food. His role: hunt the food. If both sexes were
restricted to roles, it is not accurate to call it sexism, but sex roles. We have lived not
in a sexist world, but a bisexist world.
HOW SUCCESSFUL MEN FREED WOMEN BUT FORGOT TO FREE THEMSELVES
Abigail, a typical 1890s woman, had eight children. She almost died twice in
childbirth. By the time her last child left the house, she was dead.
Cindy, a typical 1990s woman, was single until she was 25. After she married, she
bore two children. When her last child left the house, she had another quarter century
to live.
Abigail never heard of a freezer. Cindy could pull a whole meal out of one. It took
Abigail all day to shop and cook for her family of ten. Cindy often picked up
gourmet food, put it in the microwave, and was eating twenty minutes later. (She
often joked, “I don’t cook dinner, I heat it.”) On other evenings, she and her husband,
Jeremy, took the kids to McDonald’s, or had pizza delivered, or Jeremy barbecued,
or “made Cindy’s favorite thing for dinner—a reservation.” Both Cindy and Jeremy,
though, did face expectations Abigail never faced (e.g., to play chauffeur, to provide
a college education).
Abigail shopped by horse and buggy or by foot. Cindy or Jeremy shopped by car
or by phone. Abigail got groceries between nine and five—what she forgot she never
got. Cindy or Jeremy got groceries round-the-clock.
Abigail had to wash dishes after every meal. Cindy gave the dishes to a
dishwasher. (Sometimes she didn’t touch the dishes at all—Jeremy or her older son
did.) Abigail washed clothing by pumping water, building a fire to heat the water,
and then using her own hands to scrub every inch. If it was raining or snowing, she
hung the clothes around the house a clothespin at a time in corners she could find.
Cindy set the right wash and dry cycles. (Sometimes she didn’t touch the wash at all
—Jeremy or her older son did.)
Abigail sewed by calloused hand in a cold house by candlelight. Cindy and Jeremy
picked up wrinkle-free blends from discount clothing stores. It took Abigail two days
to sew a shirt for one child, times a family of ten. It took Cindy or Jeremy twenty
minutes at the discount clothing store to pick up shirts for both children.
Abigail had eight children’s needs focused on her. Cindy had two children’s needs
focused partially on a TV. And Cindy had one other thing: a husband who knew how
to nurture as well as discipline.
In 1990, Cindy could still choose to bake bread in the oven or sew a shirt by hand
—but now it was by option, not obligation; now it was occasionally, not daily; now it
was for part of her adult life, not 100 percent of her adult life.
Did Cindy face pressures that Abigail never had? Absolutely. But those new
pressures were rarely additions, but substitutes for her old burden. Had they been
additions, women’s life span would not have increased by almost 50 percent since
1920.5
Why, then, did men’s life expectancy go from one year less than women’s in 1920
to seven years less today? Because men’s performances—inventing, manufacturing,
selling, and distributing—saved women, but no one saved men from the pressure to
perform. She went from being a baby machine, cooking machine, and cleaning
machine to having time for love. He went from being a performing machine near
the home to being a performing machine away from home. And having less time
for love.
Men did a better job creating better homes and gardens for their wives than they
did creating safer coal mines and construction sites for themselves. Few cared that
only men died by thousands clearing paths through mountains to lay roads for cars
and tracks for trains that allowed the rest of civilization to be served in a dining car.
The location of a man’s work disconnected him from the people he loved, thus
depriving his life of meaning . . . creating little deaths every day. And if he
succeeded in all this, he became a male machine; if he failed, he suffered
humiliation. Either way, the more he saved her, the sooner he died compared to her,
leaving what he made to her and the children to spend. In these ways, successful men
freed women but forgot to free themselves.
Despite this, feminists labeled “male technology”—and especially “male medical
technology”—as a tool of the patriarchy designed to oppress women.6 So our
entrance into Stage II was marked by criticizing men for the destruction to the
environment created by a dam, but not acknowledging men for the electricity created
by the dam, or asking women to take responsibility for the female consumption that
also led to the demand for electricity that required more dams.
As for male medical technology, it was probably the single factor most
responsible for women’s life expectancy increasing by almost 50 percent. It
prevented women from dying in childbirth and developed vaccines for almost all the
contagious diseases (polio, diphtheria, typhoid fever, measles, chickenpox, bubonic
plague, smallpox, tuberculosis).
During wartime, experimental drugs were often tried on men. If a drug failed, the
man died. But if a drug succeeded, it was used to save both women and men, but
without women dying to develop it. Men were similarly used as guinea pigs in the
development of emergency procedures, microwave ovens (a man was inadvertently
“cooked” during the testing process
7
), and other advances that served both sexes.
Later it was labeled sexism that physicians studied men more than women. No one
labeled it sexism because men were used as guinea pigs more than women.
Feminists felt patriarchy and male technology conspired to restrict women’s
reproductive freedom—women’s “right to choose.” But male technology created
women’s “right to choose”—it created birth control. And it created safe abortions.
The male technology of birth control did more than any other single thing to reduce
women’s work load; to move women from a one-option sex to the only multi-option
sex. Overall, technology led to the male role saving women more than the female
role saved men. Ironically, some of the feminists who complained of male
technology would have died in childbirth or via abortions without it. (They literally
owed their lives to what they complained controlled their lives.)
Male technology did not create for men the equivalent right to choose. Thus, each
time a man had sex with a woman who said she was using birth control, he had to
trust that she was, in fact, using it. If she wasn’t, he could be responsible for
supporting a child for eighteen years. If a man used a condom but the woman later
said she had nevertheless conceived, the Stage II unmarried woman now had the
right to inform the man or not to inform him; to abort the fetus unilaterally or
secretly put the child up for adoption; to raise it herself and make him pay the bills;
or even raise it for ten years by herself without telling him it was his child and then
sue him for child support retroactively. All this is legal.
Every woman knows that if there was only male birth control, she would not feel
in control, she would feel out of control. “Trust me” from a man is laughable; “trust
me” from a woman is the law. Birth control created the right of women to choose and
the expectation of men to trust. Today, every man who puts a penis in a woman’s
body also puts his life in a woman’s hands.
In brief, male technology and male laws freed women from female biology as
female destiny and created female biology as male destiny.
THE EMERGENCE OF THE MULTI-OPTION WOMAN AND THE NO-OPTION MAN
Today, when the successful single woman meets the successful single man, they
appear to be equals. But should they marry and consider children, she almost
invariably considers three options:
Option #1: Work full time
Option #2: Mother full time
Option #3: Some combination of working and mothering
He considers three “slightly different” options:
Option #1: Work full time
Option #2: Work full time
Option #3: Work full time
Mothers are still forty-three times more likely than fathers to leave the workplace
for six months or longer for family reasons.
8
In most cases, this leaves him not just
working full time but working overtime or working two jobs.
Ironically, then, it is his success that makes her more than equal to him—that
gives her three options while he has none. Of course, a woman’s choice to mother
may hurt her career, but she can choose maternal opportunity or career continuity. In
contrast, men who chose paternal opportunity—to be “pioneer househusbands”—
soon learned that many reporters wanted them for an interview but few women
wanted them for a marriage.
Women did even more than speak up for new options. They articulated the
problems the new options created. So we heard about her “juggling act.” Fathers did
not articulate their pressure to intensify their commitment to the workplace when
children arrived. We didn’t hear about his “intensifying act.” Nor did men discuss
how hurt they felt being left out of their families.
The first time I asked a group of men whether they would choose to parent full
time for six months to a year if they could (as mentioned above) and more than 80
percent said that being full time with their newborn child would be their preference
if they were not hurting the family economically and their wife approved, I assumed
I was either dealing with a group of liars or a self-selected sample. When I received
only a slightly smaller percentage from an association of construction
subcontractors,
9
I began to understand the degree to which men had not even thought
about their options.
We often say, “In today’s economy, women need to work outside the home—it’s
not an option.” We forget that women who work outside the home are usually
exercising the option of paying for the technology that reduced women’s burden
inside the home.
Most Multi-Option Women had one thing in common: a successful husband. But
divorces eliminated many women’s successful husbands—leaving us with six basic
classes of women. . . .
THE SIX CLASSES OF WOMEN
1. The Stage I Married Woman. She never gave herself permission to work, or she
felt “My husband won’t let me.” Psychologically, she was a No-Option woman.
2. The Three-Options Woman with a Poor Marriage. She remained married, but
unhappily, often to avoid having to work.
3. The Single Mother Married to the Government. The government played
substitute husband, providing her with three options but only if she remained at
a subsistence level.
4. The Stage I Single Working Woman. This woman worked to prevent herself or
her family from starving. If she had children from a previous marriage, she
usually did not receive child support.
5. The Stage II Single Working Woman. She was neither supported by a man nor
supporting a man. If she had children from a previous marriage, she was likely
to be in Stage II only if she received child support.
6. The Have-It-All Woman. This woman was married to a man who provided an
economic safety net (a financial womb) from which she could choose among
her three options. The Have-It-All woman was happily married. This created a
class of people who had never before existed. In a sense, the Have-It-All woman
was the “New Royalty.” Virtually no man was in the equivalent position.
The political genius of the feminist movement was its intuitive sense that it could
appeal to all six classes only by emphasizing expansion of rights and avoiding
expansion of responsibilities. Had the National Organization for Women (NOW)
fought to register 18-year-old girls for the draft, it might have lost a few members.
Had feminism emphasized women’s responsibilities for risking sexual rejection, or
paying for men’s dinners, or choosing careers they like less to support the family
more, or marrying down, its impact would have been more egalitarian but less
politically successful.
WHAT MADE WOMEN SO ANGRY AT MEN?
Women became angry at men in part because they compared themselves to the
successful heterosexual white man—not to the plight of the black and native
American man, or to the ostracism of the gay man, or the invisibility of the poor
man. But this was only part of it. . . .
Women as the Disposable Sex
Divorces threw millions of women out of the Have-It-All class. But the woman who
got divorced, more often 40 than 20, was tossed into the marketplace of men more
addicted to two 20s than to one 40. Understandably she became angry.
In Stage I, reinforcing men’s addiction to the 20-year-old woman worked for her
—the addiction made him agree to support her for a lifetime; the taboo on divorce
made him stick to his agreement. When the taboo on divorce weakened and she was
40, his addiction to two 20s worked against her. She felt disposable. Divorce had
altered the psychological relationship between men and women.
The more beautiful the woman was when she was younger, the more she had been
treated like a celebrity—what I call a genetic celebrity—and therefore the more she
felt like a has-been. It’s harder to lose something you’ve had than never to have it to
begin with. As she became increasingly invisible, she felt increasingly disposable
and increasingly angry.
Simultaneously, women who had never made it into the Have-It-All class—the
New Royalty—also felt like failures. In different ways, both groups of women felt
rejected—by men. And therefore angry—at men.
The divorced woman with children felt doubly disposable. She was not just a
woman, she was a package deal: a woman-with-children. I recall a male friend of
mine coming back ecstatic from his date with Carol. A week later, he went to Carol’s
home and she introduced him to her three children. When they all went on a ski
weekend, he spent over $1,000 on the children. He knew he didn’t have to, but, “I
didn’t want to be stingy so I paid for their ski-lift tickets, rooms for them separate
from us, some of their meals, treats. . . .”
My friend was already supporting his former wife and two children. He feared
becoming both a father of two families and a financial womb for two families. He
feared becoming a man with four jobs.More precisely he feared doing each job
inadequately. He soon backed off from the relationship. Carol felt hurt and never
really spoke with him again. He felt disposable as a friend just because he couldn’t
commit to being a wallet; she felt disposable as a marriage partner. In fact they were
both victims of the post-divorce phenomenon I call “woman-as-a-package-deal” (she
was not just a woman but a woman-and-three-children). Had they understood how
they were both victims of a setup, they could more easily have remained friends.
Divorce forced the middle-class woman who used to be able to take a job she liked
more that paid less to have to take a job she liked less that paid more. When
feminism explained that women were segregated into the lower-paying and
meaningless jobs, she felt devalued. Feminism was so powerful it blinded her to the
men around her who were also segregated into different types of lower-paying,
meaningless jobs: the short-order cook and dishwasher in her local coffee shop; the
migrant workers who picked the vegetables for her table; the custodians and
carwashers, the busboys and gas station attendants. . . . By being blinded to the whole
picture—that when either sex had minimal skills they commanded minimal wages in
different types of meaningless jobs—women became increasingly angry.
Women interpreted men’s tendency to earn more for different work as an outcome
of male dominance rather than male subservience: they did not see it as an outcome
of male obligation—obligation to go where the money was, not where fulfillment
was. For him, following money was primary; following fulfillment, secondary. For
him, divorce also created a change: he still followed money to support a family
economically but without a family to support him emotionally.
Simultaneously, feminists focused on the fact that women as a whole earned less
“for the same work.” And soon U.S. presidents—through to President Obama—were
repeating the assertion as fact. They concluded the reason was discrimination. They
ignored the thirteen reasons why women earned less that I discussed in The Myth of
Male Power in 1993. In my opinion, the unwillingness to diagnose the problem left
women only with “victim power” (“it’s discrimination, therefore I deserve
affirmative action, a scholarship, or a man paying for me”) rather than real power:
the ability to determine why she is earning less and an understanding of the tradeoffs involved in earning more.
Feminists tend to equate high pay with power. In fact, the road to high pay is a
toll road. That is, when I did research for a book published in 2005 titled Why Men
Earn More: The Startling Truth Behind the Pay Gap—and What Women Can Do
About It, I identified twenty-five measurable differences between men and women’s
work-life decisions. I discovered that each of men’s choices resulted in men earning
more; that each of women’s choices resulted in women having more balanced lives
—and therefore, usually happier lives. I discovered that for most people, the road to
high pay is a toll road: the tolls of working more hours, traveling overnight and
weekends, moving to undesirable locations, hazardous jobs, unsanitary jobs, night
shifts and so on.
If the road to high pay is a toll road, then pay is not about power. There is, rather, a
“pay paradox”—pay is about the power we forfeit to get the power of pay.
However, what is forfeiting power for one person may be a pleasure for someone
else. For some people, traveling more means forfeiting family time; for others, it
means exploration. Empowerment comes from assessing the trade-offs to each
person’s values at that stage in her or his life. It is having all the information needed
to assess those trade-offs that gives us more control over our lives, which usually
results in a happier life, or real power. (Since the purpose of pay is a happier life, and
a more balanced life is generally a happier life, maybe it is really men who should be
learning from women about real power!)
Since I want every reader to have a happier life, here are the 25 ways to higher pay
—mostly “tolls” or tradeoffs. Caveat: a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing—
check out Why Men Earn More before you make a real-life decision:
1. Choose a Field in Technology or the Hard Sciences, Not the Arts or Social
Sciences (Pharmacology vs. literature)
2. Get Hazard Pay without the Hazards (female administrator in Air Force vs.
male combat soldier in Army)
3. Among Jobs Requiring Little Education, Those that Expose you to the Sleet
and Heat Pay More Than Those that are Indoors and Neat (Fed Ex delivery
vs. receptionist)
4. In Most Fields With Higher Pay, You Can’t Psychologically Check Out at
The End of the Day (corporate attorney vs. librarian)
5. Fields with Higher Pay Often Have Lower Fulfillment (engineer vs.
childcare professional)
6. People Who Get Higher Financial Rewards Choose Fields with Higher
Financial and Emotional Risks (venture capitalist vs. supermarket cashier)
7. Many Fields with Higher Pay Require Working the Worst Shifts During the
Worst Hours (private practice medical doctor vs. HMO medical doctor)
8. Some Jobs Pay More to Attract People to Unpleasant Environments
Without Many People (prison guard vs. restaurant hostess)
9. Updating Pays: Currency Begets Currency (sales engineer vs. French
language scholar)
10. Also Choose Subfields with the “High Pay Formula” (surgeon vs.
psychiatrist)
11. Work More Hours – And It Makes a Big Difference.
12. Have More Years of Experience–Especially in Their Current Occupation
13. Have More Years of Recent, Uninterrupted Experience with Their Current
Employer
14. Work More Weeks During the Year
15. Are Absent Less Often From Work
16. Commute to Jobs that are Farther Away
17. Relocate—Especially to Undesirable Locations at the Company’s Behest
18. Travel Extensively On the Job
19. Take On Different Responsibilities Even When Their Titles Are the Same
20. Take On Bigger-Sized Responsibilities Even When Their Titles Are the
Same
21. Require Less Security
22. Have More Relevant Training in their Current Occupation
23. Have Higher Career Goals to Begin With
24. Do More in-Depth Job Searches
25. Above All, Produce More
By calling the difference in pay “discrimination” and not explaining the reasons
for the difference, women were left angry rather than empowered.
As female hurt and anger created an atmosphere that made it less safe for men to
express their feelings, men became more passive-aggressive. Men increasingly felt
that their only form of relationship power was not getting into one. Women labeled
this a fear of commitment, accused men of a fear of intimacy, and began making
masculinity virtually synonymous with evil: “Father Knows Best” became “Fathers
Molest.” Women became “women who loved too much”; men became “men who
harassed too much.” Women were labeled superwomen and men were labeled superspoiled.
The Politics of Housework
It soon appeared to most women that women had two jobs and men had one—that
only her labor was increasing. In reality, she had less obligation inside the home,
more obligation outside the home: we were really dealing with a division of the
locations of her labor. A nationwide study made this clear.
The Journal of Economic Literature reported that while women still do about
seventeen more hours of work inside the home per week, men do about twenty-two
more hours of work outside the home per week (including commuting time).
12 What
happens when we compare the hours of the average woman to the hours of the
average man both inside and outside the home? Hers amount to fifty-six hours; his
amount to sixty-one hours. By the same measure. Why? The average woman works
twenty-six hours per week outside the home, the average man forty-eight hours.
13
Studies of working wives that say that wives do two jobs while their husbands do
just one and slough off on the second tell but half the truth. They are so misleading
as to be a form of lying: they are women-as-victim studies. More importantly, they
make women angry and increase the divorce rate, which deepens the anger, which . . .
Women’s anger was intensified by the sense that women were changing and men
were not. It was assumed this was because of male complacency. It was not. . . .
WHY DIDN’T MEN CHANGE?
Divorces also led to women changing because divorces changed women’s source of
income. Divorces did not change the pressure on men to focus on income in order to
receive women’s love. Millions of divorced men took on five payments rarely
assessed to women:
Child support
Mortgage payments on a home no longer lived in
Apartment rental
Alimony
Dating
Men faced more of the same old pressure to earn—just intensified. So instead of
changing, they found themselves becoming more of the same. Unfortunately, the one
feminist study that found men benefiting and women hurting after divorce
completely ignored most of the five male payments and ignored much of female
income, therefore not only ignoring men’s burden but leaving men unappreciated (it
was the only study with those findings and the only one to receive media
attention).
14
HOW THE GOVERNMENT PLAYED SUBSTITUTE HUSBAND WHILE NO ONE
PLAYED SUBSTITUTE WIFE
When divorces occurred, women’s greatest fear was of economic deprivation. Men’s
was of emotional deprivation. Stage II divorce laws helped Alice make a
transition from economic dependence to economic independence. No Stage II
laws helped Jack make a transition from emotional dependence to emotional
independence. (Which is why Alice rushed to a court for economic support and Jack
rushed to a woman for emotional support.)
When divorces meant that husbands no longer guaranteed women economic
security, the government became the substitute husband. It guaranteed women
equality in pay and an advantage in hiring (affirmative action). It gave women Aid to
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC); it provided special programs for
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC); it gave women the preference for keeping
children and then garnisheed men’s wages if child support was not paid; it gave
special opportunities for women in college, women in the armed services, women
artists, women in small businesses; it severed him from future services from her.
Alice used to have only one option for economic security and Jack only one option
for emotional security. Now Alice has multiple options for economic security
(income via career, husband, or government) while Jack has fewer than one: income
via career minus child support, minus alimony, and minus higher taxes to pay for the
government-as-substitute husband. All of this kept him a prisoner of money, barred
from exploring his inner self.
WHY STAGE I INSTITUTIONS WERE OPPRESSIVE AND HOW STAGE II
INSTITUTIONS CAN BE FREEING
Part of women’s anger at men comes from the belief that men made the rules, and
made them to oppress women and benefit men. Since most institutions are headed by
men, when these institutions don’t meet our needs, we tend to blame men. The
challenge is twofold: first, to recognize that these institutions helped women get to
Stage II even before men; second, to understand how institutions that were functional
in Stage I can now make a transition to become functional in Stage II.
How the Functional Family Became the Dysfunctional
Family
Just as we held up Stage I marriages to Stage II standards and labeled them a failure,
we currently hold up Stage I families to Stage II standards and label them
dysfunctional. As many as 97 Golde’s ability to seek self-fulfillment and search for a
deeper love. Thus Tevye was able to ask Golde Stage II questions only after their
daughter was about to be “married off.”
Because happiness was secondary, drinking, frustration, and abuse were rampant.
But in Stage I, it was not functional to permit divorce: with eight children at home
and no ability to support two homes, walking out was not an option. So we tolerated
drinking and abuse rather than divorce and starvation.
In brief, the generations will learn to love each other more quickly if we see their
socialization as Stage I Functional rather than labeling them dysfunctional; if we
acknowledge that the children best able to pursue Stage II values today often can do
so exactly because their parents had Stage I values. Discussions of family values
without distinctions between Stage I and Stage II families are thus setups for
deprecation rather than appreciation.
Religion in Transition
In Stage I, the church provided rigid rules and rituals designed to get people to make
sacrifices for the next generation without questioning. In Stage II, questioning is
needed to deal with life’s options, and rigidity is poor training for life’s ambiguities.
Stage I religions had to restrict premarital sex because premarital sex led to
children without a guarantee for the children’s and woman’s protection. In Stage II,
birth control allowed sex to become more associated with fulfillment,
communication, and spiritual connection—goals of the Stage II relationship. So
Stage II religions can focus less on restricting the sexes from access to each other’s
bodies and more on assisting the sexes to have access to each other’s souls.
Stage II churches are now freer to teach how sexual inhibition often becomes
spiritual inhibition. For example, teaching women to keep sex artificially repressed
teaches men to tell women what they think women want to hear rather than what they
are really feeling. Dishonesty inhibits spirituality. Women then begin to use their
sexuality to get told what they want to hear rather than learn to enjoy their sexuality.
They often contrast sexuality with spirituality rather than see how a sexual bond
contributes to a spiritual bond. Women’s sexual repression is an effective way of
giving women control over men, but it keeps men less than genuine. percent of our
families of origin are said to be dysfunctional. So while in Stage I, “spare the rod,
spoil the child” implied if you did not use the rod, you’ve abused the child, in Stage
II, if you do use the rod, you’ve abused the child. Why?
In Stage I, using the rod was considered functional—it taught children that not
obeying would create pain. Which was true—rules were designed to prevent
starvation. But in Stage II, goals of self-fulfillment required being in touch with
one’s feelings. Using the rod disconnects children from their feelings and is
therefore more likely to be dysfunctional.
In Stage I, mutual dependence was the cement in a family’s foundation. So there
could hardly be too much of it. Codependence was Stage I Functional. But when
divorces forced us to prepare ourselves for independence, then codependence often
became over-dependence and therefore dysfunctional. So the functional Stage I
family became the dysfunctional Stage II family.
I would like to see us stop describing our families of origin as dysfunctional and
begin describing them as Stage I Functional. This gives them credit for the
contribution they made to taking care of our survival needs so that we have the
freedom to decide what is functional in Stage II. It also allows them to rejoice in the
opportunity to pursue that freedom themselves rather than feel blamed and guilty for
screwing up.
Marriage
Feminists assume that marital traditions such as the father giving the bride away
were a reflection of patriarchy. But the father “gave away” the bride because it was
the father giving away his responsibility to protect. (No one gave the man away
because no one would protect a man. The job of the parents was to turn the son into a
protector, not give him away to a protector.)
Our parents were often criticized for discouraging a son from “doing his own
thing.” But because a Vincent van Gogh could barely support himself (much less a
family of ten), it was the job of parents to make sure their son didn’t become an
artist, and to teach their daughter that being courted by such a man was courting
disaster. Children often heard those instructions as parents exercising power. In fact,
it was not parental power, it was postponement of parental power—the postponement
of Tevye’s and Many women are beginning to prefer men who are genuine to men
whom they can control. In brief, Stage I religion’s emphasis on rigid rules prepared a
couple to be enduring role mates. Stage II religion’s emphasis on communication
prepares a couple to be soul mates.
Stage I churches will continue to seek men to lead as a symbol of men’s
responsibility to be a problem solver and savior. These churches will attract mostly
Stage I female followers and Stage I male leaders. Stage II churches will seek both
sexes to lead, not by blaming men for leading in the past but by helping both sexes
make a transition into a different future.
Stage I Vs. Stage II Sexual Politics
Worldwide, politicians trained in Stage I sexual ethics were suddenly being judged
by Stage II ethics. John Kennedy’s affairs were kept secret but Ted Kennedy and Bill
Clinton were seen as womanizers. Stage I Japanese prime ministers had geishas but
Stage II prime minister Uno was toppled as soon as it was discovered he had had a
geisha. British war minister John Profumo went from being the leading candidate for
prime minister to being forced out of politics in disgrace when his having a mistress
was judged by Stage II sexual ethics.
Why this change? In Stage I, divorces were not allowed, so men’s affairs did
not put women’s economic security in jeopardy; in Stage II, affairs could lead to
divorce, so men’s affairs did place women’s economic security in jeopardy. We
did not want political leaders who would be role models for behavior that would put
women’s economic security in jeopardy.
Doesn’t our supposed concern about women conflict with the sexual double
standard that seems to have served only men? No. There were two double standards:
(1) a man could have affairs, a woman couldn’t; and (2) a married woman could
force her husband to support the children from her affairs; a married man could not
force his wife to support the children from his affairs. (Rather, he was ostracized if
he refused to take care of a child that resulted from his affairs.
15
) It is the second
double standard that we never hear about.
Both double standards, though, protected women. How? Had married men felt
their wives were having affairs to create children they had to support, few men would
commit to marriage and few women and children would receive protection.
Nevertheless, Stage I societies had a dilemma: marriage guaranteed women
economic security for a lifetime but failed to guarantee men sexual gratification for
a lifetime. So Stage I societies created a marital deal: what I call the “Marital
Triangle.”
The Marital Triangle was the husband, wife, and mistress (or, depending on the
culture, the geisha, prostitute, second wife, or a harem). The deal was this: “Husband,
your first obligation is to take care of your wife’s and children’s needs economically.
If you’re still doing this but you’re not getting the sex, youth, beauty, attention, and
passion that made you agree to do this for a lifetime to begin with, then you can take
care of some of your needs, too, but under two conditions: you must continue to
provide for your family (no divorce is allowed even if your needs aren’t met); and
you must also provide for some of the economic needs of this younger, attractive
woman (geisha, mistress, prostitute) whose need for money otherwise might not be
met.”
In Stage I, no one group got their intimacy needs met—not husband, wife,
mistress, or children. Of course, some individuals did, but that wasn’t the primary
worry of a Stage I marriage: it was stability, and the Marital Triangle was the “Great
Stability Compromise.”
By Stage II standards, politicians who declared they were moral but were having
affairs were clearly hypocrites. But that missed the underlying spirit of morality that
was bred into Stage I culture: morality meant taking care of your family. For most
men, affairs would undermine that goal. But the man who could do both discreetly
was not ostracized because on some level it was understood he was providing an
incentive for a man to be successful and a better protector. All this changed when
affairs signaled divorces and dumped millions of women into the workplace without
workplace skills. Then politicians who had affairs soon also had no workplace.
By calling these changed standards a higher morality, women again appeared to
have the higher morality. Women, though, did not have a higher morality. Why not?
Every affair involved both sexes.
The difference? In the 1980s and ’90s, Gary Hart’s Donna Rice got commercial
and TV roles, Bill Clinton’s Gennifer Flowers got paid an estimated $100,000 to
reveal her story . . . both sexes participated, but men were seen as perpetrators and
women as victims even though the men’s careers were being hurt while women’s
careers were being jump-started.
Stage II Politics
When we think of political bosses, bribes, and patronage, we tend to think of male
power, male corruption, the “good ol’ boys” network, male chauvinism, and male
dominance. The unraveling of this process is associated with the unraveling of these
symbols of male dominance. However, in Stage I, political bosses, bribes, and
patronage were acceptable not because they served men but because they served
families—including women and children. The boss remained in power only as long
as he created jobs to feed those families. He built his “machine” from the economic
underclass, so these jobs fed the poor. The fact that they were jobs, not welfare,
allowed the families respect.
When a man became the boss it was often the first symbol of an economic
underclass—Irish or Italians or Jews or blacks—breaking into the economic
mainstream. One could call it Stage I welfare or corruption or job training,
depending on one’s point of view, but it benefited families, not just men. In its
extreme forms (e.g., the Mafia), it not only provided for families but it disposed of
men much more often than women.
CREATING GENDER TRANSITION
In brief, our genetic heritage is in conflict with our genetic future. For the first time
in human history, the qualities it takes to survive as a species are compatible
with the qualities it takes to love. To love the other sex, to love our children—by a
Stage II definition of love. The challenge for a woman is to create enough economic
independence that she doesn’t compromise love for an economic safety net. The
challenge for a man is understanding how preparation for Stage I protection is really
preparation for disconnection—from children, wife, and life. The Stage I man had a
role that was more disconnected from intimacy than the Stage I female role of
nurturer. Which is why the challenge for men to enter Stage II is even greater than
the challenge for women.
• • •
To conclude that men did not have the power, though, we must be more secure that
the male role in the past has not, after all, been just a way of keeping women in their
place. We must deal with denying women the vote; treating women as property and
second-class citizens; objectifying them as concubines, harems, and prostitutes;
stoning them as witches; not writing them into constitutions; denying them access to
roles of leadership, jobs outside the home, and so on. We must see if “power,”
“patriarchy,” “dominance,” and “sexism” were code words for male privilege or
male disposability.
CHAPTER 3
Are “Power,
” “Patriarchy,
” “Dominance,
” and “Sexism”
Actually Code Words for Male Disposability?
Patriarchy is “the universal political structure which privileges men at the
expense of women.”
—Encyclopedia of Feminism1
I. A SLAVE BY ANY OTHER NAME . . . IS STILL A SLAVE
If power is defined as having control over one’s life, then myths, legends, and Bible
stories were often ways of getting both sexes to forfeit power. . . .
THE HERO AS SLAVE
Once upon a time, a mother who wanted to see the beautiful statue of Hera had no
horses or oxen to carry her there. But she did have two sons. And the sons wanted
more than anything to make their mother’s wish come true. They volunteered to yoke
themselves to a cart and take her over the mountains in the scorching heat to the
faraway village of Argos, the home of the statue of Hera.
2
Upon their arrival in Argos, the sons were cheered and statues (that can be found
to this day) were built in their honor.
3 Their mother prayed that Hera give her sons
the best gift in her power. Hera did that. The boys died.
The traditional interpretation? The best thing that can happen to a man is to die at
the height of his glory and power. Yet had this been a myth of two daughters who had
substituted themselves for oxen to carry their father somewhere, would we have
interpreted the daughters’ deaths as proof that the best thing that can happen to a
woman is to die at the height of her glory and power?
The statues and cheers can be seen as bribes for the sons to value their lives less
than their mother’s request to view a statue. The fact that the statue was of Hera, the
queen of the Olympian gods and the protector of married women,4
is symbolic. The
sons’ sacrifice symbolized the mandate for men to become strong enough to serve
the needs of mothers and marriage, and to be willing to call it glory if they died in
the process. Which is why the name Hercules means “for the glory of Hera.”5
Was a hero a servant? Yes. The very word “hero” comes from the Greek ser-ow,
from which comes our word “servant,” as well as “slave” and “protector.”6 A hero
was basically a slave whose purpose was to serve and protect. To protect the
community in general, women and children in particular. In exchange, heroes
received the respect and love of those they protected. Just as the appreciation we
gave our mother’s cooking kept her cooking and gave her an “ego bribe” to be a
slave to her role in the kitchen, so statues and tales of glory are ego bribes for males
to be slaves to their roles as heroes. Appreciation keeps the slave a slave.
None of this denies the female contribution to protection. The female who
protected in her way was Hera; the male who protected in his way was a hero.
WERE MEN LESS THAN PROPERTY?
Men were not “thought of” as property or animals, they were just used that way. The
fifteenth-century Incas did not have horses to speed messages over the long distances
up and down mountain paths. The men were given coca leaves (cocaine), which
allowed them to run farther and faster . . . until they burned out.
7 The good died
young. Unlike women-as-property, men were not to be protected—they were to be
used and be disposable.
During the bubonic plagues in Europe (fourteenth century), men who carried the
corpses were subject to catching the plague. Poor peasant men (gavoti) volunteered
to do this, though, for the money it gave them. Many died. But their families were
supported.8
On the surface, it would appear that the gavoti corpse carriers “had money” and
that the Inca runners had physical strength and “power.” But both knew they would
be dying so their families could live. If these were rules made by men, what does it
say about men that they made rules to sacrifice themselves for their families?
WHY WERE MEN SO FOCUSED ON WINNING?
When I was a boy and went to a museum I can remember seeing a head cut off from
its body and being told by the curator that it was thought to be the head of the captain
of the winning team in a Mayan ball court game (roughly a Mayan and Aztec
equivalent of football). Other times, the losing team’s captain—or the entire team—
was killed.9 Why? It depended on who the society felt would best protect them: the
able-bodied winners, in which case the losers were sacrificed; or the gods, who might
be more pleased by a sacrifice of the winners.
If winning per se were important, the winner would never have been sacrificed.
The sacrifice of the winners taught the society that both men’s lives and winning
were secondary to society’s protection. Men’s focus on winning was, historically, a
focus on protection—even at the expense of themselves.
THE CIVIL WAR: MEN AS SECOND-CLASS CITIZENS
During the Civil War in the United States, two groups were able to avoid the draft:
females and upper-class males. Any female was the equivalent of an upper-class
male in this respect. Except that even the upper-class men had to buy their way out
of death. They did this by paying three hundred dollars
10
(roughly $5,400 today
11
) to
a poor man. This allowed the poor man’s family to survive while he risked death.
The poor man’s self-concept—that he was worth nothing if he remained poor—was
literal. Being cannon fodder at least made him worth something to someone.
Why could the upper-class male buy his way out of the Civil War? Because he had
the ability to save the community in other ways—producing munitions or food
supplies in factories, producing harvests via the property and slaves he owned (which
might go unproductive were he to go off to war; and which might never again be
productive if he was killed). The upper-class male did not have the privilege to avoid
the savior role—only the privilege to play that role in various ways. He still inherited
the obligation to save, not the option to be free from saving. Nor did he inherit the
option to have a woman save him.
During the Civil War, the government passed a Conscription Act
12 allowing, in
essence, for an all-male slave trade. More than a half million men (623,026) were
killed in the Civil War
13—the equivalent of eleven Vietnam Wars. Try to imagine
eleven Vietnam Wars in a row in which only females were drafted, in which 620,000
female soldiers—your sister, your mother, your daughter—arrived home in body
bags.
Was this war stuff, though, “men’s thing”? Hardly. Women “hissed and groaned”
at men who didn’t fight.
14
 In the South, men rarely ran ads for substitutes because, as
the award-winning PBS series on the Civil War explained, “women wouldn’t permit
it.”15
 Few women wanted to marry a man who was “afraid” to fight.
There is yet another lesson here. If men loved war so much, why did men riot,
protesting the draft of men in the 1860s? Why did many Northern men risk ostracism
by running ads in newspapers for substitutes so they could buy their way out? Today
men still get hissed and booed when they succeed at avoiding war. Ask Dan Quayle,
Bill Clinton. . . .
Some boys, of course, willingly go into war. If girls from disadvantaged
backgrounds willingly had their limbs torn off so their families could have an extra
$5,000 a year, we would call these girls saints. We call the boys “macho.”
In the Civil War, as in most wars, both sexes believed in the principles for which
their side was fighting. One of those principles was freeing black slaves. In essence,
white male slaves fought to free black slaves. We have long acknowledged the
slavery of blacks. We have yet to acknowledge the slavery of males.
In these respects, no man was equal to a woman: no man, of any class, could
expect a woman to save him from attack. Or from starvation. And in Stage I,
starvation and attack were the primary fears. In these ways, men were the secondclass citizens. Boys died before the age of consent—before they had the right to vote.
If girls willingly risked their lives in the Civil War in exchange for a few medals,
we would immediately recognize low self-esteem as a woman’s issue. Yet boys do
this and a best-selling feminist book in the 1990s, Gloria Steinem’s Revolution from
Within,claims that low self-esteem is a woman’s issue.
16 Low self-esteem is also a
man’s issue—an issue deriving from the male version of being a second-class
citizen. Our ability to address it is a Stage II privilege; our addressing it for only one
sex is Stage II sexism.
When feminist historians call this slave class a warrior class and an elite class,
17
they miss this perspective: warriors were not so much an elite class as a dead class.
THE HAZARDS OF HEROISM
Heroism had its hazards: teaching a boy to kill and then expecting him to kill only to
protect; instructing him to kill males, but not females or children. The tragedy of the
warrior is that the more he fights the enemy, the more he begins to be like the
enemy; the more he kills beasts, the more he becomes like a beast. (The myth of the
Centaur—half man and half beast—symbolizes the resultant male schizophrenia.)
A parable from the Cherokee describes these hazards beautifully.18
Chief of the Pond
Once upon a time there was a gentle pond abundant with God’s creatures:
fish, snakes, and frogs. All day these creatures did as they pleased. In the
pond was a log. The creatures thought of the log as their shelter, a podium for
food, almost a Chief of the Pond. One day, though, an elegant heron with long
legs poised its graceful body upon the pond’s edge. All the creatures took its
arrival as a sign that they were meant to be led to greater things. They held a
powwow. They agreed that the log did nothing but sleep all day. So, they
proudly elected the elegant heron their chief. Within a week or two, the heron
had eaten all the fish, all the snakes, and all the frogs.
When females ask males to protect them with their strength, the risk is having
the very strength that protects them in one instance be used against them in
another. Thus the athletes for whom females cheer are also involved in one third of
campus sexual assaults.
19 On a broader level, when people allow kings “divine
rights,” the upside is the potential for greater protection; the downside, the potential
for greater misuse. When individuals empower their drugs, religions, kings, or
males, they risk being disempowered. The log, by doing nothing, forced the
creatures to take responsibility. The temptation in choosing a hero is to relinquish
responsibility—to blame the hero, the patriarchy, the politician. But ultimately it
was the creatures who had the power. They rejected the log—or self-responsibility—
and they opted for the hero . . . for the heron. Just as genius walks a thin line with
destructiveness, so heroism walks a thin line with both the destruction of others and
self-destruction.
Don’t leaders often manipulate their way into power? Yes. And people manipulate
their leaders by choosing leaders who tell them what they want to hear. The Aryans
were willing to make someone chancellor in exchange for being told they weren’t
doing as well as the Jews because the Jews were oppressing them. A young man
named Adolf spoke to the Aryan fear of taking personal responsibility. He was soon
rewarded. If the pay is good enough, the prostitute will appear.
II. SOCIALIZATION FOR SLAVERY
SCARS AS MALE ELIGIBILITY
Women’s scars and rituals involved beauty (piercing ears and noses, binding feet,
and wearing corsets); men’s involved protecting women. In cultures in which
physical strength is still the best way to protect women, as among the Dodos in
Uganda, each time a man kills a man,he is awarded a ritual scar; the more scars, the
more he is considered eligible.
20
In the Old South, the more duels a man won, the
more he was considered eligible. The single ladies spoke of a single man’s victories
just as the single men spoke of the single woman’s beauty.21
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in many European countries, to be
called a “gentleman,” a man had to don a sword. A gentleman would use his sword to
defend a woman’s honor, to prove himself worthy of a woman, or to defend his own
reputation. “Gentleman” was a term of the highest honor.
Why was a man with a sword called a gentleman? Because the sword was to be
used only against men . . . to women he was to be gentle.
Think of the implications: calling a man “gentle” if he wore something with which
to kill. Imagine requiring a woman to wear a sword before we called her a lady.
Imagine expecting her to kill any woman who insulted a man. How many women
would we have left?
This tradition—of men killing a man who insults a woman—is still with us in
places like Sicily, and the verbal remnants of it are with us in men’s hesitancy to talk
behind women’s backs, even in an era when calling men jerks behind their backs is
virtually institutionalized.*
* Men’s hesitancy is documented in Why Men Are the Way They Are, in the section called “The Worst
Infidelity.” Male-bashing is in the chapter called “The New Sexism.”
Scars, men’s teeth being knocked out, and circumcisions were all “symbolic
wounds”—symbols of the necessity for a boy to endure pain in subordination to his
male role as warrior and protector.
22
In societies in which circumcision is
commonplace, it is usually a prerequisite to marriage. (The prayer at the end of the
bris, the Jewish circumcision ceremony which takes place on the eighth day of a
boy’s life, goes, “As he has been initiated into the covenant, so may he enter into
matrimony. . . .”23
)
Today, scars that reflect a risking of life in sports still bring a man love when he is
young, but when he is older, only if they translate into money. Thus, a high school
dropout like Mike Tyson could find “love” with a beautiful Sarah Lawrence graduate
like Robin Givens only if his scars translated into money.
Engagement Rings as Scars
An engagement ring is one modern equivalent of a ritual scar: The scar symbolized
the physical risk taken only by the man to bring physical security to the woman; the
engagement ring symbolizes the financial risk taken only by the man to bring fiscal
security to the woman. Both symbolize the man’s willingness to protect a woman.
The bigger the diamond, like the bigger the scar, the greater the protection.
The Officer and the Gentleman: Modern Versions of
the Duel
Today, when a man makes money killing and protecting, we still call him, well . . .
An Officer and a Gentleman. The officer was, after all, a trained killer, but, as
Richard Gere swept Deborah Winger off her feet, he became a gentleman. And in the
theater in which I saw the film, the women burst into applause. We still call the
trained killer a gentleman if he uses his money from killing to protect a woman.
DYING FOR GOD
The Christian Soldier
As He died to make men holy,
Let us die to make men free. . . .
—“Battle Hymn of the Republic”
A man who died to save was said to be loved. For the Christian male, Jesus was
love. Jesus saves. But Jesus also saved others by dying himself. The military was the
secular form of Jesus. Jesus in uniform. For many boys, the bribe of military rank,
the faith in God’s support, and the power of music felt, in combination, like a
personal call to put his life on the line: “Onward, Christian Soldiers.”
Pressure on a man to become a savior or protector is part of every religion. Hindu
men see the male images of Vishnu, Shiva, Krishna; Buddhist men see Guatama
Buddha; Christians see the male Christ; Moslems see Allah. . . . Priests, rabbis, and
ministers are mostly men . . . always protectors.
The message of religion for boys is that there really is no choice but to save. In the
Garden of Gethsemane, Jesus begged God to take from him the cup that represented
his role as savior. The Lord Jesus was so distraught he sweated blood. God would not
grant him permission to forfeit the cup—God said nothing. When, ultimately, Christ
was to die, he felt betrayed (“My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?”).
Theologians have debated whether or not Christ had a choice in playing his savior
role: could he really have refused? Theoretically, of course, he could have; but God’s
approval symbolizes the approval of everything that is meaningful and, when
everything that is meaningful is saying, “You have a role: to save,” sure, you can
turn it down, but . . .
Today, men are returning to their Gardens of Gethsemane, asking an old question,
seeking the courage to find an answer for our times.
Gladiators and Their Virgins
During Roman times, the highlight of the religious holidays was the gladiatorial
combats. Essentially these were slaughters of men—ranging from slaves (who hoped
to be freed) to knights and nobles (who hoped to be heroes).
24 The slaughters were
presided over by female deities: the Great Mother, Ceres, and Flora.
25 Solemn
religious processions kicked off the games as our national anthem might introduce a
football game. While males were the ones subject to death, the Vestal Virgins (who,
you might guess, were not males) occupied seats of honor at the games.
26
 The Vestal
Virgins were to the gladiator what the cheerleader is to the football player: female
support for male violence. Both were socialized to play their roles before what we
would call the “age of consent.”
Why did female deities bless violence against men? Because the deeper purpose
of violence against men was to prevent violence against women. Both sexes
wanted the protection that came when potential invaders, upon seeing the strength of
their potential victims, chose another village to pillage.
ARE WE STILL PREPARING MEN TO BE DISPOSABLE?
Today, violence against women is rightly abhorred. But we call violence against men
entertainment. Think of football, boxing, wrestling; or ice hockey, rodeos, and auto
racing. All are games used to sugarcoat violence against men, originally in need of
sugarcoating so “our team”—or “our society”—could bribe its best protectors to
sacrifice themselves. Yet even today the violence against men in sports is still
financed by our public education system; and by public subsidies of the stadiums in
which sports teams play. Violence against men is not just called entertainment, it is
also called education. We all support it. Every day.
The celebration of that violence can be seen in our naming of school teams after
violent societies (Vikings, Aztecs, Trojans) or fierce animals (Tigers, Bears,
Panthers). Even our cars are called Jaguar, Cherokee, Cougar, Fury, and Stealth.
Imagine your daughter being picked up by a guy driving a Ford Fairy, a Dodge
Daisy, or a Plymouth Pansy. . . . Or (if you’re getting into this), imagine a grown
man rooting for a team named not the Giants but the Munchkins; not the Atlanta
Braves but the Atlanta Sensitives.
It is not coincidental that a professional football team is named after the Vikings.
The Vikings used to enter competitions to see who could best split their male
victim’s body from head to groin. In cheering for the Vikings, we honor the process
that educates men to sacrifice one anothers’ bodies for appreciation. We keep the
slave a slave.
Imagine how we would feel if I began this section saying, “Today, violence
against women is rightly applauded.” We would know I favored the death of women;
when we applaud for violence against men, we favor the death of men. We do it
because we have learned that the more effectively we prepare men to sacrifice
themselves, the more we are protected. The unconscious translation of “our team
winning” is “our society protected.” We applaud violence against men and abhor
violence against women because part of the purpose of violence against men is to
protect women.
III. WHY WERE MEN SO VIOLENT AND WOMEN SO LOVING?
ARE MEN INHERENTLY VIOLENT?
Men often become nonviolent in societies that (1) have adequate amounts of food,
(2) have adequate amounts of water, and (3) perceive themselves as isolated from
attack. For example, the Tahitian men, the Minoan men on Crete, and the Central
Malaysian Semai were nonviolent during the period in their history when all three of
these conditions prevailed.27
When men were not needed to kill, women were less likely to select men who
killed and men were less likely to kill. (Choosing men who killed was no more
women’s fault than killing was men’s fault—both were necessary to survive.)
The beautiful princess rarely married the conscientious objector. Why? Few
societies could afford to give their highest reward to a man who wouldn’t kill. If men
were inherently violent, there would be no need to create a social structure bribing
men to be violent.
The ability to kill always required the vulnerability of being exposed to being
killed. Male eligibility was created by vulnerability masked as invulnerability. Men
have been both violent and vulnerable, but they are neither inherently violent nor
inherently vulnerable. For the first time in human history a “family man” no longer
has to be a “killer man.”
WERE MATRIARCHIES MORE PEACEFUL?
Some historians are now suggesting that matriarchal societies were superior because
men and women worked more in partnership and that the society tended to be more
peaceful.
28 But that missed the point: the reason partnership models were developed
in societies like Tahiti was not because the societies were patriarchal or matriarchal,
but because they were unthreatened and self-sufficient.
Some historians are labeling these societies matriarchal because, for example,
female gods were primary, not male gods. But male gods were the primary gods
when protection was the primary need (the gods that protected were male, not
female, because protection via killing was the male role). The sad part of this
matriarchal labeling is that it makes male sacrifice look like male dominance and
makes peace and partnership look like the responsibility of women rather than the
outcome of adequate food and water and a good defense.
ARE WOMEN INHERENTLY LESS WARLIKE THAN MEN?
Throughout history, women in power have used a rationale similar to men’s to send
men to death with similar frequency and in similar numbers. For example, the drink
Bloody Mary was named after Mary Tudor (Queen Mary I), who burned 300
Protestants at the stake; when Henry VIII’s daughter, Elizabeth I, ascended to the
throne, she mercilessly raped, burned, and pillaged Ireland at a time when Ireland
was called the Isle of Saints and Scholars. When a Roman king died, his widow sent
80,000 men to their deaths.
29
If Columbus was an exploiter, we must remember that
Queen Isabella helped to send him.
In recent years, the so-called Iron Ladies—Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and
Margaret Thatcher—have all sent men to their deaths at rates not dissimilar to those
of the average male leader, and in wars as wasteful to male life as Thatcher’s
involvement in the Falkland Islands War.
What has remained consistent throughout history is that whether or not the
leaders were female or male, almost 100 percent of the troops they sacrificed in
battle were male.* When women led, it was still men left dead. Equality was at the
top—not at the bottom.
* Even in Israel, the combat role for women is optional, but obligatory for males; and the woman who
volunteers for combat is, in practice, rare. See chapter 5, “War Hero or War Slave?”
WHY DID MEN CREATE EMPIRES?
Empires are often considered the quintessential example of men’s desire for power
and conquest. It is ironic that we blame men for creating empires while we all live in
the empires men create. But why did men create empires?
Empires were to countries what insurance policies are to individuals: a source of
security. For example, as European countries saw themselves as vulnerable to attack,
empires became buffer zones—a good offense became the best defense. Similarly, if
famine hit their country food could be obtained from the empire more easily than
from the enemy.
Why did people invade countries that weren’t a threat to them? Think of why
Europeans invaded the native American Indians—who were never a threat to the
Europeans. When a group within a country felt oppressed, it frequently fled, found
another territory, and killed those gentler people who dared resist. The people who
did the killing—and the people who were killed—were men, but the people who
benefited were men and women.
The accumulated wars that eventually led to the United States are another example
of men being less important than property. Men died for property; women lived on
the property that was often their husband’s grave.
Put another way, major powers have become major powers via the deaths of
boys. Because boys died, empires can be seen as a male form of subservience;
because others lived, empires can also be seen as the male contribution to survival.
HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE MALE VIOLENCE TO CHANGE?
How long does it take a firmly embedded male killer mentality to change? The
Vikings (the head-through-groin choppers) are considered as ruthless as any. But
after the Vikings conquered England, Englishwomen found the men who killed with
axes attractive; soon wedding bells were ringing. Within two generations, instead of
razing villages, they were raising children; instead of destroying the property of
foreigners, they were planting on their own property. Within two generations, the
Vikings had turned swords into plowshares.
More recently, Japan has taken less than two generations to turn swords into stock
shares. The males are still performers, but not via violence. Why not? Both cultures
reinterpreted what it would take to survive—and the males adapted accordingly.
What is consistent among men is not violence but men’s willingness to protect.
When they can protect by killing enemies, they kill enemies; when men can protect
by “making a killing” on Wall Street, they do that. Men’s underlying motivator is
neither swords nor plowshares . . . it’s adapting to love and adapting to approval.
ARE WOMEN NATURE’S CIVILIZING BALANCE?
It is often said that women are a civilizing balance to the innately warlike male. By
taking care of the killing for women it could be said that men civilized women.
When survival was the issue, men killing to protect what women bore was the male
form of nurturance.
30
It was men’s contribution to the civilizing balance. (Later, as
money was required for survival, the raising of money was the male “financial
womb.” Whether killing in war or making a killing on Wall Street, “making a
killing” was men protecting what women bore.)
When a woman says she wants male sensitivity and then falls in love with the
football player, surgeon, or rock star, she gives the male the message that he’ll get
the most love when he is most unbalanced—most focused on his work, most focused
on becoming a hero. Had she fallen in love with a sensitive nurse, an altruistic artist,
or an empathetic cabdriver, she would have provided a real vote for civilizing men.
She would have put her love where her mouth is.
Societies in which the man who “makes a killing” is most lovable create the male
tragedy: they disconnect men from love to earn love. . . .
IV. DISCONNECTING FROM LOVE TO EARN LOVE: THE MALE
TRAGEDY
SELF-ESTEEM AND MASCULINITY
In Sparta, boys were moved into barracks at the age of seven.31 They would be
forced to play “games” like “steal the cheese from the altar.” To get the cheese, they
had to run through a gauntlet and endure flogging so fierce that some died shortly
afterward from concussions and blood gushing out of open wounds.
32
This stealing of cheese was a perfect metaphor: the constant plagues and famines
forced the military to defend what little food citizens had and to steal what it did not
have. Stealing required the courage to risk death.
Why were the boys removed from home at age 7? The less a boy valued
intimacy, life, and loving, the more he would allow himself to be disposable. We
bribed him to do this by offering him respect—actually, conditional respect that we
called “love” when he met the conditions. The catch-22 was that the process it took
to get love disconnected him from love.
Disposability training started at birth. With the penis. Studies of male
circumcision find that the more a society needed hunters and warriors in order to
survive, the harsher were its procedures for circumcision of boy babies.
33
The problem for the women these men married was that death training rarely
included courses on “Intimacy in Marriage.”
And the problem for fathers? . . .
DID FATHERS WHO DISCONNECTED FROM THEIR SONS REALLY LOVE THEIR
SONS?: THE STORY OF THESEUS
When King Aegeus of Athens was about to become a father, he said he did not want
to see his son until Theseus was stronger than all others.
34 Why? King Aegeus feared
that a pampered prince could not protect his people. So Aegeus deprived himself of
seeing Theseus until Theseus could lift a massive boulder that no one else could lift
and then risk his life by slaying the Minotaur that threatened to destroy the people of
his kingdom.
What was the importance of Theseus’s having to risk his life—as in slaying
dragons? It demonstrated the purpose of power—the subservience of the life of
the king to the life of those served by the king. A good father was expected to
prepare his son to be disposable.
A good Stage I dad was to prepare his son not to feel loved until his son could
protect and save. He demonstrated this by not showing his son his own love until he
had adequately trained the son to replace him as a savior.
Is it possible that all my words are just rationalizations for King Aegeus being a
truly uncaring dad? Well, after Theseus had slain the Minotaur, he forgot to put up a
white flag as a signal that he was still alive. Aegeus thought that his son had
perished. His grief was so deep that he killed himself.
35
“When You Comin’ Home, Dad?”
To experience the male tragedy in its present form, listen to Harry Chapin’s song
“Cat’s in the Cradle.” The son asks, “When you comin’ home, Dad?” The dad
responds, “I don’t know when.” Yet the father’s yearning for his son is so deep that
the moment the dad was no longer preoccupied with providing for his son, he reached
out for his son’s companionship. Unfortunately, the pressure on the dad is relieved
only when the son has a job of his own. So the son responds, “My new job’s a hassle
and the kids have the flu.”
Historically, the obligations of dads deprive dads of love while the obligations
of moms provide moms with love. Deprived of genuine love, dads are deprived of
genuine power. Ironically, the son had ached for connection with his dad so intensely
that he vowed, “Some day I’m gonna be like him. …”
Dead Poets Society
Not understanding the Stage I father’s obligation to prepare his son to replace him
(to “kill” him) creates a deep father-son wound. If we review a video of the film
Dead Poets Society, we can see how the son hated his Stage I dad and loved his Stage
II teacher (Robin Williams) because he did not understand three things: first, how his
dad’s sacrifices had created the freedom for him to explore Stage II values; second,
how the discipline his dad instilled was part of what the son would need to have the
strength and security from which to pursue a Stage II life; third, that his dad’s
discipline was not only his dad’s way of loving him but also his dad’s way of
preparing him to find a woman’s love in the best way his dad knew how.
The father, of course, did not understand that he was discouraging his son from
pursuing the very freedom he had created for his son. But the son can never be at
peace with his father—and therefore himself—until he understands that his dad’s
best intent was to teach his son how to give and receive love.
The male tragedy, then, is that showing our love by providing takes us away from
showing our love by connecting. Thus, loving our sons has taken us away from
loving our sons.
V. MALE SUBSERVIENCE TO FEMALE BEAUTY
The woman is life, and the man is the servant of life. . . .
—JOSEPH CAMPBELL, explaining why women are in the center of a tribal dance, why
they control the dance, and why men dance around the women.36
BEAUTY POWER: THE BIBLICAL STORY OF RACHEL AND JACOB*
* The biblical quotes are all from Genesis. See endnotes.
Jacob lived with his uncle Laban. Uncle Laban had two daughters: Leah, who was
homely, and Rachel, who was beautiful. Jacob fell in love with—guess who? But
when Jacob asked for his beautiful cousin Rachel’s hand in marriage, his uncle
required that he work seven years for him to earn Rachel as his wife.
When Jacob completed the seven years, the wedding took place. But when Jacob’s
bride removed her veil, Jacob realized his uncle had tricked him by substituting his
homely cousin, Leah. Jacob was told he must work yet another seven years to earn
the beautiful Rachel. Must he remain married to the homely Leah? Yes. And she will
remain his first, the most-honored, wife. So it cost Jacob fourteen years of working
for Uncle Laban to earn the right to continue supporting both Rachel and Leah.
Rachel, however, could not have sons, so she told Jacob to have sex with her
maidservant so she could have sons whom Rachel would raise as her own.37 Leah
then got Jacob to create two more sons with her maidservant. When the process
ended, Jacob was supporting four women, twelve sons, and a daughter.
38
Why is God blessing bigamy, sex with maidservants, and first-cousin incest?
Because, in each case, what God blessed created offspring who were protected.
Morality was not the issue. Immortality was. As a result of the first-cousin incest,
for example, instead of Uncle Laban’s family line dying out, twelve sons were born,
from whom came the twelve tribes of the Jewish people.
39
How did God get Jacob to support four women and thirteen children? The answer
tells us a lot about the purposes of female beauty. Rachel’s beauty served as a
magnet to get Jacob to create offspring with three women who might otherwise
be left out of the process of passing on their genes: one woman who was homely,
and two of lower-class status. By having sex with a reliable man of a higher class,
the maidservants were creating offspring who were likely to be protected.
God did not bless Rachel and Jacob with sons right away because that would have
given Jacob little incentive to have children with the maidservants, thus Rachel’s
beauty would have stopped short of getting many different women involved in the
process of raising children with a man who was hardworking and successful enough
to support all of them.
Beauty was God’s gift—or the gift of the species—to Rachel; it was meant to
be used by Rachel to serve God—or serve the species. When a person served God,
then, he or she was serving humans. When God gave a blessing, that was God’s way
(or society’s way) of instructing humans as to how to continue surviving: by having
children. This is why the first of 613 commandments (mitzvoth) in the Torah is “Be
fruitful and multiply.”40 What I began to see as I researched this chapter was how
biology and the Bible shared the same first commandment: “Be fruitful and
multiply.”41
Beauty and the Beast as the Modern-Day Version of
Rachel and Jacob
Beauty and the Beast is to fable what Rachel and Jacob are to the Bible. Both
Rachel’s beauty and Beauty’s beauty are used to attract a man who will save her
family from starvation. The man who does this might be a beast to the world, but to
the woman, he becomes a prince.
Before Jacob could become a husband or a beast could become a prince, they had
to be willing to give the fruits of their labor to the beautiful woman’s family with no
guarantee the beautiful woman would marry them, or that they would get along, or
that she would still be beautiful when they had completed the process.
Are there modern-day remnants of this? Yes. The man buying the woman dinners,
drinks, movie tickets, flowers, and an engagement ring which the woman is not
required to return if they do not get married. Both historically and currently, the
woman learned to ask for guarantees, the man learned to take risks.
This was not the woman’s fault. In Stage I, she needed guarantees—guarantees
were functional for her children to survive. But in Stage II, she needs preparation for
risk-taking to survive. In Stage I, the beast became a prince by offering the
beautiful woman guarantees; the Stage II prince is the man who does not seduce
the woman with guarantees. He is secure enough to be the prince within; she is free
to find a man who is a prince inside exactly because he did not become a prince of
bribes.
WHY WAS A BEAUTIFUL YOUNG WOMAN SUCH A BIG DEAL?
Beauty was a sign of health and reproductive capability; thus, a beautiful woman
historically had wide hips (for childbearing), body symmetry (indicating no
deformities), hair and teeth that weren’t falling out (indicating health). And she was
young—at the beginning of her fertile years.
Society needed to reinforce men’s biological dependency on female beauty for the
same reasons it needed to make women dependent on male income: dependency
created an incentive to marry. A man who was addicted to a woman’s beauty, youth,
and sex would temporarily “lose his mind”—he would make the irrational decision
to support her for the rest of his life. Female beauty, then, can be thought of as
nature’s marketing tool: the way of marketing a woman for the survival of her
genes.
42
 Which is why female beauty is the world’s most potent drug.
The ideal beauty varied . . . but there was always an ideal of beauty. Throughout
history, the only constant about female beauty and female sex was that they were
more valued than male beauty and male sex. Especially in Stage I cultures. We have
selected for women who consciously or unconsciously learned that their beauty
and their sex were worth a man’s labor, money, life. No, many men’s lives.
Beauty power and sex power are parts of the female collective unconscious. Not
every woman wants to give up these powers.
VI. IMMORALITY . . . OR . . . IMMORTALITY?
Were sexual freedom and premarital sex condemned because they sacrificed
morality or sacrificed immortality? The Bible contains some astonishing answers. . .
.
WAS RELIGION CONCERNED WITH IMMORALITY . . . OR . . . IMMORTALITY?
DAUGHTERS RAPE
DRUNK DAD,
SAY GOD APPROVES
Why would the above “headline” make William Randolph Hearst and Rupert
Murdoch blush and yet lead to Lot and his daughters receiving God’s blessing? The
Bible explains, “One day the older daughter said to the younger, ‘Our father is old,
and there is no man around who will lie with us. . . . Let’s get our father to drink
wine and then lie with him and preserve our family line through our father.”43
 So, on
two consecutive nights, both daughters got their father drunk, waited until he fell
asleep, and had sex with him without his being aware of it (“He was not aware of it
when she lay down or when she got up”44
). They each became pregnant.
Were Lot and his daughters punished for incest or rape? (If a father had sex with
his daughter while she was asleep, we’d call it rape.) No. They were blessed. By God.
So blessed that both their sons became leaders of a people. Rather than feeling
ashamed about the incest, not only was the first of the sons, Moab, named after the
incest (Moab comes from the Hebrew meaning “from father”
45
), but so were the
peoples of which he was the father: the Moabites. Why? The drunkenness, rape, and
father-daughter incest led to the preservation of a family line.*
* Scholars who contend the daughters were hopeless sinners do so on the argument that the daughters could
have found other men with whom to continue the family line. Even these scholars seem willing to ignore the
“immorality” if the immortality of the family line is guaranteed. See The Pentateuch and Haftorahs, Second
Edition (London: Soncino Press, 1979), edited by Dr. J. H. Hertz, C.H., Late Chief Rabbi of the British
Empire, p. 69, note 31.
WHY PREMARITAL SEX, SEXUAL FREEDOM, AND HOMOSEXUALITY WERE
CONDEMNED
Premarital sex and sexual freedom were condemned because the children they led to
had no way of being protected. Masturbation, homosexuality, and sodomy (as in anal
sex, oral sex, or sex with animals) were also condemned because none of them even
led to children.
In contrast, affairs, polygyny, sex with maidservants, and even incest could be
sanctioned—if they led to protected offspring; if they did not, they were also
condemned. Principles of immortality were clothed in the garb of immorality.
This might be called the “Immortality Rule.”
Giving permission to homosexuality in Stage I involved the same problem as
giving permission to masturbation: it was permission for sexual pleasure without a
price. Think about it. A homosexual experience might mean two hours of sexual
pleasure. The consequences?—two hours of sexual pleasure. A heterosexual
experience might also mean two hours of sexual pleasure. But the consequences?—
eighteen years of responsibility. In brief, hetero-sexuality was a bad deal!
Homophobia was a Stage I society’s way of not allowing men to even think about
having sex with anyone other than a woman. Homophobia reflected an unconscious
societal fear that homosexuality was a better deal than heterosexuality for the
individual. Homophobia was like OPEC calling nations wimps if they bought oil
from a more reasonably priced source. It was the society’s way of giving men no
option but to pay full price for sex.
Homosexual relationships promised more than sex-for-free; they promised
relationships for free, companionship for free, love for free. All free of the cost of
feeding offspring. Since homosexuality was the greatest temptation to avoid
reproduction and, therefore, threaten survival, it was the primary candidate for the
death penalty. (When death wasn’t exacted literally, it was often exacted via
ostracism.) So the Old Testament demanded the death penalty for male homosexuals.
As did many Roman emperors, Spanish inquisitors, English monarchs, and some
American colonists. Thus, homophobia.
The fear that homosexuality would tempt people away from heterosexuality seems
to have left us with a more intense fear of homosexuality today than of other forms
of sex without offspring. For example, if we discover someone has masturbated, we
don’t say, as soon as their back is turned, “He’s a masturbator.” But when a man has
sex with another man, we say, “He’s a homosexual.” The taboo against
homosexuality tends to make the person secondary to his or her sexual expression,
just as racism makes the person secondary to his or her race.
All of these fears might have been functional for survival in Stage I, but they are
dysfunctional for love in Stage II. And homophobia is also dysfunctional for Stage II
survival—it teaches the objectification of a human, a prerequisite for killing humans,
which, with nuclear technology, threatens survival. One trademark of a Stage II
society, then, is the degree to which it frees itself from the Stage I fear of
homosexuality, from the discrimination against homosexuals that is its consequence,
and from the fear of loving our neighbor as ourself.
WASN’T POLYGNY AN EXAMPLE OF WOMEN AS MEN’S PROPERTY?
In no country at no period of time, were women safe from . . . the insistence
that their bodies existed only in relation to man, for his pleasure and progeny.
—The Women’s History of the World
46
Academic feminism often equates mistresses, concubines, and polygyny* (a man
having more than one wife) with male dominance. Once we understand the
Immortality Rule, though, we can move to a deeper understanding of why God
blessed the many wives and concubines of David—as in David and Goliath. As a
king, David had enough wealth and power to support more than one woman—so why
should other women miss out? Polygyny did not mean any man could have many
wives—it meant a poor man would be deprived of a wife so a woman could have a
rich man. No one took pity on the man who was poor for being deprived of love.
* Polygamy is often inaccurately used to mean a man having more than one wife, but it actually means either
sex having more than one spouse; only polygyny means a man having more than one wife.
Polygyny, then, was a system by which the rich man, by having more than one
wife, prevented a woman from being stuck with a poor man. Polygyny was a form
of socialism for the poor woman: the rich man was taxed to help the poor woman.
Polygyny was to some Mormon women what the government is to some modern
women—a substitute husband.
Polygyny was man-made religious rules saving poor women at the expense of poor
men. But polygyny was not a conspiracy against men. It was an outgrowth of Stage I
survival needs. It was not designed to help anyone get their intimacy needs met.
POLYGYNY AND CHRISTIANITY: CHRIST AND HIS NUNS
The Christian sanctioning of polygyny takes the form of nuns actually “marrying”
Christ—down to the taking of vows and the wearing of a wedding ring to symbolize
the union. The polygynous marriage between Christ and nuns is ideal from the nuns’
perspective because, while Christ assumes the protection of millions of women, the
nuns take vows of celibacy. Christ’s wives would not have been celibate if
polygyny’s primary purpose was the satisfaction of male sexual desires.
Polygyny’s primary purpose was female protection by the best male saviors.
Christ, then, is the superhuman male role model: protection, but no sexual
demands; the ability to be a breadwinner—or bread multiplier—should that be
needed in times of famine; a willingness to die to save us from our transgressions.
Priests were the human manifestation—protection without sexual demands, listening
without needing to burden the woman with his problems. The problem for the
everyday man was that if he listened to women all day he would have left his family
starving and, if he offered celibacy, the species would not have survived. The
everyday man’s sexual energy was stimulated from everywhere before marriage, and
then channeled into monogamy after marriage.
The church “patriarchy,” then, did what patriarchies did best—protect women and
help men protect women. Which is one reason more women than men attend church.
And why the more traditional the church, the more it expects men to play its savior
roles. In these senses, “patriarchy” served women more than men.
WHY WAS DIVORCE CONSIDERED IMMORAL AND ILLEGAL?
As a rule, when women had enough food, water, and shelter so that they could live
independently of men without starving, divorce was made legal and considered
moral.
47 And therefore it was common. This was the case among middle-class
Americans since the 1960s, the !Kung Bushmen of southern Africa’s Kalahari
Desert, the Yoruba of West Africa, the Hadza of Tanzania, and the Tamang of Nepal.
Even in societies that married off every woman possible and prevented divorces for
the masses, women who had economic security often ignored marriage—from
Cleopatra to the empress Wa of the Wei dynasty of China to Elizabeth I in the
sixteenth century or Catherine of Russia in the eighteenth century.48
The laws and religious rules, both made by men, almost always gave women the
primary protection even when a man might have wanted a divorce. Calling the taboo
against divorce “God’s will” (“What God has joined together, let no man put
asunder”) was society’s way of making that guarantee iron-clad for women.
Marriage-as-sacrament was the female’s “divine right.” At least for as long as
women needed it to prevent starvation.
The lesson? If men and women want the freedom to divorce, the socialization
process must require women to take care of themselves from as early an age as it
requires that of its men.
WHY WAS SEX SO FREE IN TAHITI, SO REPRESSED IN THE MIDDLE EAST, AND
SO MIXED UP IN AMERICA?
Sex in Free Supply, Tahiti Style
What happened to sex when there was plenty of food and water and no invaders—so
women didn’t need to keep sex in short supply until they found a protector? The
Tahitians possessed these conditions of abundance from the moment humans settled
there. Tahitian parents actually taught their children sex at an early age, as did other
elders.
49 When they became teenagers, the parents encouraged the children to enjoy
sex with anyone they happened to meet and be attracted to. Even group sex was fine.
The more lovers the children had, the more the parents were pleased.50 Because
children were easily cared for, pregnancy before a marriage was celebrated as a sign
of fertility. Tahitian religion had no rules suggesting sex was sinful. Sex was
considered a combination of pleasure, skill, and sport.
Within a century of Cook’s discovery of these islands, though, Westerners
imposed their concepts of morality, repressing sexuality. The Westerners, by not
understanding why they considered sex immoral, sapped the spirit of the Tahitians.
As Ian Campbell wrote in Lost Paradise, “Those who have nothing to live for, die.
Within three generations, the population of Tahiti plummeted from more than
140,000 to less than 5,000.”51
Sex in Short Supply, OPEC Style
We often think of countries that require women to wear a veil as keeping women
powerless. In Muslim countries, the purdah keeps female beauty hidden, only to be
shown to the selected few—who were invariably good providers. This prevented the
average man from even looking at the average woman until he promised to protect
and provide for her and her children for life (i.e., marriage). And until the man does
this, he is deprived of her (and she of him) while traveling, eating, worshiping, etc.
Her love, her nurturance, her affection, her cheers, even her smile, were made
conditional—until he demonstrated willingness to provide, protect, and risk death for
her. This got almost all women, not just the beautiful ones, protected by someone.
In the Middle East, female sex and beauty are to Middle Eastern men what oil
and gas are to Americans: the shorter the supply, the higher the price. The more
women “gave” sex away for free, or for a small payment, the more the value of every
woman’s prize would be undermined . . . which is why anger toward prostitution,
purdah violation (removing the veil), and pornography runs so deep, especially
among women. It is also why parents told daughters, “Don’t be cheap.” “Cheap” sex
floods the market.
Think of this in reverse form: If women had to promise to provide for a man for a
lifetime before he removed his veil and showed her his smile, would we think of this
as a system of female privilege?
To this day, when we talk about someone giving sexual favors, we never speak of
the man’s sexual favor; therefore only women expect something in return.Billions of
dollars are spent by men every year to uncover women’s bodies, while men who
expose theirs are put in prison. We call her exposure a centerfold, his is
exhibitionism; we give her money, him a prison sentence. Her sexual power meant
sexual payments. He learned to earn more to pay more; so he was surprised when he
was told his need to earn more was a reflection of his greater power.
Sex in Alternating Supply, American Style
In the United States, when feminists in the late 1960s believed women’s economic
freedom would lead to women’s economic abundance, they advocated sexual
freedom. When it was discovered that divorces led to economic obligation,
feminists, fundamentalists, and women’s magazines all moved toward closing off
sexual freedom. Headlines in Cosmopolitan read “Sex: Make Him Earn It”
52 even
before the herpes scare. A careful analysis of the sexual revolution’s decline helps us
see why, if it hadn’t been herpes and AIDS, it would have been something else.
53
This need for economic security preceding female sexual openness is probably
unconsciously reinforced by our tradition of a man taking a woman out for dinner
and drinks first. The more traditional the woman, the more dinners, the more drinks,
and the less she feels sexually open until she receives a commitment—in essence, a
commitment from him providing for life.
VII. DID MEN OPPRESS WOMEN?
DID MEN TREAT WOMEN AS PROPERTY?
It is only the understanding that men’s lives were subservient to property that allows
us to reconcile women’s combined status as equal to property and “on a pedestal.”
When we hear that men treated women as property, we rarely hear that men were
expected to die before their property got hurt—that men’s lives were, in essence,
subservient to property. Even in nineteenth-century America, federal law required
that if a wife committed a crime, the husband would be tried for her crime and he
would be put in prison if she was found guilty.54 Similarly, if the family went in
debt, only he went to debtor’s prison.
Throughout history, both sexes were property in various ways. Mayan boys
indentured themselves to their fathers-in-law; in biblical times, Jacob indentured
himself to Uncle Laban; in America, Johnny indentured himself to Uncle Sam. . . . In
almost every society that had to defend its land, boys died defending it and, before
they were old enough to know better, were socialized to be proud to die.
In America, tens of thousands of immigrants earned passage as indentured
servants. More than 90 percent of the indentured servants were men. The men
initially assumed slavelike status for a seven-year period.55 Some were single men
who hoped to earn enough money to become eligible for marriage. Others had wives
still in Europe. Think about this. What could be a greater demonstration of love than
a man enslaving himself for a woman without any of the benefits of her cooking,
cleaning, or companionship? Many of these men didn’t do this just on Mother’s Day
—they did it every day for between seven years and life. Only men—the
“unromantic sex”—did this unilaterally for women. But . . .
Many indentured men eventually extended their indenture to fourteen years or a
lifetime to bring their families over. These men became, in essence, male slaves.
In Europe, between the time of the Roman Empire and the Middle Ages, it was
common for men to need financial protection—so they sold themselves to lords. A
ceremony developed involving the vassal taking vows, the count asking if the vassal
wished to be “his man,” and both kissing to seal their vows. The vassal, though, was
required to do one thing for the owner that women rarely do for their husbands:
consider it an honor to die to protect him.
56
If men didn’t have the power, why was property often passed down through men?
Because men were responsible to provide property. Property was one of men’s
contributions to eligibility just as fertility and children were among women’s
contributions to eligibility. Men had property rights to take care of property
responsibilities. Social pressure got most men to provide a wife with as much
property as he himself had; and the taboo on divorce prevented a woman from losing
the property before her husband did.
Women, then, were both equal to property and more than equal to men—and,
therefore, “on a pedestal.”
IF FEMALES WERE SO VALUED, WHY DID MOTHERS KILL BABY GIRLS AND
NOT BABY BOYS?
Parents—and especially single mothers—sometimes killed female infants but not
males. Why not? When starvation threatened, families had more need for boys to
plow fields and produce food than for girls to produce more children who would
consume more food. If boys were needed for war, the society sometimes disposed of
the girls as infants and disposed of the boys in war. Why dispose of the girls at all? If
the war wiped out women’s economic support system of men, sometimes girl infants
were “aborted” until women could get supported.
The issue was not female versus male. It was whether the female or male role was
more needed at a given time. The solution? Socializing both sexes to play both roles.
DIDN’T MEN OPPRESS WOMEN BY DEVELOPING MALE-ONLY CLUBS?
Both sexes had single-sex clubs in the area of that sex’s responsibility.
Female-Only Clubs
All known societies are ruled by men, who control and profit by women’s
reproductive capabilities.
—ENCYCLOPEDIA OF FEMINISM
57
In most cultures the birthing process was a female-only club. Men were
completely excluded.58 Even women who were strangers were included while the
husband who was the dad was excluded.
Both sexes, then, had single-sex clubs—each in their area of dominance. Or their
area of responsibility. Each sex’s area of responsibility was its area of business:
women had women-only business clubs; men had men-only business clubs. The
difference? We said male-only clubs were “proof” of male bonding, male
dominance, and male chauvinism. And the female-only clubs? We said they were
proof of women’s nurturing instinct and men’s failure to be involved with their
children.
The First Men Admitted to the Female-Only Clubs
Were . . .
The first men admitted to the female-only birthing clubs were not the dads, but the
doctors. The male doctors were admitted only in the nineteenth century after they
had developed anesthesia to reduce women’s pain and breech-birth techniques to
save women’s lives. Husbands, who could offer only love and support to their wives,
were still excluded. The choice to include the doctor and exclude the husband was a
powerful message to men as to the female desire for a savior over the female desire
for her husband’s love and psychological support. The practice of including even
female strangers before the husband deepens our understanding of the discounting of
men-as-loved-ones, of men-as-dads.
If husbands had the power, how could they be excluded at all? If women were
men’s property, why were men not allowed even to be near their “property”? If male
institutions offered male privilege, why did hospitals (“male institutions”) exclude
husbands from delivery rooms until the 1970s? If patriarchy were a male conspiracy
to control women’s reproductive processes, female-only birthing clubs that excluded
men were an odd way of orchestrating a male conspiracy.
Did men want to be admitted? Well, on the one hand, once women said, “Men, get
involved,” millions of fathers immediately joined, many discovering the happiest
moments of their lives. On the other hand, if men had really wanted to be admitted
before that they could have made it an issue—and they didn’t. Why not? The
division of labor led to a division of roles and a division of interests. Which is why
all this male-only club, female-only club stuff is not a result of a conspiracy by
either sex, but a result of the division of roles.
Both sexes were resistant to change when their traditional area of responsibility—
or dominance—was threatened (even when the help might save their lives).
Today women are often credited with being the creators of life, men labeled as
being destroyers of life. I believe it is more accurate and compassionate to
understand that both sexes were working to promote life—women risked death to
create life; men risked death to protect life.
WASN’T WITCH BURNING PROOF THAT WE CARED LESS ABOUT WOMEN
THAN ABOUT MEN?
When we think of burning witches at the stake, we often think of the Salem witch
trials and men burning women. In fact, the Salem witch trials were a direct result of
two girls who experienced epileptic convulsions and blamed their convulsions on the
“witchcraft” of several women in Salem.
59 The Salem witch trials were a result of
the community believing the girls without question and trying to save the girls.
When a community condemned a woman as a witch, they did not believe they
were condemning a woman: they believed this woman was a nonwoman—that she
was supernatural. The very purpose of the trial was to discover whether she was “in
fact” a nonwoman. She increased her chances of becoming a nonwoman if she did
not play the contribute-to-survival game: if she had never been married, was a
midwife who had attended bad births or given birth herself to deformed children, was
a heretic, or practiced forms of healing that led to deaths.
60 She multiplied her
chances if she became an outspoken advocate of any of these practices.
Ten to 20 percent of witches were men
61
(often called warlocks62
). Men who were
Quakers—who refused to sacrifice themselves in war—were burned at the stake. As
were homosexual men.63 A “faggot” was literally a bunch of sticks that people
tossed into the fire; it was less literally a heretic that people burned at the stake.
64
Often that “heretic” was a homosexual.
65 Witches (females who wouldn’t reproduce)
and homosexuals (males who wouldn’t reproduce) were both burned.
Why were artists and writers often condemned? In part, because writing and art
got people to question all this. But more importantly, artists, sculptors, and writers
were also condemned because they often gained this freedom to create by not
supporting a family. And because many homosexuals did not have to support a
family to begin with, they could become writers and artists—thus putting
homosexuals in double jeopardy.
Being an artist or being gay was not in itself the problem. When a gay man added
to an institution’s ability to protect its citizens—for example, by becoming a priest,
minister, or rabbi, or otherwise adding to the grandeur of religion as Michelangelo
did by painting the Sistine Chapel
66—he could hope to be accepted. Similarly, in the
old Soviet Union, the artist had to add to the grandeur of the state. Even shamans,
witch doctors, or oracles were permitted as long as they were perceived as adding an
additional layer to the community’s protection.
VIII. SO, WAS IT A MALE-DOMINATED. PATRIARCHAL, AND
SEXIST WORLD?
I govern the Athenians, my wife governs me.
—THEMISTOCLES, 528 to 462 B.C.
67
PATRIARCHY VS. MATRIARCHY: GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE VS. FAMILY
STRUCTURE
You can cut off a man’s head if a man be a bachelor, sir; but if he be a
married man, no; for a married man is a woman’s; for to cut off a married
man’s head is to cut off a woman’s head, and I cannot cut off a woman’s
head.
—SHAKESPEARE IN MEASURE FOR MEASURE
When we say we lived in a patriarchy, we think of living under a male-dominated
government or power structure. We forget that the family had at least as much power
as the government in people’s everyday life, and that the family was female
dominated. We forget that it too was a power structure. As we have seen, though,
almost every woman had a primary role in the female-dominated family structure;
only a small percentage of men had a primary role in the male-dominated
governmental and religious structures.
Although a man’s home was more likely to be his mortgage than his castle, it has
always been a characteristic of men that they give lip service to their dominance
even as another part of them is aware of their subservience. . . .
If taking on a wife for life in an institution called marriage were a sign of male
privilege, why did “husband” derive from the Germanic “house” and the Old Norse
for “bound” or “bondage”?
68 Why did it also come from words meaning “a male
kept for breeding,” “one who tills the soil,” and “the male of the pair of lower
animals.”69 Conversely, if marriage were as awful for women as many feminists
claim, why is it the centerpiece of female fantasies in myths and legends of the past,
or romance novels and soap operas of the present?
Spartan boys who were deprived of their families were deprived, not privileged.
Boys deprived of women’s love until they risked their lives at work or war were also
deprived—or dead. Training boys to kill boys was considered moral when it led to
survival, immoral only when it threatened survival. In these respects, “patriarchy”
created male deprivation and male death, not male privilege.
In any way that is meaningful, though, we have never lived solely in a patriarchy
or a matriarchy but in a combined patriarchy and matriarchy within each society.
There was not male dominance but male and female dominance—a division of
dominance that reflected the division of roles—each sex “dominant” in the area in
which they had responsibilities and risked death—dominant where they were also
subservient.
Like male privileges, female privileges (e.g., to be protected without killing or
being killed) were the rewards of a role well followed. Both sexes were rewarded
with “identity” when they followed well, punished with invisibility when they failed,
death if they protested. The paradox of masculinity was that the men who followed
best were called leaders. In fact, they were not really leaders, but followers—of a
program called leadership.
All of this can no more be called only patriarchy or male dominance than
matriarchy or female dominance. In fact, it was neither. And both.
HOW CAN PATRIARCHY AND MATRIARCHY BE DEFINED?
How, then, can patriarchy be defined? Perhaps it can best be defined as the male area
of dominance, responsibility, and subservience in a culture, reinforced by both sexes
for the purpose of serving both sexes’ survival needs.
How can matriarchy be defined? As the female area of dominance, responsibility,
and subservience in a culture, reinforced by both sexes for the purpose of serving
both sexes’ survival needs.
But patriarchy is now too associated with defining men as evil to ever be used
without that connotation. My suggestion: eliminate its use. When describing a
society explain the roles both sexes played to keep its members alive. Then we
uncover diversity rather than impose a conspiracy.
A flaw of feminism is the assumption that dominance and sexism was a one-way
street. Feminism, in this sense, was a very traditional movement: it retained the
underlying belief that men were responsible, knew what was going on, women were
not. Which, aside from being untrue, implies women are inherently inferior or
stupid. An ironic position for the feminist movement. Perhaps as important, though,
the belief that men were responsible for women’s bondage was the flip side of the
belief that her prince would come to rescue her. In fact, both sexes were bound to do
that which kept the next generation alive.
IX. OUR GENETIC HERITAGE VS. OUR GENETIC FUTURE
“Genetics be damned for the curse which remains, and praised for the fact
that we, as human beings, also remain.”70
Our genetic heritage is in conflict with our genetic future. In the past, choosing
the killer male could be said to have led to the “survival of the fittest.” In the
future, with nuclear technology, choosing the killer male leads to the potential
destruction of everyone. In the past, survival, marriage, and the family all required
the killer male. In the future, survival, marriage, and the family will require the
communicative male. For the first time in human history, what it takes to survive as
a species is compatible with what it takes to love.
However, is it wise to violate what has been natural for millions of years? If it is
wise, is it possible? And if it is possible, how do we do it?
THE IMPORTANT QUESTION IS NOT “IS IT NATURAL?” BUT “IS IT
FUNCTIONAL?”
We tend to consider it helpful to reinforce what is natural. However, if a baby is born
with a handicap, it might not be helpful to say, “Your handicap is natural, so we’ll
teach you how to increase it!” Yet, that’s what we do with men’s aggressiveness and
women’s passivity. We teach both sexes how to increase their handicaps.
If it is biologically proven that women are born with more passivity than are men,
then the only relevant question is, “Will that be functional for the type of future we
desire?” If it is not functional, then the greater the biological propensity, the
greater the need for change. If female passivity is proven innate, then that increases
the need for female assertiveness training. If male aggressiveness is ingrained, that
increases our need for male assertiveness training (not aggressiveness training).
Biology is only the best hint as to what was functional in the past but not
necessarily about what will be in the future. The most empowering question we can
ask about the future is not “What is the future and how do we adapt?” but “How do
we want our future to be and how do we adapt?”
IS THERE HOPE?
If even chimpanzees—with genes almost identical to humans’—have more
aggressive males than females, is there hope for humans changing ourselves before
we kill ourselves? Yes. Our hope lies in the instinct to adapt.
Within all of us, males and females, is the potential for killer-protector and the
potential for nurturer-connector.
71 When Vikings got approval for being nurturerconnectors rather than killer-protectors, they soon adapted and became nurturerconnectors. The change was not impossible because killing-to-protect was just their
method of adapting to what gave them approval.
Conversely, within each female is the potential for aggressiveness: females
competing to see a rock star are more aggressive than males competing to see a rock
star. What runs deeper than our propensity for aggressiveness or passivity is our
ability to adapt to what makes us survive: to live in Beverly Hills or a concentration
camp . . . to be an ambassador one day or a hostage the next. . . .
HOW DO WE ADAPT?
When we select certain types of men and women to have children with, each
child becomes a vote for the type of man and woman we want. The type of man or
woman we select is the most important vote any human casts. It is a vote that begins
with the type of men and women we cheer for and ogle . . . continues with the type
we marry . . . ends with the type with whom we create children. (Next to that, all our
parenting skills are secondary.)
How do we get males to develop the nurturer-connector within them? When
cheerleaders cheer for the men who listen rather than the men who play “smashface”
. . . when men protest being selected for their ability to win more than their ability to
nurture.
Women will continue choosing the updated version of the killer male—men who
“make a killing” in their profession—until men protest. Men will not protest until
they see the connection between that obligation and their earlier deaths from heart
attacks, cancer, suicide, and all fifteen leading causes of death. In brief, men will not
protest until they see how continuing to play their Stage I role is making them the
disposable sex. Here’s how. . . .
PART II
THE “GLASS CELLARS” OF THE DISPOSABLE SEX
CHAPTER 4
The Death Professions:
“My Body, Not My Choice”
“Men are not human beings, they are human doings.”1
We frequently hear that women are segregated into low-paying, dead-end jobs in
poor work environments such as factories. But when The Jobs Related Almanac2
ranked 250 jobs from best to worst based on a combination of salary, stress, work
environment, outlook, security, and physical demands, they found that twenty-four of
the twenty-five worst jobs were almost-all-male jobs.* Some examples: truck driver,
sheet-metal worker, roofer, boilermaker, lumberjack, carpenter, construction worker
or foreman, construction machinery operator, football player, welder, millwright,
ironworker. All of these “worst jobs” have one thing in common: 95 to 100 percent
men.3
* The twenty-fifth job, the one job with about half women, was professional dancing, which, like professional
football, doubtless earned low ranking due to the combination of poor job security, poor long-term outlook,
high injury rate, and high stress level.
Every day, almost as many men are killed at work as were killed during the
average day in Vietnam.
4 For men, there are, in essence, three male-only drafts: the
draft of men to all the wars; the draft of Everyman to unpaid bodyguard; the draft of
men to all the hazardous jobs—or “death professions.” When men are not legally
drafted, they feel psychologically drafted.
Just as women provide a womb to create the children, men often provide a
financial womb to support the children. Many men are motivated to enter the death
professions to provide this financial womb. The unspoken motto of the death
professions is My Body, Not My Choice.
THE DEATH PROFESSIONS: MEN’S BIGGEST “GLASS CELLAR”
ITEM. 94 percent of occupational deaths occur to men.5
ITEM. The United States has a worker death rate three to four times higher
than Japan’s.
6
If the U.S. had the same rate, we would save the lives of
approximately 6,000 men and 400 women each year.
7
ITEM. The United States has only one job safety inspector for every six fish
and game inspectors.
8
ITEM. Work safety is yet to become a course requirement for even one MBA
program in the United States.
9
ITEM. Every workday hour, one construction worker in the United States loses
his life.
10
ITEM. The more hazardous the job, the greater the percentage of men. Some
examples:
11
Hazardous Occupations
Fire fighting 99% male
Logging 98% male
Trucking (heavy) 98% male
Construction 98% male
Coal Mining 97% male
Safe Occupations
Secretary 99% female
Receptionist 97% female
One reason the jobs men hold pay more is because they are more hazardous. The
additional pay might be called the “Death Profession Bonus.” And within a given
death profession, the more dangerous the assignment, the more likely it is to be
assigned to a man.12
Both sexes contribute to the invisible barriers that both sexes experience. Just as
the “glass ceiling” describes the invisible barrier that keeps women out of jobs with
the most pay, the “glass cellar” describes the invisible barrier that keeps men in jobs
with the most hazards.
Members of the glass cellar are all around us. But because they are our secondchoice men, we make them invisible. (We hear women say, “I met this doctor . . .,”
not “I met this garbageman. . . .”)
THE MEN ALL AROUND US: THE SECOND-CHOICE MAN
Let me tell you a little story.
I had just completed the research for this chapter and wanted to clear my mind. I
thought an “errands morning” might do the trick.
Well, if you’ve read the first few chapters you’re suspicious. You know there are
no little stories without little morals. Chalk it up to Farrell’s Fables, but you’re right,
all around me the men I had been researching I now began to see.
As I prepared to leave the house, I heard the roar of the garbage truck. Usually that
just triggers an “Oh yeah, it’s Monday.” This time it also triggered my memory . . .
that the garbageman was two and half times more likely to be killed than a police
officer. And that 70 percent of the collection crew for the City of San Diego (where I
live) suffered job-related injuries in the last year alone.
13 Now, as I saw the
garbageman pull up to my garbage, I connected the 70 percent figure to this man; to
his disproportionate chances of back injuries, hernias, rectal cancer, cirrhosis of the
liver, or just being hit by a passing automobile. I saw some things I hadn’t seen
before . . . first, just the lumbar support belt one of the men was wearing; then, eye
contact; then, a name I had never bothered to ask. Ride with me for a moment on one
of these men’s trucks.
On Terry Hennesey’s route (real person, true story) is a dental office.
14 When he
recently compacted the trash, several plastic bags of human blood burst and
splattered into his face. Just a few weeks later, he found a World War II hand
grenade with the pin still in it* and about two dozen 9-millimeter, hollow-point
bullets. Some months later he picked up a load of low-level radioactive waste. His
colleagues tell stories of battery acid splattering on their clothes and faces; of the
compacting process forcing chlorine to shoot out of a container, hitting a man in the
back and setting him afire; of hot fireplace ashes being dumped in the trash and
igniting the back of the truck; of a container of liquid cyanide. . . .
* Of course, it’s hard to find a hand grenade without the pin in it!
Why was I so unaware of these dangers? In part, because these men never speak up
—instead they turn each other’s misfortunes into humor, calling each other the
“Cyanide Man,” the “Radioactive Man,” and so on. And in part, we are more
conscious of the injuries of the football players, for example, because the absence of
the football players has an impact on our egos: it makes “our team” lose. If our
garbageman dies, he is replaced, like any part on the garbage truck.
I was more likely to think of it as sexism to call garbage collectors garbagemen
than to understand that the real sexism is the pressure felt by uneducated, unskilled
men to take more than 96 percent of the garbage collector jobs so they can get paid
$9 to $15 an hour to support their families.
15 Or that the real sexism was in hiding
something dangerous in our garbage.
Once I saw the garbagemen in a different light, I registered how differently I
looked at a garbageman as opposed to, say, a pregnant woman. When I see a pregnant
woman, I automatically smile a smile that expresses appreciation for her joy, her
adventure, her contribution. But I had never supported the garbageman with a smile
that expressed appreciation for his contribution (although he supports what the
pregnant woman creates and carries a different load). Nor had I felt empathy for his
lack of joy . . . I never expected him to be joyful. For all practical purposes he had
been invisible. As were so many men in the death professions.
As with any new opening, new information flies in that would previously have
flown by—like this letter to Ann Landers:
Dear Ann,
I’m fed up with people using the garbage collector as an example of an easy
job for morons. I’m married to a garbageman and this is what life is like:
He leaves for work at 4:30 a.m., six days a week. . . . One day it was 50
below zero. My husband was out in that miserable weather for 10 hours. . . .
His route consists of 2,500 homes. . . . If he spent just a few extra minutes at
each stop, he would be out there an additional two to three hours a day. . . . He
works on commission, 17.5 cents per house.
16
Of course, it’s his wife who’s writing. The garbageman remains silent. . . .
• • •
On my way to the Lucky supermarket in Encinitas, I picked up some cash from an
ATM. At about the same time, an armed courier picked up cash from another ATM.
He was the second armed courier to be fatally shot in the head that week.17 Every
time I cash a check, an armed courier helps. Such couriers transport virtually every
cent of cash that flows through the American economy. One of these couriers, a
veteran of three combat tours in Vietnam and whose delivery area in south-central
Los Angeles is gang-infested, says, “As soon as you open the door, you’re ‘meat on
the table.’ ”
18 So why do they do it? Well, as David Troy Nelson puts it, “I am a
single parent with two preschool children.” He is willing to be “meat on the table” so
his two children might have meat on their table.
Which brings me to the meat and vegetables. Sorting through chicken breasts, I
used to be more aware of the crimes committed against chickens than those
committed against the workers preparing the chicken. Of 2,000 workers at the
Morrell meat packing plant, 800 had become disabled in one year.
19 Some of these
workers were chopping and carving at a rate of 1,000 movements per hour. With 40
percent per year being disabled, each worker’s hands were essentially a time bomb.
Almost 90 percent of the workers in the fifty-seven highest-risk jobs at Morrell were
men.20 Dozens who had to undergo surgery requiring one to two months to heal were
instead required to return to work immediately after the surgery.
As I picked out the best-looking vegetables, I took for granted that I would be
washing off parathion and other poisons that allowed the best-looking vegetables to
get that way. Now I found myself thinking of the men who spent their lives inhaling
the parathion as it blew back into their faces from the planes and tractors from which
they did their job of spraying.
I had always thought of farming as a reasonably safe profession in which men and
women worked “side by side.” I was wrong. With the exception of mining, the
agricultural industry has the highest death rate of any industry.21 Young men are
twenty-four times as likely to be killed in farm labor as are young women.22
 They are
also a lot more likely to suffer the amputation of an arm, leg, or finger. In reality,
men and women do not work “side by side.” Men work where there’s greater
potential for death; women, where there is greater potential for safety. As I picked up
a microwave dinner, I felt thankful for the many men who prepared that dinner—who
plowed, lifted, sprayed, and risked amputations so I could heat and eat a meal.
As I exited from Lucky’s down Encinitas Boulevard, I counted about thirty
migrant workers in fewer than six blocks, each looking soulfully into the eyes of
every passerby, each hoping to be picked to do a day’s work in someone’s fields. I
saw a driver go by, look over the men, choose two, and leave the others behind. In
the ten years I have lived in the town of Encinitas near San Diego, I have seen
perhaps a thousand of these migrant workers waiting on these street corners. All of
them have been men. Being rejected all day didn’t mean returning to a warm home at
night; it meant sleeping in the cold hills. In San Diego, these men are everywhere:
The field labor leaves the men permanently stooped over (after seven to ten years’
work) and rips up their hands. The pesticides sprayed on the fields two or three times
daily gradually soak into the men’s skin, especially through open cuts on their hands.
The poisons eventually deplete the men’s brains or cause cancers. Those who make it
back into the United States year after year to work in the fields thus face brain
damage or early death (typically by age 40).
Most of these men are sending their wages back to their wives and children in
Mexico, whom they see only once or twice a year before once again risking
imprisonment by illegally crossing the U.S. border. This might be thought of as the
migrant worker draft. Another all-male draft.
Highway Camp, © 1989, by DON BARTLE’ITI.
This “sacrifice-to-feed” is the male form of nuturance. In every class, men with
families provide their own womb, the family’s financial womb. They provide their
bodies. But the psychology of disposability leaves them without placards reading My
Body, My Choice. No movement calls these men oppressed for providing money for
women from whom they are receiving neither cooking nor cleaning; for providing
their wives with homes while they sleep on the ground. When a field worker is
radicalized, he is taught to see the classism but remains blind to the sexism. Yet we
call Mexican men patriarchs—as if the rules of their society served them at the
expense of women.
As I stopped by a Von’s supermarket for some grapefruit juice, I waited for a huge
truck to back into a narrow delivery space. It was a familiar scene, but it was only as
I had become aware of how truckers’ scheduling demands sometimes led to their
falling asleep at the wheel (making their death rate among the highest of any
profession23
) that I registered the cup of coffee he was slugging down. In the process
I saw more than a truck blocking my entrance into the parking lot, I saw a man in the
truck. I visualized a trucker on his eighth cup of coffee at 4 a.m., stretching his limits
so I can eat to my limit without paying to my limit.
I thought how I had been more likely to associate trucking with “teamsters” and
the deaths caused by a truck accident rather than the deaths caused to the truckers.
The difference in my feeling toward him turned a moment’s wait into a moment’s
appreciation. I smiled at him with a warmth that must have been different because he
returned the smile as if he felt the appreciation.
The impact was with me months later. As I saw Thelma and Louise and felt the
audience’s thunderous applause as they set a trucker’s truck afire, I didn’t miss what
the audience felt, but I felt sad at what the audience was missing.
Before I returned home, I couldn’t resist stopping by my fantasy house. It was
being built on the bluffs over the ocean. As I watched the men putting nails through
the lumber, I imagined the truckers navigating their semis through city traffic and
the loggers navigating logs through half-frozen rivers (making logging one of the
most dangerous of the death professions). I thought of logging lingo like “deadman”
and “widowmaker” that referred to the various ways trees and branches could kill a
man and make a widow. I realized my fantasy house would result not just from the
risks taken by the construction workers but also by the truckers and loggers.
As some colder winds made me ready to leave, I saw one worker on the second
story almost miss the beam he grabbed to keep himself from joining the ocean. Until
that second I had forgotten about a friend of mine who had been hit by a crane boom
almost a decade ago. Although he has recovered some, he will never be the same
again—nor will the life of his wife. I wondered why almost no state hired enough
safety investigators to do anything but investigate an accident site after a death.
The trip was taking longer than I expected, so I stepped on the gas a bit. A second
later, I heard a siren. My heart skipped a few beats until my rearview mirror calmed
me with the sight of a fire truck. As soon as I saw it wasn’t heading toward my house
(my real one!), I was free to recall the MGM Grand Hotel fire in Las Vegas—how it
had left seventy-six people lying dead in almost sterile rooms, untouched by fire,
unclouded by smoke.
24
It was my first awareness that fire fighters now face more
danger from toxic emissions in fumes than from fire or smoke—not always
immediately, but cumulatively. Why?
Plastics. Since World War II, plastics such as polyvinylchloride (PVC) have
increasingly become part of our telephones, furniture, carpets, wallpaper, waste
baskets, plumbing, and televisions. When they burn, they produce deadly chemical
by-products such as chlorine, hydrogen chloride, and phosgene gas (deadly enough to
have been used in World War I as a weapon for chemical warfare). When a fire
fighter enters a home, he might see neither smoke nor flames, but the invisible fumes
contain a literal bomb of poisonous gas. Toxic emissions become toxic munitions.
The result?
Death from cancer has increased 400 percent more for fire fighters than for the
population at large.
25 The average age for cancer deaths among fire fighters is 52.26
Line-of-duty injuries such as back injuries, and occupational diseases such as heart
attacks, force one out of every three fire fighters into early retirement.
27 One out of
every twenty-one fire fighters is exposed to communicable diseases (a quarter of
these to AIDS).
28
While volunteerism has often been labeled a women’s issue, 80 percent of all
municipal fire fighters, almost one million, are volunteers—99 percent male
volunteers.
29
I know of no equivalent numbers of women voluntarily exposing
themselves to death to save the lives of strangers while virtually guaranteeing an
earlier death for themselves.
Why don’t more fire fighters use breathing equipment more often? Breathing
equipment adds about 35 pounds to the 100 to 150 pounds fire fighters already carry
in ladders, axes, hoses, and turnout coats. Handling a fire requires an organized
attack with good communication; wearing masks prevents the fire fighters from
talking.
The fire fighters know that every time they protect themselves, others might die. A
flame might be moving as fast as eighteen feet per second, as was true in the 1980
fire that roared through the MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas. In a matter of minutes,
eighty-five people were killed. The oxygen tanks take about a minute to put on. In
that minute, a flame could move more than a thousand feet. In brief, many fire
fighters choose to forfeit their own lives to save others’.
Why do volunteer firemen risk their lives? In part, to be appreciated. Some
fireman feel a little unappreciated, though, when homeowners seem to resent the
firemen’s boots muddying their carpets.
As I pulled into my driveway, I spotted a moving van in front of a new home in the
neighborhood. I was in time to see the movers slip their bodies under a large couch,
angle the couch through the doorway, and juggle/balance it up a curving stairway. I
could hear the father warn the son, “Watch the way you lift or you’ll end up with a
lower back like mine.”
I looked around my home with a different appreciation for how the refrigerator
and file cabinets were moved . . . appreciating the men who make my life convenient
while they remain invisible.
When I showed a first draft of this chapter to a friend in the coal industry he said,
“You’ve left out the most dangerous of all industries—mining.” I responded that I
guess I didn’t see the evidence of that around me every day. He corrected me, “It’s
the miner you don’t see around you, but you see the evidence of mining all around
you.”30
 I was intrigued.
“First,” he said, “mining isn’t just coal mining, but metal mining and oil and gas
extraction as well. Now look in the shaving mirror and check out your teeth—the
fillings contain gold, silver, mercury, and composite [petroleum]. Your eyeglasses
contain not only metal but plastic, which is made with both petroleum and coal. And
you doubtless have the light on, which is shining through glass bulbs containing
tungsten, mercury, and phosphorus. The electricity to produce the light comes
through copper and aluminum wires from generators also made of copper, spun by
tungsten turbines, powered by steam produced from uranium, coal, or oil.” I was
impressed.
“Then, assuming you get dressed,” he said, laughing, “your clothes usually contain
iron, made from iron ore, limestone, coal. And as for your computers, they are made
of plastic, glass, phosphorus, and dozens of metals that have to be mined. The
chapters of the manuscript you sent me are currently bound together by binder clips
made of steel [iron ore, limestone, coal]. By the time your readers get the book,
they’ll be reading these words on paper manufactured with sulfuric acid, a byproduct of refining petroleum and sulfide metal ores. If the paper is acid free, it
probably incorporates calcium carbonate [limestone] to neutralize the acid. Even the
adhesives that hold the book together are made, in part, with petroleum. If the dust
jacket turns out to be shiny, it will be that way by adding clay to the paper.”
What makes mining so dangerous? Each week, rocks falling from mine ceilings
cause concussions or deaths among miners; dangling electrical wires electrocute
them, and moving equipment maims them. If an office had ceilings falling and
killing secretaries, or electrical wires dangling from the walls onto desks and
electrocuting them, or moving equipment crushing them, how many women would
agree to work there (for any price)? How long would the employer remain free of a
lawsuit?
That was enough thinking for the night. I turned on the TV to relax. Despite
myself, I chose the news over a sitcom. It featured the War on Drugs; and, of course,
the next morning, I couldn’t help but do a little checking.
From 1921 until 1992, every Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) agent killed
has been a man.31 The War on Drugs, then, is a war with a sex-segregated army: the
women are in the safe positions; the men, in the combat zone.
Agents of the DEA used to go from induction to retirement without ever firing
their weapons.
32 Now, says the training director at a DEA academy, “the DEA agent
who graduates today probably will have to draw his gun within the first week.”33
Today the DEA has the highest assault rate of any federal law enforcement agency.34
I had never thought of the War on Drugs as another virtually all-male war.
THE SAVING PROFESSIONS
Complete these sentences with your first, gut-level thought:
Shortly after they heard the alarm, a crew of ______ rescued some women from
a blazing apartment.
Two ______ attacked a woman jogger in Central Park.
Most people think of the woman as being saved by “firemen” or “fire fighters.” It
is now considered sexist for TV announcers to use “fireman” rather than “fire
fighter.” But when a woman is attacked, the TV announcer says, “Two men attacked
a woman.” When men save a woman, we emphasize their function (fire fighters,
doctors). When men hurt women, we think primarily of their sex (men), not some
men’s behavior (violence). Which creates in our subconscious an anger toward men
that, in turn, allows us to feel more comfortable with their disposability.
We call women who are nurses “helping professionals”; we call men who are
police officers “cops” (or “pigs”), not “saving professionals.” Thus we associate
men’s physical strength with how men use it to hurt women, but not how they use it
to save women—not only as police officers and fire fighters but as women’s personal
bodyguards, ready to die before a woman they love is raped, robbed, or murdered.
The male propensity to save can be found even in places that we normally
associate with the male propensity to destroy. When the white-hot core of the
Chernobyl reactor had been about to drop into a pool of radioactive water, which
would have set off steam explosions, spreading radioactive contamination and
leaving hundreds of other families exposed to early deaths via cancer, three men
voluntarily dove into the radioactive water to open valves to drain the water, thus
preventing a steam explosion. Although the plant supervisor had given the workers
permission not to enter the contaminated water, one of the men responded, “How
could I refuse when I was the only person on the shift who knew where the valves
were located?”
Chernobyl reflects, then, not only men’s propensity for destruction but men’s
propensity to save.
THE DEATH PROFESSIONS’ DOUBLE STANDARD
When mining, construction, and other death professions are discussed in feminist
publications, they are portrayed as examples of the male power system, as “maleonly clubs.” However, when Ms. magazine profiled female miners, the emphasis was
on how the woman was “forced” to take a job in the mines because it paid the best,
and how taking such a job was the only way she could support her family.35
Ms. could never acknowledge that the male-only clubs of hazardous occupations
paid best because of their hazards and had been male-only exactly because men
risked their lives for the extra pay to support their loved ones. They could not
acknowledge that almost no woman worked in a mine to support a husband. Or that,
if the woman they were profiling had a husband, he would have gone to the mines—
not her. This double standard—of the death professions being a privilege when men
did them and an oppression when women did them—has made two generations of
men feel a bit unappreciated.
WOMEN ARE SEGREGATED INTO THE WORST JOBS, AREN’T THEY?
While we have seen that twenty-four out of the twenty-five worst jobs are male
jobs36 and that many men also have low-pay jobs (busboy, doorman, dishwasher, gas
station attendant, etc.), many of the lowest-paid jobs are predominantly occupied by
women. Why the distinction between the “worst” and “low-paid” jobs? Because
many of the low-paid jobs are low-paid because they are safer, have higher
fulfillment, more flexible hours, and other desirable characteristics that make them
more in demand and therefore lower in pay. When either sex chooses jobs with these
desirable characteristics, they can expect low pay. Women are much more likely to
choose jobs with seven of these eight characteristics—what might be called the
“Female Occupations Formula.”
The “Female Occupations Formula”
Women now constitute 15-30 percent of a few of the high-pressure, highly skilled,
and highly paid professions such as law and medicine. But occupations which
employ more than 90 percent women almost always have in common at least seven
of the following eight characteristics. The combination of all seven characteristics
makes the job high in desirability—so high that an employer has more than enough
qualified applicants and, therefore, does not need to pay as much.
Ability to Psychologically “Check Out” at end of day (department store clerk
vs. lawyer)
Physical Safety (receptionist vs. fire fighter)
Indoors (secretary vs. garbage collector)
Low Risk (file clerk vs. venture capitalist)
Desirable or Flexible Hours (nurse vs. medical doctor)
No Demands to Move out of town “or else”—to “move it or lose it” (corporate
secretary vs. corporate executive)
High Fulfillment relative to training (child-care professional vs. coal miner)
Contact with People in a pleasant environment (restaurant hostess vs. longdistance trucker)
Note how this female occupations formula applies to the more than 90 percent
female professions of receptionist, secretary, child-care professional, nurse, and
department-store clerk or salesperson.
The “Exposure Professions”
After exposure to death, exposure to the elements is the most common hazard of
male jobs. The hole in the ozone layer makes daily exposure to sun the equivalent of
exposure to cancer. Just as the fire fighter’s newest hazard is invisible, so the
construction worker’s newest hazard is invisible. And as for the road worker or
garbage collector, well, not only does he take in ultraviolet rays through his skin but
car fumes through his nose. All of which add the exposure professions to our list of
death professions.
The more a worker’s beat requires exposure to the sleet and the heat, the more
likely is the worker to be a man: ditch digging, previously the work of chain gangs of
prisoners, was protested as exploitive of prisoners.
37
It is not protested as exploitive
of men. The gas station attendant who pumps gas in the rain is most likely male
(whereas the one collecting money indoors can be of either sex). Be it roofing or
welding, if it is an exposure profession, it is a male profession.
The willingness to expose oneself to death at work belies a deeper male-female
difference in attitude toward work. In a death profession, the feeling of not being
entitled to protection is a metaphor. Harassment is called hazing, and hazing weeds
out those who desire protection and selects for a team of protectors. Issues like
hazing and harassment pale in comparison to the need to prevent death.
This doesn’t mean that hazing and harassment are good for the individual. To the
contrary: the very attitude that protects others is a disaster for protecting self—thus
more New York City police commit suicide than are killed on duty.38
Each man, whether in a coal mine near home or in a trench “over there,” expects
his body to be used. Male prostitution is a given; freedom from it, a luxury. Which is
why the unspoken motto of the death professions is My Body, Not My Choice.
• • •
In brief, then, it is a myth that women are segregated into the worst jobs. Jobs that
require few skills and few hazards pay less and jobs that have high fulfillment pay
less—to either sex. The worst jobs are almost all “male jobs,” which men take more
because they have, on average, more mouths to feed.
WHAT IS OUR INVESTMENT IN MAKING MEN “THE DISPOSABLE SEX”?
Letting men die is a money-saving device. Safety costs money. When contractors bid
low to get a job, they need to pressure men to complete work lest they go bankrupt.
As one safety official put it, “When everything is hurry, hurry, hurry, when you start
pressuring people and taking shortcuts, things can go wrong. And then people die.”39
No. And then men die. How many of us work in an office building in which a man’s
life or limbs were lost?
The solution? Strict enforcement of safety standards. Why the emphasis on
enforcement? The safety standards are good; it is the enforcement that is bad. It is
only when government enforces safety standards that the companies which incur
safety costs do not saddle themselves with a burden that undermines their ability to
compete. The alternative is what we are doing now: “selecting for” the survival of
those companies that take shortcuts with men’s lives.
THE GOVERNMENT: SUBSTITUTE HUSBAND IN THE WORKPLACE
I just read an article about protecting the owls in the Northwest. I wonder
howmany Senate staff people devoted how many years to that? There’s
nobody on the U.S. Senate staff who works full-time on worker safety yearround. I’d be perfectly happy to go back home to Kansas and box up all the
goddamn owls they want and send them out to Washington and Oregon.
—JOSEPH KINNEY, National Safe Workplace Institute
40
No sooner had the government documented the much greater risk of death in the
workplace for men than it cut back the programs to protect men and expanded the
programs to protect women.
The government cut back the Occupational Safety and Health Administration41
(OSHA), which enforces safety standards for both sexes equally and therefore would
have helped more men, and created special programs to protect only working
women. It passed the Federal Pregnancy Discrimination Act,
42 making pregnancy
eligible for as much compensation as a disability resulting from an on-the-job
hazard, even though pregnancy was an off-the-job choice. But that wasn’t all. . . .
When some women claimed that exposure to video display terminals created
their spontaneous abortions, the government immediately responded by funding a
study of more than four thousand women—only to find that women using the
terminals had fewer spontaneous abortions than those not using the terminals.
43
When other women complained they were being sexually harassed, the government
radically expanded its protection of women by expanding its prosecution of men.
Simultaneously, construction sites with shaky scaffolding and coal mines with shaky
ceilings were left uninspected—and the men left unprotected. In brief, men were left
unprotected from premature death while women were protected from premature
flirtation.
How Both the Neglect of Men and the Overprotection
of Women Leads to Discrimination Against Women
Women do not enter a profession in significant numbers until it is physically
safe. So until we care enough about men’s safety to turn the death professions
into safe professions, we in effect discriminate against women. But when we
overprotect women—and only women—it also leads to discrimination against
women.
The more laws overprotect women, the more I hear employers whisper of their
fears of hiring women. If they employ for a large company for which quotas prevent
discrimination, they find themselves increasingly hiring free-lancers rather than
taking on a woman and therefore a possible sexual harassment lawsuit and the
possibility that anyone who criticizes her or fires her will be the victim of that
lawsuit.
When the employer adds the fear of having the company’s name dragged through
the mud; of hiring lawyers; of awarding the woman $100,000 and having her leave
the company because she no longer needs to work; of having the woman sue for
exposure to video display terminals; of losing the woman to pregnancy and paying
disability insurance; of having his male executives fear being critical of women on
the one hand and fear joking with the women on the other; of having . . . Then the
employer begins unconsciously to discriminate against the sex that will create these
burdens; or begins to cut back staff and hire free-lancers; or retires early; or files for
bankruptcy.
The American employer who is mandated to give the sexes equal pay but unequal
protection faces the new American dilemma. Paying a competitive wage is in the
employer’s self-interest, but paying an equal wage to a woman who is a few hundred
times more likely than a man to sue for harassments and hazards is not to an
employer’s advantage. The overprotection of women and the underprotection of
men, then, soon leads to discrimination against hiring women.
This overprotection of women and underprotection of men is part of how we
psychologically prepare men for a lifetime of protecting others. It creates the
atmosphere for male disposability and the link to men’s three Ws: women, work, and
war. . . .
CHAPTER 5
War Hero or War Slave?: The Armed Prostitute
Every society rests on the death of men.
—OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES
ITEM. Almost one out of three American men is a veteran.1
ITEM. In one World War I battle alone (the Battle of the Somme), more than
one million men were killed or maimed.2
Understanding men requires understanding men’s relationship to the three Ws:
women, work, and war. Only 18-year-old boys are legally required to register for
future wars. Both sexes have the option of joining the armed services in peacetime,
but only men in the services are required to be available for combat in wartime.
Should a major war break out, it is only our sons who will be notified within fortyeight hours to report to boot camp. Before men can vote, they have the obligation to
protect that right; women receive the right to vote without the obligation to protect
that right.
I. THE PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS OF THE DOUBLE
STANDARD
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL DRAFT
The psychological draft of boys begins before, and continues after, the legal draft of
boys. It begins with unconsciously teaching infant boys to endure pain when we cut
an infant boy’s penis without anesthesia but not an infant girl’s clitoris; with taking
longer to pick up our boy children than our girl children when they cry
3
(thus
signaling to only our sons that complaining won’t solve their problem); with violent
sports for boys but not girls . . . Combined, these might be called the psychological
draft. It starts with boyhood and continues throughout adulthood.
The Double Standard of Electability
When Margaret Thatcher’s belief in a strong defense was coupled with her sending
hundreds of men—but not one woman—to their deaths in the Falkland Islands War,
she experienced such a huge surge in popularity from both sexes that polls which had
just predicted her a sure loser in the upcoming election were soon predicting her a
sure winner. No headline stated “Woman Remains in Office by Killing Men.” Or,
“Thatcher Called Hypocrite for Belief in Strong Defense While Using Her Gender as
Excuse to Escape Fighting.” When Thatcher used men to kill for her, she was not
called a wimp, she was called stronger; she did not become less eligible to serve her
country, she became more eligible.
In contrast, even though Dan Quayle did serve his country in the National Guard,
just not in Vietnam, he became a laughing stock; and when Clinton objected to the
Vietnam War and pursued legal means not to participate, he experienced an initial 20
percent drop in the polls that would have knocked any other candidate out of the
primaries. We can say it was because of the way Quayle or Clinton handled the
situation, but why did no one even ask Geraldine Ferraro for her war record—and
then criticize the way she handled evading the draft? How did she evade the draft?
Via the sexism of exploiting female privilege.
When a man who served in the ROTC and followed his conscience is identified
more as a draft evader than as a Rhodes scholar while a woman who took advantage
of traditional sexism is seen more as a pioneer than as a sexist, we have some
rethinking to do. Specifically, why do we blame our male politicians for causing war,
then blame them for not wanting to participate in war?
Throughout the world, our basic message is: If you are born male, then a
willingness to serve your country (e.g., as vice president or president) is not good
enough. Only men must be willing to die before they may serve in another way.
As mentioned above, Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher all sent
men to their deaths at rates not dissimilar to those of the average male leader; that
when women led, it was still men left dead; that equality was at the top—not at the
bottom.
Wars will not end via female leaders. Wars will end when any country that has
significantly more men dying in combat than women is held in violation of
international law as it would if it drafted only black men, only Jews, only women, or
only gays.
War will end when, worldwide, men’s lives are no more disposable than women’s.
COMBAT FOR THE DISPOSABLE SEX VERSUS COMBAT FOR THE PROTECTED SEX
… I think women are too valuable to be in combat.
—CASPAR WEINBERGER, U.S. Secretary of Defense (under Reagan)4
It is not appropriate for women to engage in combat . . . to be captured or to
be shot, as opposed to pushing a button someplace in a missile silo.
—SANDRA DAY O’CONNOR, Supreme Court Justice
5
Men get killed in wars all the time. But she’s my daughter.
—FRANK MITCHELL, Retired Chief Master Sergeant6
If there’s a fire at sea and you have to slam down a hatch to save the ship, you
might do it on a man. But on a woman . . .
—LARRY K. KENAVAN, Master Chief Petty Officer, U.S. Navy7
Combat positions in the armed services are now divided into dangerous versus
less-dangerous combat positions.
8
In wartime, only men can he forced into the
dangerous combat positions. Restricting women from even volunteering for the most
dangerous combat positions is clearly discrimination against women. But it also
discriminates against the men who must fill these dangerous positions.
The service is often called the college for the poor, yet these dangerous positions
are poor preparation for civilian life. The New York Times has few “help wanted” ads
for cannon artillery positions, armored tank specialists, and infantry positions in
civilian life. Poor men hope to be trained in jobs such as computer specialties, office
jobs, food preparation, teaching, nursing, social work, flight controller, or jet
mechanic. When only men are forced to fill the dangerous combat jobs, only men
lose the opportunities for these civilian preparation positions.
In addition, cannon artillery and infantry positions are also more likely to
reinforce the killer mentality, create the most psychological disturbances and the
most difficulty adjusting psychologically to civilian life. The “restriction on
women,” then, makes men more disposable in military life and more disposable in
civilian life.
COMBAT: THE PRO-CHOICE WOMAN AND THE NO-CHOICE MAN
I predict that women will increasingly be allowed to volunteer for any combat
situation. But, by giving women more options in combat while still requiring only
men to go to combat should a war erupt, we will be increasingly reinforcing the era
of the Pro-Choice Woman and the No-Choice Man. It will mean that during wartime:
The woman in the armed services will have the choice to:
1. Enter combat
2. Not enter combat
The man in the armed services will have two “slightly different” choices:
1. Enter combat
2. Enter combat
This increase in women’s military combat options will be hailed as an advance in
equality, but in fact it will not be. A true advance in equality would be to require
women to enter combat to the degree men are required to enter combat. Equality
involves equal options and equal obligations.
HOW TO ACHIEVE EQUALITY WITHOUT DAMAGING MILITARY STRENGTH
The fear of the services is that if women and men are held to equal standards in
combat training that either the standards will have to be lowered or, conversely, the
standards kept the same and about 80 percent of women won’t be able to hack it.
Fortunately, though, there is a way of making all combat an equal-opportunity option
that still preserves combat readiness.
The Combat Incentive Plan: Supply and Demand
The plan? The military increases its pay for the jobs it finds the toughest to fill and
lowers its pay for the jobs it is easiest to fill. For example, if few recruits want
assignments like infantry combat, the pay and benefits are raised until they obtain all
the qualified recruits they need; if everyone wants to be a pilot and plenty of recruits
are qualified, the pay for pilots is lowered. The result is that women pursuing real
equality—sharing the least-desired assignments—would get higher pay. Neither sex
is discriminated against; no standards are lowered for any specialty. The
psychological result is respect for women because they are earning it, rather than
resentment toward women getting equal pay for the safest and most glamorous of the
combat jobs (pilot).
DIDN’T WOMEN IN THE PERSIAN GULF SHARE EQUAL COMBAT RISKS
WITHOUT EQUAL COMBAT PAY?
During the U.S. invasion of Panama, front-page headlines heralded the first woman
leading soldiers into combat.
9 Although The New York Times made it clear the
woman thought she was approaching an unguarded dog kennel,
10 Congresswoman
Schroeder used this incident to develop three myths—myths that were reinforced
during the war in the Persian Gulf:
1. Women and men share equal risks
2. Women were being denied combat positions in order to deny them equal
opportunity as officers
3. Women were being denied combat positions in order to deny them equal pay
These myths were reinforced by the cover stories of our news weeklies:
But the facts give a different picture:
1. Equal risks. If women shared equal risks, Panama would not have resulted in
the deaths of 23 men and 0 women (also 0 women injured)11
; and the Persian Gulf
practice operations and war would not have led to the deaths of 375 men versus 15
women.12 For both wars combined, 27 men died for each woman
13
; but since there
are only 9 men in the armed services for each woman, then any given man’s risk of
dying was three times greater than any given woman’s.
If men accounted for less than 4 percent of the total deaths and any given man had
only one fourth the risk of dying, would Congresswoman Schroeder have said men
equally shared the risks? Equality is not making women vulnerable by chance when
men are made vulnerable by design.
Were women being denied combat positions in order to deny them equal
opportunity as officers? Or to deny them equal pay?
2. Equal opportunity as officers. Women constitute 14.5 percent of the total
military, but 16.6 percent of the officers as of 2011.14
3. Equal pay. Both sexes in the Persian Gulf received $110 per month extra
combat pay.15 The sexes received equal pay despite unequal risks.
In brief, men get fewer promotions and, therefore, less pay for longer periods of
service and a threefold greater risk of death, yet we read about discrimination against
women, not discrimination against men. When men do 30 percent of the housework,
we criticize men for not sharing the housework; when any given woman receiving
100 percent of male combat pay takes 25 percent of the combat risks of any given
man, we call her a warrior and credit her with “sharing the danger.”
MY BODY, MY BUSINESS?
ITEM. If a fetus has a “right to life,” but eighteen years later has an “obligation
to death,” which sex is it?
Registering all our 18-year-old sons for the draft in the event the country needs
more soldiers is as sexist as registering all our 18-year-old daughters for childbearing in the event the country needs more children.
At this moment, fifteen million American boys are in the data bank of drafteligible men.16 How realistic is it that the boys will, in fact, be drafted? We know
only that in twenty-four to seventy-two hours the first induction orders can be in the
mail.
17 That’s how fast your son’s life could change. National Guard and Reserve
units are prepared to fill boot camps with 100,000 boys in four weeks.
18 The units
practice one weekend a month on the finer points of setting up and operating
headquarters and field offices, and giving refresher courses to draft boards. If there’s
a war, there’s a way.19
Ironically, Selective Service officials are proud of their “equal opportunity”
system—no longer biased in favor of class, race, student status, or job status. It is a
metaphor for our times that something can be called equal opportunity that registers
only men for potential death.
The Selective Service does legally what the death professions do psychologically.
For women, it’s “our bodies, our business”; for men, it’s “our bodies, government
business.” A woman has the “right to choose”; a draftee has the choice of being
“mined, mortared, shot, grenaded, blown up . . . you could fly apart so that your
pieces would never be gathered, you could take one neat round in the lung and go out
hearing only the bubble of the last few breaths, you could die in the last stage of
malaria with that faint tapping in your ears.”20
G.I. still means “government issue”; someday G.I. will be M.I.—a men’s issue.
HIS ARMY VERSUS HER ARMY
Combat training strips you of your self-image so you can be rebuilt to fit the
Army mold.
—BRUCE GILKIN, Vietnam Veteran
21
When every man in the armed services is required to enter combat upon command
and every woman either has the option of combat or is protected from combat, we
produce two distinct mentalities. Combat training requires the men to devalue their
lives; training for technical jobs that can be used in civilian life is compatible with
valuing one’s life. The result?
Harassment and hazing are preparation for devaluation—which is why men haze
and harass one another: they are amputating each other’s individuality because the
war machine works best with standardized parts. Harassment and hazing are
therefore a prerequisite to combat training in the “men’s army”; but in the “women’s
army,” harassment and hazing can be protested—they conflict with valuing one’s
life.
If the men’s and women’s armies were physically separate, these differences
would be less of a problem. However, when the men are told that the women are
equals but if they harass and haze the women as equals they’ll have their careers
ruined (and often family life destroyed), this only reinforces the men’s belief that
women want to “have their cake and eat it, too.”
THE PREGNANT-NAVY SYNDROME
It isn’t politically correct to even discuss this in the services, but. . . a large
percentage of women soldiers are electively aborting their fetuses after
they’ve served their purpose of enabling them to avoid their tour of duty in
Operation Desert Storm. . . . It is wrong to use a fetus to shirk the
responsibility for which you have signed up, and then to kill that fetus.
—NAME WITHHELD, Army-Physician, Kuwait
22
The mentality of valuing self also produces the “Pregnant-Navy Syndrome”: the
phenomenon of a woman benefiting from the technical training and then, just prior to
her ship’s being deployed, becoming pregnant so as to qualify for shore leave and not
being deployed; or becoming pregnant immediately after her ship is deployed, thus
allowing her increasingly to shirk responsibilities, forcing her shipmates to pick up
the slack. This is all compatible with valuing self, but in a military situation—when
more than .40 percent of the women on ships like the USS Acadia become pregnant
during workup for deployment23—this bailing out puts men’s lives in danger. Why?
The navy trains teams. Each person on the team is trained to interact with the
others in situations where a split second can save or lose a life. When part of that
team is suddenly missing, they cannot just be replaced because part of what made
them valuable is the way they learned to interact with the particular personalities
who are part of their team. In essence, when even one woman is lost, the entire team
is lost. The consequences? Imagine if Lieutenant Conklin were a pregnant woman
when the two Iraqi missiles tore a fifteen-foot hole in the side of the USS Stark. . . .
The missile attack caused a rapidly spreading fire that threatened to blow the ship
and its 200 men to pieces.
24 Twenty-seven-year-old Lieutenant Conklin (real person,
true story) was severely burned and wounded in both feet, both hands, and both arms.
Yet he knew that crawling through the burning, mangled wreckage to the crew cabin
to shut off the firemain valves might possibly save the ship from exploding.
The path to the crew cabin was pitch black and about 400 degrees (paper bursts
into flame at about 451 degrees, hence Fahrenheit 451). Yet he entered, protecting
himself only with a T-shirt doused in salt water, keeping his eyes closed so that his
eyelids would burn away rather than his eyes. Feeling his way through the piping
system, each time he touched a searing pipe the skin was stripped off his fingers and
hands—he described it as like walking into a blazing pizza oven and putting his
hands on the hot griddles. He persisted until he closed off the firemain valves,
worked his way back out, and then, discovering the ship was now in danger of
sinking and still in danger of exploding, he continued his acts of protection.
While Conklin was doing this, Seaman Mark Caouette, whose leg had been blasted
off and was bleeding profusely, refused his shipmates’ efforts to drag him to safety.
He chose instead to shut off other firemain valves. His charred, dead body was later
found over one of those valves. Simultaneously Electronics Technician Wayne
Weaver pulled between six and twelve men to safety before his own body was found
clutching the body of another man he was trying to rescue.
These men, ages 19 to 36, saved the lives of 163 men as 37 died. To them, being a
team meant being able to count on each member’s willingness to make her or his life
secondary to others. It did not mean receiving the benefits of training and finding a
way to get shore leave just before deployment.
In the past decade or two, we have viewed it as sexism against women when men
like this reacted defensively to the idea of women being on board such a ship (or
joining a crew of volunteer firemen). One serviceman explained it to me like this:
“We don’t wait until an emergency to discover who’s gonna risk his life and who’s
gonna walk away. When a new recruit arrives, we set up hazing situations, making it
appear that someone’s life is at risk. We wanna see if the new guy’s gonna save the
guy in trouble or save his own skin. But when we do this to women, they shout
‘Discrimination.’ Not all women, of course. But if a woman’s wearing nail polish,
well, I’ve never seen a woman with nail polish who didn’t want to be saved.”
The Pregnant-Navy Syndrome is only the outward sign of a problem reflected in
almost every armed forces study—from the U.S. Signal Corps25
to the U.S. Army.26
Each study found that the men felt the women received easier assignments or
undeserved promotions, often by offering sexual “favors.” They felt resentment
when these women nevertheless drew equal pay.
Questions about the seriousness of women in the military were reinforced by
studies finding that only 21 percent of the women were considering a military career,
compared with 51 percent of the men.27 The men felt this attitude was reflected by
female soldiers using skin cream, putting up their hair, and wearing makeup—even
under simulated combat conditions.
28
The service academies have responded to differences such as women at West Point
going on sick call four times as often as men
29 not by making women’s standards
equal to men’s, but by making a double set of standards. For example, a marine boot
camp had to excuse women altogether from the infantry field training and all the
obstacle courses.
30 The result? In the Gulf War, men were often expected to pick up
the slack when women couldn’t change truck tires, push a vehicle out of the sand,
move heavy fuel cans, move a wounded soldier.
31 More importantly, though, the
men could severely hurt their careers by complaining about this discrimination.32
Ironically, complaining about discrimination would make them vulnerable to charges
of discrimination.
The larger picture is two different mentalities: the combat-if necessary mentality
of “his army” and the combat-if-desired mentality of “her army”; an army of men
who devalue their lives and an army of women who value their lives. It reinforces the
feeling that women are bluffing in their demand for equality. It splits the armed
services in two.
TO KILL OR BE KILLED . . .
In 2014, if your son refuses to register for the draft when he turns 18, he can be
barred from all federal jobs—from the U.S. Post Office to the FBI.
33 He faces a fine
of up to $250,000 and five years in prison.34
 Once in prison, your son’s nubile, young
body combined with his reputation for not fighting makes him a perfect candidate for
homosexual rape and, therefore, AIDS. In brief, he is subject to being killed. Why?
He was too sensitive to kill.
Do male-only draft registration and combat requirements amount, then, to the
legalized rape of men? Yes. But we can’t help the feeling of exaggeration when we
compare the mass execution of men—as shown in the Civil War film Glory—to
legalized rape. Why is that? Well, we’re so used to calling the death of men “glory.”
The Multi-Option Woman and the No-Option Man
In many states, an 18-year-old boy who has not registered for the draft cannot attend
a state school.
35
 He cannot receive even a loan for a private school.
Male-only draft registration leaves a woman who doesn’t register for the draft able
to:
1. Go to a state school
2. Go to a private school with federal aid or
3. Get married and work; be single and work; have children . . .
It leaves a man who doesn’t register able to go to:
1. Jail
Our different standards for women frees a woman from moral dilemmas,
allowing her to see herself and other women as more innocent and moral than
men. This is reinforced in wartime, when women aren’t even required to leave their
normal jobs and manufacture armaments for two years.
In brief, the problem with the Selective Service is that it is selective.
WHAT ARE THE TWO MOST UNCONSTITUTIONAL LAWS IN AMERICA?
Why will male-only draft registration and combat requirements ultimately be
recognized as the most unconstitutional laws in America? They are a breach of
America’s most inalienable right: the right to life.
Depriving our fathers and sons of their right to live because of their sex is the
greatest possible violation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of equal
protection under the law. That guarantee was the basis of almost all civil rights
legislation.36
THE MORE MALE CHAUVINIST THE COUNTRY, THE MORE IT …
The more chauvinist the country, the more it protects women. And therefore the
more it limits women. Italy and Spain protect women completely from military
service by not permitting them to join. Denmark gives women more options (to join
and to be in combat) but still protects women from the draft.
37 Like the United
States, it gives women options without obligations. These countries are, therefore,
still male chauvinist and female chauvinist, not emancipated. The degree to which a
country is emancipated is the degree to which it frees men from the obligation to
protect women and socializes women to equally protect men. No country is very
emancipated.
Aren’t Women Equal to Men in the Israeli and Soviet
Armies?
ITEM. The Women’s Corps of the Israeli Defense Forces is called CHEN,
Hebrew for “charm.”38
We often think of the Soviet and Israeli armies as having equality of obligation
between women and men. Not true. Less than 1 percent of the Soviet armed forces is
female. No females are sent into combat.
39
In Israel, both sexes are subject to the
draft, but combat duty is required only of the men. For women, combat duty is an
option that is nowadays almost never pursued.
Soviet and Israeli women, like American women, are able to choose jobs that
create opportunities after military service (flight controller, cook, teacher,
technician).
40 Taxpayer dollars, then, train Soviet and Israeli women in jobs that
are profitable to them in civilian life while Soviet and Israeli men are trained to
kill and be killed. The men who escape death return to civilian life with training to
be destructive—not constructive. (And then we blame men for being destructive.)
Aren’t Israeli men and women required, though, to serve an equal number of
years? In theory, almost: Israeli men, three; Israeli women, two.41
In practice,
though, the Israeli man serves an average of thirteen years before his eligibility ends
at age 54; the woman, fewer than two.42 Why? First, because only 50 percent of the
women are called to serve (versus 90 percent of the men).
43 Second, an Israeli
mother cannot be forced to serve beyond her two years; Israeli fathers can.44 Third,
even in peacetime, the Israeli man—whether father or not—is still required to serve
two months per year (after his three-year minimum) until he is 54.45 The mother has
no requirement, and women without children need only be on call.
46 Fourth, in
wartime, only the man serves as much as he is needed.
II. THE ULTIMATE “GLASS CELLAR”
THE “ELITE CLASS” OR THE “DEAD CLASS”: IS THE MILITARY AN
OUTGROWTH OF MALE COMPETITION AND POWER?
My policy? Sir, I am a soldier. I do not have a policy.
—French general HENRI GIRAUD
47
We think of top military brass as the bastion of male power. In the United States,
as in France, the policy to create war is determined by the legislature, the policy of
when to fight or negotiate is determined by the president, and both the president and
the legislature are determined by the voters. The general is just the chauffeur. His job
is to get us where we tell him to go.
The individual soldier is trained not in dominance but in subservience. Only
after he proves his ability to take orders can he give orders. In fact, his training to
give orders is created by his ability to take orders; his training in dominance is
created by his subservience.
We think of the Japanese male as being the quintessential example of the
dominant male. Yet Japanese males in World War II were trained in the Way of the
Warrior. The Way of the Warrior was the way of subservience: the Japanese warrior
was willing to die for the emperor and his ancestors; he was trained to believe there
was no acceptable alternative to victory except death. The kamikaze fighter is but an
outgrowth of the Way of the Warrior—the way of total slavery to “the Other.”
We often open our mouths about men’s competitiveness and close our eyes to
men’s altruism. But in the military, a man sacrifices himself to a state and to the
freedom of people he doesn’t know. Pretty altruistic. Yet the military is also
competitive. Men compete to serve. Or compete to be altruistic. In men’s lives,
competition is often the pathway to altruism.
THE “KILL-A-BOY” FUND
In the recent Iran-Iraq War, Iran—and later Iraq—put “human waves” of boys as
young as 6 in the front lines. The boys were throwing grenades and shooting, which
ultimately forced the Iraqis to fire back and kill the young boys. However, many
Iraqi soldiers reported that the moment they killed a 6- or 8-year-old boy they “could
not let it go.” They suffered nervous breakdowns, nightmares, cold sweats, and
haunting memories for years.
48 The Iranian boys were, of course, used for exactly
that purpose: to wear down the Iraqi morale.
The use of young boys was so widely supported in Iran that if a city was being
attacked, families reportedly encouraged their young sons to go to war, believing it
was better to be martyred in battle and assured of paradise than to die in an air raid,
not fighting at all. With paradise as the bribe to die, the boys “volunteered.” Before
the age of consent. The result of this early childhood socialization is producing
Saddam Husseins who are detested and women who are protected.
Boy from Shiite Muslim militia learns to kill to provide safe space so girl can love.
War is sold to boys not only by the bribe of paradise but by the ignorance of its
hell. No one warned the Soviet soldier he would be left with the memory of
separating a baby from its dead mother in Afghanistan and having the tiny body
come apart in his hands. . . . Or, for another Soviet soldier, the memory of an Afghan
rebel making an incision around his buddy’s waist, then pulling the skin up over his
head like an undershirt.
49
As we come to care more about people dying, we give them warnings, not bribes.
We put warning labels on cigarette ads but not on recruitment ads. But with boys,
well, if we paid taxes in the late seventies, we helped pay for arms that were sold to
Iran; we made our contribution to the human wave; we contributed to the “Kill-aBoy” fund.
HOW ARE BOYS TRAINED TO FACE DANGER?
In the picture below, Chinese boys are piling bricks on their heads and being hit with
a sledgehammer in order to learn to become less fearful of death. (Imagine Time
magazine showing only girls being hit over the head with a sledgehammer and
making no reference to the sexism?)
In reality, the pound-the-bricks-into-the-boy’s-head exercise involves two tricks.
First, the bricks absorb a fair amount of the hammer blow.
50 The second trick,
therefore, becomes the real one: the men are seduced into believing that facing
danger head on (so to speak) doesn’t feel as bad as it looks. It is part of the way the
armed services get men to discount their fears—in this case by “scientifically
proving” to men that “even a sissy” can handle a sledgehammer.
III. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MAKING MEN DISPOSABLE
ITEM. The Defense Department gave $2 million to Louisiana State University
to study how to return brain-injured soldiers to battle (rather than help them
adjust to civilian life). The Physicians’ Committee for Responsible Medicine
protested. But wait. . . . The protest was not over the recycling of braininjured men, it was over the subjection of cats to brain injury to determine
how the men could best be reused. Even the headlines read “Doctors Assail
Project in Which Cats Are Shot.”51
In Pakistan in 2014, a teenage boy, Aitizaz Hasan, martyred himself tackling a
suicide bomber. His dad commented, “Many people try to express sympathy; I tell
them to congratulate me on becoming the father of a martyr. I will be even more
happy if my second son also sacrifices his life for the country.”
WHY DO WE CARE SO LITTLE ABOUT MEN’S LIVES?
We have seen that it was the sacrifice of men’s lives that historically led to
everyone’s survival. So societies unconsciously taught themselves not to care too
much about men’s lives. Notice how this greater caring about a woman’s survival is
unconsciously highlighted in headlines:
If we don’t care about men’s lives, why did married men with children receive
draft deferments? Because we began to care about men’s lives when men helped
women and children survive.
INNOCENT WOMEN. GUILTY MEN
Both conservatives and liberals passively accept phrases like “innocent women and
children.” When foreign hostages are captured and only women and children are
released, neither ideology protests the sexism:
Imagine a law requiring our daughters to enter a jungle and risk being shot
through their heads. If you heard a news report lamenting that “innocent men and
children” were being shot, would you want to shout, “Wait a minute, my daughter is
innocent too!”? We would all know the news reports were “blaming the victim.”
When a country goes to war, all the citizens of that country are equally
innocent and equally guilty. When the United States attacked Iraq, 76 percent of
women approved, as did 87 percent of men.52
Who is guilty? Who causes war? War is caused by our primal fear of not
surviving. This is a two-sex fear. And because the fear is so primal, we are easily
seduced into exaggerating the evil intent of anyone we become convinced might
threaten our survival. Why? One mistake of underestimating a threat could leave
everyone wiped out; many mistakes of overestimating would just leave men wiped
out. Because our fear of not surviving was so primal, it led to the distortions of
nationalism and our willingness to make men’s humanity secondary to their
disposability. It is time to stop blaming men for this two-sex fear.
When conservatives and liberals passively accept phrases like “innocent women
and children,” few understand how phrases like this actually keep women in their
place: the more the woman accepts the innocent role, the more she requires a
protector, thus reinforcing her innocence and justifying more protection. It’s actually
a powerful place, but it comes with a price tag: the more she needs protection, the
more she seeks male chauvinists who protect her but don’t respect her. Why?
WHY DO MEN LOVE WOMEN MORE THAN THEMSELVES, BUT RESPECT
THEMSELVES MORE THAN WOMEN?
Remember how we protected our children before we respected their ability to protect
themselves? The ability to protect generates respect. But the process of protecting
comes by coping with the shadow side of the world. And with that coping comes a
loss of innocence. When the man who has mastered protecting meets the innocent
woman, he “falls in love” because her innocence allows a reunion with the self that
got lost in the process of coping with complexity. Although he appears to have fallen
in love with her, he really falls in love with his own lost innocence. He loved that
innocent self because his innocence allowed him to see his soul directly, the way
we see mountains in a land without smog.
The more innocent—or traditional—the woman, the more she seeks the man who
can handle complexity. It is exactly his ability to handle complexity that allows her
to retain her innocence. (The protector literally protects her innocence.) But in the
process of dealing with the shadow side of life, he distances himself from his own
spirituality, thus decreasing her love for him even as she increases her dependence
on him.
Conversely he becomes spiritually dependent on her and loves her more even as he
respects her less. He respects the part of himself that can master complexity but
hates the part of himself that had to compromise.
When women are seen as the innocent ones, they become worshiped by men
almost religiously. Which is not coincidental. The appeal of religion, as with the
“innocent” woman, lies in part in how it allows us to be in touch with our simpler
spirit—or spirituality. In how it gives us temporary relief from life’s complexities.
But don’t women fall in love with men they respect? We call it love. But she has
not really “fallen in love,” she has “fallen in respect.” A man with an ounce of
introspection is often uncertain whether it is love that his football or military
uniform has generated, or respect. Thus the crisis in the film An Officer and a
Gentleman, when the woman “in love” suddenly falls out of love when the pilot-tobe decides to be true to himself and not become a pilot. The film became a female
fantasy because of the one officer who carried the woman away, not because of his
friend who looked inside himself and decided not to become an officer. Audiences
ignored the man who would value self and applauded the man who would sacrifice
himself. The choice was a pension over introspection. Most men follow the applause.
And they see few women applauding A Dropout and a Gentleman.
Men will not love themselves nor will women love men as long as the killerprotector role is disproportionately the role of the male.
The solution? Both sexes developing their own spiritual integration by integrating
the need for protection with the need to be in touch with our innocence. The
integration gives us inner peace. It doesn’t make spirituality dependent upon denying
reality.
AREN’T WAR STORIES EVIDENCE OF HOW MUCH MEN LOVE WAR?
Our association of war stories with bragging leaves us with the impression that men
love war—that war is a male “toy.” This is the dark side. The light side is the
celebration of self that compensates for the tearing down of self that prepared him to
be disposable.
War stories are the male way of processing feelings. “War stories” are what men
tell to reframe their fear. When Bruce returned from ’Nam, he told this story.
We shared our hooches with rats that weren’t afraid to come at you while you
were awake, much less asleep. I’ll never forget the time a rat ran across my
face. Its tail dragged for what seemed like a mile.
—BRUCE GILKIN, Vietnam Veteran
53
It is doubtful that Bruce enjoyed the rat running across his face. But telling his
story was therapy. It is like being in a relationship and having a big fight that later
becomes our favorite story. War stories are to war what the War of the Roses is to
relationships. It is our way of reframing the horror—of turning a negative experience
into a bonding experience. It doesn’t mean we wanted to fight.
Soldiers returning from Vietnam and Afghanistan returned to countries which
didn’t want to hear their war stories. Deprived of war stories to reframe their fears
and affirm themselves, they were, instead, overwhelmed by their fears and
overwhelmed by self-doubt. The Soviet soldiers went into sanitariums,
54
the
American soldiers went into drugs, prisons, and suicide.
War stories create two war-story dilemmas. The first is that war stories can be
healthy for the storyteller to tell but might be unhealthy for the son to hear. It
unconsciously teaches the son that he can get his attention the way dad gets his
attention—by doing things that will put his life at risk. The second dilemma is that
these stories tend to lull the storyteller into forgetting that he also needs help to
release deeper, uglier fears.
The solution? Make counseling mandatory for anyone who has experienced
combat or combat training. And educate the dad to help his son (or daughter)
understand that he risked his life to free his child to do something other than fight;
then ask the child what his or her interests are, thereby actually giving attention to
the child for exploring alternatives to war.
IV. THE POLITICS OF MAKING MEN DISPOSABLE
ITEM. Parade magazine announces that 40 million Soviet men were killed
between 1914 and 1945.55 The magazine’s headline reads “Short End of the
Stick.” Because men died? No. The women were seen as getting the short end
of the stick because they were stuck with factory and street-cleaner positions
the men weren’t around to do.
After the world wars, our concern for veterans resulted in veterans’ benefits. But
during the 1970s and ‘80s, our lack of concern for veterans led to veterans’ neglect. .
. .
FORGET-ME-NOT?—THE LEGACY OF POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
I got killed in Vietnam. I just didn’t know it at the time.
—PAUL REUTERSHAN, Agent Orange victim56
ITEM. More Vietnam veterans have committed suicide since the war ended
than were killed in the Vietnam War itself.
57
ITEM. It is conservatively estimated that 20 percent of all Vietnam veterans,
and 60 percent of combat veterans, were psychiatric casualties.
58
ITEM. A presidential review found over 400,000 Vietnam veterans to be either
in prison, on parole, on probation, or awaiting trial.
59
ITEM. In Los Angeles alone, an estimated 20,000 homeless veterans walk the
streets. The Veterans Administration Center has fewer than 300 beds in
service for them.
60
If we are to understand the psychological responsibility of being born male, it
might start with understanding the disease suffered by 60 percent of the combat
veterans.
61 After the Civil War, the disease was called soldier’s heart—heart
palpitations, chest pains, dizziness. After World War I, shell shock.62
 After Vietnam,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
WHAT DOES POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER FEEL LIKE?
To many men, here’s what posttraumatic stress disorder actually felt like:
The headaches started a couple of years after I came home from Vietnam. . . .
Then one night not long afterwards, my wife, Loretta, found me in the
hallway of our apartment, wearing army fatigues and holding my bayonet. . . .
It took me another 12 years to find out that when I returned from Vietnam,
not all of me came home.
. . . sometimes even in broad daylight, faces of the dead come to life.
A story like mine can be told by thousands of Vietnam veterans. The
problem is, many vets just can’t talk about what went wrong. Hell, I had to
almost die before I found that the only way to live was to talk it out.
63
What is a flashback like?
I’d be driving down an open road and a commercial jet flying overhead would
become an F-4 taking off from the air strip in ’Nam. . . . A hill in front of me
would turn into a hot spot about to be strafed. . . . The thoughts switched back
and forth. . . . I’m home; I’m in ’Nam. . . . Don’t look at broken white lines on
the black road—they’re tracer bullets in the dark night.
If you could read that last paragraph 100 times faster, with 1,000 times the
intensity, you’d have an idea of what a flashback is like.
64
A friend of mine wrote, “My ex-father-in-law, who strafed and bombed a trainful
of Nazi troops, woke up in a cold sweat and in terror night after night for years after
having to kill.”65 As one military historian put it, “The fear of killing rather than the
fear of being killed was the most common cause of battle fatigue in World War II.”66
Why is it we seem to hear more about disabled vets and stress disorder after
Vietnam than after other wars? Does this signal increased sensitivity? Not quite.
Vietnam produced totally disabled servicemen at three times the rate of World War
II.
67 Why? Ironically, because medical evacuation procedures were more efficient—
men whose legs were blown off were eventually saved. In World War II, these men
would have died.
So the death rate in Vietnam tells us less about the real toll than in other wars. The
physical and psychological aftermath—the 50,000 who are blind, the 60,000 who
committed suicide (that are detectable), the abnormally large number “dying in car
accidents,” the 33,000 paralyzed—tells us more.
68
On a theoretical level, we have recognized that the real trauma of Vietnam is lack
of appreciation; on a practical level, we have not translated that appreciation into
adequate help for Vietnam veterans facing homelessness, unemployment, recurrent
substance abuse, Agent Orange poisoning, delayed stress syndrome, incarceration,
homicide, suicide, amputations, and chemical poisoning.
When a study published by the New England Journal of Medicine revealed that
wounded Vietnam combat veterans suffered more from PTSD than victims of rape
and muggings,
69
it received little publicity. And little action was taken. For example,
we have only four social service organizations in all of New York City dealing with
veterans.
70 Compare this with more than fifty such agencies dealing with women’s
issues, almost all publicly funded—either directly (by the government) or indirectly
(by tax-exempt status).
WHY HAS THE U.S. GOVERNMENT REFUSED TO RELEASE DOCUMENTS ON
PRISONERS OF WAR?
ITEM. June 1992. America sees Boris Yeltsin acknowledge in a television
interview that American POWs from the Vietnam War, World War II, and the
Korean War had been transferred to Soviet labor camps and that some might
still be alive.
71
Within two days, the news media were explaining that Boris Yeltsin had probably
just “misspoken.” In fact, his acknowledgment had first been made in writing to the
U.S. Senate’s Select Committee on POW-MIA Affairs.
72 And the U.S. government
had long been in possession of some 11,700 reports about the more than 2,000
American men still missing in action from the Vietnam War—including 1,400
firsthand live sightings.
73
In Korea, more than 8,000 men were missing in action and
another 559 were unaccounted for as prisoners of war.
74 Secretary of State John
Foster Dulles was aware of numerous reports of American prisoners of war from
Korea in Soviet custody as early as 1954.75
Was there a cover-up? Was it just by the media? And if so, why? There does
appear to be a cover-up, but not by the media alone. Just months before, army
colonel Millard A. Peck, originally put in charge of investigating such findings after
his stance that there was no cover-up,76 came to the conclusion that there was. He
found that officials in the National Security Council, State and Defense departments
were taking each lead and, instead of pursuing it, “finding fault with the source. . . .
The mind-set to debunk is alive and well.”77 He was so frustrated he resigned,
protesting that his office was being used as a “ ‘toxic waste dump’ to bury the whole
mess out of sight and mind in a facility with limited access to public scrutiny.”78
Colonel Peck knew the risk he was taking. He asked immediately for permission to
retire from the army “so as to avoid the annoyance of being shipped off to some
remote corner, out of sight and out of the way.”79
Why this cover-up? “Closing the case” on POWs and MIAs helps Americans to
return to peaceful lives after the war. After World War II, the Korean War, and the
Vietnam War, the U.S. government declared all prisoners of war and men missing in
action dead. It refused to release documents on POWs and MIAs. We can understand
the desire for this, but it reflects a greater willingness to make our own lives peaceful
than to make sure that the men who preserved our freedom and peace are alive.
Now consider this: Had these MIAs and POWs been 10,000 of our mothers,
daughters, and sisters would we not have intuitively known it would be impossible
for the country to heal until every last lead was pursued? It would have been such a
political issue in World War II that we would never have considered a cover-up
following the Korean or Vietnam wars.
Our caring so little about men’s lives always hurts more than men: children have
grown up recalling their dads only from pictures on night tables in their mothers’
bedrooms, and women have not known whether to bury their husbands
psychologically or await the next phone call.
THE POLITICS OF AGENT ORANGE
The United States sprayed Vietnam with roughly 11 million gallons of Agent
Orange, a chemical defoliant that contains dioxin. Laboratory tests on animals link
dioxin to birth defects, cancer, infertility, and miscarriage as well as to damage to
the liver and to the nervous and immune systems.
80
Admiral Elmo Zumwalt was responsible for the decision to use Agent Orange.
Perhaps no other decision of the war cut deeper scars on the nation’s postwar nerves.
Was it motivated by the insensitivity of male power? Let’s look.
Zumwalt was opposed to the Vietnam War. He was nevertheless put in charge of
the in-country naval forces in Vietnam. After sending off hundreds of boys who were
ambushed by Vietnamese soldiers hiding in the intense jungle cover, and seeing only
their forms return in body bags, he learned that Agent Orange could destroy the
jungle cover and reduce deaths from ambushes.
81 At the time, the negative effects of
Agent Orange were not revealed to him, but to this day, Zumwalt feels the decision
saved more lives than it cost—despite what happened later.
Soon after Zumwalt’s decision, his own son, Elmo, Jr., was exposed to the Agent
Orange and contracted cancer. (A generation later, his grandson was born with
multiple birth defects.) Elmo Jr.’s reaction? He bought insurance policies and
struggled to stay alive for the three years it would take for the insurance benefits to
kick in for his family.82 He then arranged to have his wife’s brother pull the plug
once the three years were up. He wanted to give his wife his insurance benefits yet
spare his wife the agony of pulling the plug. So he arranged for another man to live
with that agony.
Did he blame his dad? No. He said, “Certainly thousands, including me, are alive
today because of his decision to use Agent Orange.”83
When we think of the top military brass, we think of power; we rarely consider the
internal hell experienced by the Zumwalts of the world who find themselves making
decisions that cripple their sons and grandsons for a cause they oppose.
Throughout history we have assigned men to live with the hell of making
decisions that killed one man so two could live. Few men consider it a feeling of
power to explain that to the parents of the dead boy. And yet, just as God asked
Abraham to sacrifice his only son to prove his love for God, so Zumwalt experienced
the powerlessness of sacrificing his son as he proved his love of country.
Isn’t part of being a man having the courage to voice opposition? Part. Elmo did
speak up. But having done so and lost, he, like all the military, knew his obligation
was to serve others—not to have power. He could become a hero, but only within a
framework—the framework of serving.84
Today, Admiral Zumwalt is the special advisor to the secretary for veterans
affairs, specializing in the issue of Agent Orange. After reviewing every study done
on Agent Orange, Zumwalt listed twenty-seven illnesses for which Vietnam vets
should be compensated because of the likelihood they were caused by Agent
Orange.
85
 However, only three have received approval. Why?
Zumwalt explains that chemical companies are fearful of acknowledging dioxin as
a cancer-producing agent in humans because it is present not only in Agent Orange
but in many commercial products as well, and they are afraid of civilian lawsuits.
There’s astonishing evidence, though, that the resistance runs much deeper than
chemical companies.
In 1987, when the Center for Disease Control was conducting a study of the link
between Agent Orange and various diseases, the study was suddenly cancelled,
reportedly as a result of the White House strategy to deny federal liability. This was
part of a decade-long struggle in which veterans groups claimed everyone was trying
to deny the connection for fear of liability. The government and chemical companies
denied that was the reason. Who’s right? Here is a clue.
Almost overnight the decade of deadlock was broken. A bill was signed into law to
compensate Vietnam veterans exposed to Agent Orange.
86
 Stunningly, the vote in the
House was 412 to 0.87 Why? Saddam Hussein was threatening to use chemical or
biological substances against U.S. troops. Suddenly the United States wanted to link
Agent Orange to cancer and wanted to establish a precedent for guaranteed
compensation because Saddam Hussein would be paying the bill. So the bill provided
for new studies and guaranteed compensation.88
 This reasoning was not kept a secret.
In brief, when it appeared that American companies or the American government
might have to pay the bill, everything was done to avoid the connection between
Agent Orange and cancer and thus avoid payments. When it appeared that Saddam
Hussein might pay the bill, everything was done to make the connection and establish
a precedent for guaranteed payments. Perhaps there is a no more poignant statement
about our attitude toward men’s lives. (The turnabout was blatant enough to make a
cynic blush.)
Who’s to blame? In the final analysis, the U.S. is us. When women request to use a
chemical and it does damage (as with Thalidomide), we create the political
atmosphere to guarantee that women win their lawsuits. When men have no option
but to be exposed to chemicals, we hesitate to compensate.
The women’s movement has tagged the military as the “warrior elite.”89 The
warrior elite, though, is less an elite class than a servant class; less an elite class than
a dead class.
When Zumwalt wrote a book about his experience, he said, “There was one
universal aspect of being a Vietnam veteran that I shared with all the others: our
silence about serving in that war.”90
My purpose in writing this book is, similarly, to bring men out of isolation—and,
therefore, out of the drugs, divorce, depression, and suicide that are isolation’s false
alternatives. Talk about learned helplessness. To this day, the military elite has done
little to help itself.
V. THE CONSEQUENCES OF CREATING A KILLER CLASS
WHY ARE MEN SO CRUEL? WHY DO THEY NEED TO “PROVE THEIR
MANHOOD”?: THE CONSEQUENCES OF TRAINING OUR MEN TO FIGHT
When John Beverly returned from Vietnam with posttraumatic stress disorder, the
men at work reinforced his suffering. They popped milk cartons, broke beer bottles,
and even set off fireworks to see his reaction. He became so anxious he could no
longer hold a job.91
Why do some men do this? Men who taunt each other are instinctively training
each other to become protectors. How? No one wants a protector who could be
scared away by taunting; so, over the centuries, young males went on search and
destroy missions to discover each other’s weaknesses. Once they found a weakness,
they would try to “destroy” the boy by taunting him—picking at his weakness until
the boy either sank or swam. If he sank, he had “failed to prove himself a man.”
What does “fail to prove himself a man” really mean? It means he couldn’t
protect women and children because he’d be too worried about protecting his
own weaknesses. Women who sensed this wouldn’t marry him.
Our desire for men to be our protectors has left us with “police brutality,” the
military mentality, and the Mafia—all associated with men. How can we wonder
why men are not tender when we use them as tenderizer (that which makes
something else lovable and tender)?
When men play the protector role in wartime, their wives usually become more
balanced while the men usually become more out of balance. When World War II
produced Rosie the Riveter, for example, “Rosie” symbolized the female energy, the
“riveter” the male energy. The jobs women took gave many women the opportunity
to balance their female and male sides. Their husbands, however, were forced to
intensify the male side of themselves. For many women, then, war created a
psychological balance while pushing men psychologically out of balance.
War itself might lead to a physically amputated leg, but many a vet would suffer
that in a minute to recover the intimacy his psychological amputation has cost him
with his wife and children. One reason we have books like Men Who Hate Women
and the Women Who Love Them is because our taxes pay men to hate and men’s
income pays women to love. The piper plays the tune we pay the piper to play.
WARRIORS OF PEACE
Men are likely to be not only the warriors of war but also the warriors of peace.
Almost all those who risk their lives, are put in jail, or are killed for peace are men.
While some of the peace warriors—Nelson Mandela, Martin Luther King, Gandhi,
Dag Hammarskjold—are remembered, most are forgotten. Remember Norm
Morrison?
After years of protesting the Vietnam War, Norm doused himself with gasoline
and set himself on fire on the steps of the Pentagon. The incident fueled the
opposition to the war and focused energy on what protesters felt was our “enemy
within”: the Pentagon.92 But Norm Morrison is forgotten. As is Brian Wilson, who
repeatedly lay on railroad tracks to stop navy trains from supplying munitions to
bomb the people in Central America. One train went right over him.
It’s a legitimate debate whether Norm Morrisons preserve peace or undermine the
military strength needed to preserve peace; whether the military preserves peace or
creates a military mentality with a propensity to create war; whether Japan’s recent
methods of economic and family strength or Switzerland’s historic method of
staying neutral makes a nation happier than either war warriors or peace warriors.
But we tend to accuse men of being warriors of war and forget that men are also
warriors of peace. No one gives the Brian Wilsons or the Norm Morrisons Purple
Hearts for peace.
THE CIVILIAN SOLDIER OF REPRESSION
On Veterans Day, there’s one soldier who gets neglected: the civilian soldier. CIA,
FBI, and DEA agents are America’s civilian soldiers. These soldiers have legally
signed away their freedom of expression in exchange for their ability to support a
family.
The requirements not to discuss his worries, fears, or ethical dilemmas—even with
his wife or best friend—turn every evening into one of repressed posttraumatic
stress. Without the help of war stories to reframe his fears, his cover-up becomes
cancer, and he a premature corpse in a casket, covered with honor.
Do repressed feelings really become cancer? The most responsible cancer research
finds that cancer is six times more likely to occur among people repressing feelings
than it is to occur among cigarette smokers.
93 For the civilian soldier of repression,
it is not what he doesn’t know that kills him; it is what he knows that kills him. What
he cannot release from his brain can become the tumor in his brain. When William
Casey, the former director of the CIA, was accused of a cover-up in the Iran-Contra
affair, he kept his feelings to himself; he died of a massive brain tumor. At the same
time, Bud McFarlane, similarly accused, at first tried to kill himself, but then, upon
opening up and testifying, recovered.
The feelings the civilian soldier doesn’t share with his wife provide the income the
civilian soldier does share with his wife. His repression allows for her expression—
often the expression of criticism for his repression. His penchant for repression
becomes her pension to explore. The Stage I man produces the Stage II widow.
VI. THE DILEMMA OF THE SOLDIER IN TRANSITION
STAGE I SOLDIERS FREE WOMEN TO BE STAGE II WOMEN
Ninety-five percent of women’s experiences are about being a victim. Or
about being an underdog, or having to survive . . . women didn’t go to
Vietnam and blow things up. They are not Rambo.
—JODIE FOSTER, The New York Times Magazine94
Muhammad Ali’s refusal to participate in what he felt was the criminal nature of
the Vietnam War forced him into prison during the height of his career and deprived
him of four years that could never be recovered. At the same time Jodie Foster was
safe at home, becoming wealthy and famous and cashing in on her sex appeal. What
would Jodie Foster have said if a sexist law kept her in prison when she was 24, 25,
26, and 27? Or if her body was valued so minimally that the only way she felt she
could make millions was to subject herself to batterings that could eventually lead to
brain damage and Parkinson’s disease?
Just as first-generation college students had been freed by Stage I fathers to think
of themselves as intellectually superior to their parents, so the Jodie Fosters were
freed by Stage I men to think of themselves as morally superior to men who freed
them from the dirty work of war.
To many men, it doesn’t feel good to hear the Jodie Fosters ignore men’s
victimization, then blame the victim, then claim herself to be the victim—especially
a Jodie Foster who grew up in an era in which women had the fantasy of “a room of
my own” while their brothers had the reality of “a body bag of my own.” It saddened
men who watched women their age get a head start on their careers while they fought
in a war that tore apart their souls, to return from that war to hear a woman call
herself the only victim of sexism because she was being asked to make coffee at a
job that no law required her to take.
By the 1970s, the American woman was being called “liberated” or “superwoman”
while the American man was being called “baby killer” if he fought in Vietnam,
“traitor” if he protested, or “apathetic” if he did neither. Even men who came home
paraplegics were literally spit on.
This was happening not only in America. Soviet women living safely at home
were called “liberated” and “overworked” while a million Soviet men, after facing
death in Afghanistan, returned home not to be called “heroes” but “dupes.” We heard
about Soviet housewives standing in lines to shop; we heard little about Soviet
husbands sweltering in Afghan deserts, suffering from the poisonous stings of
scorpions or contracting malaria, jaundice, typhus, hepatitis, and dysentery.95 When
they returned home, the Soviet government would acknowledge only that they were
noncombatant aides. The denial and dishonor led to alcoholism, hospitalization, and
suicide. But we heard only of the overworked Soviet women.
The adults of the 1990s are a generation of men criticized for what they were
obligated to do by a generation of women privileged enough to escape the
obligation; they are a generation of unacknowledged men coexisting with a
generation of acknowledged women.
Reprinted with special permission of King Features Syndicate
This “acknowledgment gap” was widened by another media phenomenon. . . .
Trading Places?
With the War in the Gulf came hundreds of newspaper stories about women leaving
for war and of men “trading places” with the women. The stories almost always
focused on how men discovered the difficulties of the woman’s role.
96 However,
women with children married to male soldiers rarely hold down full-time
professional careers; men home with children married to female soldiers almost
always had full-time professional careers.
97 For example, a chief petty officer who
had been home only seventeen months of the past five years was now taking full
responsibility for his four children: ages 2, 4, 6, and 13.
The result of the media acknowledging only her new role, though, was the chief
petty officer feeling guilty: “I am scared about my wife getting hurt. She wouldn’t be
there if I made enough money to be able to live on one income.”98 He felt guilty
about not being able to financially support six people, even though he had 100
percent responsibility for four children’s care and all the housework.
THE SOLDIER IN TRANSITION
When the Chinese soldier in Tiananmen Square hesitated to kill people his own age
who were offering him food, and when he set fire to his own tank yet remained in
uniform, we can only imagine his internal conflict. We like to frame this as a
conflict between immorality and morality, but to the soldier it was a conflict
between two methods of being moral, or two methods of being immoral.
What made life torturous for soldiers from Afghanistan to Vietnam to Tiananmen
was facing both the old expectation of external conflict and the new introspection
that created internal conflict—and then returning home to face not appreciation but
isolation. Caring about our sons means creating a support network for our veterans to
deal with this extraordinary range of fears.
As our veterans returned to their mirrors at home and saw two faces, they
wondered if they have been the hired murderers of innocent women, children, and
men—and even, sometimes, the unwitting murderers of a buddy, a la Ron Kovic of
Born on the Fourth of July fame. We have a responsibility to help them know their
fears and know themselves. It is difficult for them to talk about their fears and
nightmares when they are either seen as a traitor or never acknowledged as having
been in combat. We must also do this for female veterans, but without forgetting that
it is combat veterans who face the most severe posttraumatic stress.
VII. TOWARD SOLUTIONS
IS THERE A WAY OUT OF MAKING MEN INTO OUR WAR SLAVES?
From Rambo to Reality
To this day, his legs still Missing in Action.
—LEROY V. QUINTANA
99
Political shifts often begin with actions that don’t just raise consciousness but
shock consciousness. For example, if a Rambo doll shows the ideal of violence,
perhaps a “Reality doll” can show the realities of violence.
The Reality doll might feature a variety of models . . . a Paraplegic Model with a
wheelchair and accessories like racially diverse arms and legs that are
interchangeable and miniature prostheses; a Corpse Model with body bags, caskets,
and urns—the quality level depending on the poverty level; a POW Model with a
bamboo cage and extra stationery; an Agent Orange Model with deformed children;
an MIA Model that gets lost in shipping . . .
The Posttraumatic Stress Models all come with straitjackets, pills, and a fifth of
Jack Daniel’s (made from caramel water). The Posttraumatic Tom Model features a
built-in noise sensor. When a door is slammed, Tom experiences a flashback. He
releases his rage on a Battered Barbie. The best-selling accessory for the battered
Barbie model is a phone with an easy-access 911 for reporting posttraumatic Tom to
the police.
The real consciousness shocker is that using dolls to prevent violence sounds more
violent than using dolls to promote violence.
The “Males-Per-Gallon” War
World War II is often thought of as a war that brought America from depression to
prosperity. The War in the Gulf would never have been fought if Kuwait were known
for carrots, not oil. In the Gulf War men were still 96 percent of those killed; it was
just the most recent exchange of men for money. It was the “Males-Per-Gallon” War.
Until we protest, it won’t end.
HOW CAN WE EMPLOY MEN IN PEACETIME WHOM WE DEPLOYED IN
WARTIME?
If war requires the willingness to sacrifice life, peace requires the skills to live life.
Because wartime requires the sacrifice of individuality, boot camp became the
lobotomy of individuality. Because peacetime requires the rebirth of individuality,
reentry programs must help the veteran take his individuality out of hibernation.
In war, mistrust and paranoia are functional; at home, they are dysfunctional.
Reentry programs must train to trust.
In war, a soldier’s crying and asking for help is virtually prohibited because
attending to self would slow down his unit; in peace, the veteran must learn how
crying creates not weakness, but strength—it strengthens his immune system by
cleansing impurities; it strengthens his children by giving them permission to
strengthen their immune systems by crying; it strengthens his family by making
them feel part of the team rather than dependent on one person. In peace, the veteran
can be taught the compatibility between self-help and the strength of his new unit—
the family unit.
In wartime, family therapy and marital counseling distract from a nation’s
survival; in peace, they’re necessary to reunite that which war tore asunder. Exactly
why? Some examples. . . .
One of the unrecognized problems of a soldier reentering his family is that a
soldier has been learning he has no rights while his wife has been learning she has all
the rights. That is, his wife created all her own orders and listened to her children
only as she saw fit. Admiral Zumwalt was commanding in a war he opposed because
even an admiral takes orders from superiors who take them from policymakers who
themselves are supervised by voters’ votes and opinion polls’ updates. The soldier
has been trapped in a constant fluctuation between the dichotomy of subservience
and the appearance of dominance while his wife-as-mother, although she might have
been called “just a housewife,” was nevertheless her own commander in chief, her
own policymaker, the only vote that counted, and the only opinion poll that had to be
tended to.
At the same time, training that is functional for being a soldier is dysfunctional for
being a parent. The soldier learns first to take orders without questioning, and then to
give orders without being questioned while still taking orders without questioning. A
father who trains his child to act without questioning trains the child well for
wartime, but poorly for peacetime. In brief, family therapy and marital counseling
are necessary to create family love instead of family war.
The job of the warrior is to sacrifice his own rights to preserve the rights of others;
to sacrifice his own ability to question authority so he might preserve the right of
others to question authority. It is tempting, when war ends, to keep this cadre of selfsacrificers on hand. The society that cares about men, though, rebirths the
individuality within each veteran. When we don’t, we are unconsciously caring more
about our own security than a soldier’s life.
We become more secure, though, by training veterans to uncork emotions rather
than liquor bottles, to prepare them for a home life rather than a prison life, to create
fathers in families rather than fatherless families. A nation that cares retrains its
veterans to disassociate war from career advancement; it does this by retraining the
veteran so he has a better future if there is peace than if there is war.
SHOULD WE GIVE HELP TO MEN WHO REFUSE TO BE KILLERS?
We can’t end war by telling men that if they don’t fight, we won’t “respect them in
the morning.” (Then we wonder why men fight to gain respect.) If women are
eventually drafted, I predict women who resist will be acknowledged, and the
resistance will be seen as evidence of women’s more peace-loving nature. In
contrast, when a friend of mine refused to go to Vietnam and claimed conscientious
objector status but without a religion, he spent the next four years in court, fighting
the FBI, losing his job . . . in living hell. Those of us who saw his life being ruined,
his hair falling out, the anger in his eyes, and ulcers in his stomach knew there was
no true escape from the combat zone. Or from the posttraumatic stress.
There were no organizations to help my friend, nor the men who went to Canada
rather than kill, nor the Bill Clintons—all torn between two definitions of conscience
and courage. There are also no organizations that see the 18-year-old boy as a victim
if he joins the army based on deceptive ads. By the time he sees reality, his choice is
the army or prison and a label of AWOL that will follow him for a lifetime. (Try
getting a meaningful job with a dishonorable discharge.)
We gave presidential pardons to women who were traitors—such as Tokyo Rose—
but not to these men, without whose draft resistance the Vietnam War might have
expanded and consumed the conscience of yet another generation of men. Maybe the
wisest of draft resisters should receive Medals of Wisdom for seeing a different way
of saving others’ lives—and sacrificing career, health, and relationships to do it.
IS EQUALITY IN THE MILITARY REALLY A POLITICAL POSSIBILITY?
When civil rights leaders asked John Kennedy to prioritize civil rights, he answered,
“Make it politically possible.” Although no laws can be more unconstitutional than
male-only draft registration and combat requirements, both are living proof that the
unconstitutionality of a law is not enough to change it if the political climate does
not support that change.
What is the forecast for tomorrow’s political climate (for equality of
responsibility)? Partly sunny, partly cloudy. The sunny part: 75 percent of men and
69 percent of women already favor drafting both sexes (if anyone has to be
drafted).
100 The cloudy part: 57 percent of draft-age women said they would be
unwilling to serve if drafted, versus only 24 percent of draft-age men.101 And as for
“requiring combat roles for women,” only 12 percent of men and 9 percent of women
are in favor.
102
In brief, neither sex is in favor of real equality; women are less in
favor than men; about 7 million more women than men vote in each presidential
election.103
None of this will change until we confront antimale sexism just as we confronted
anti-Semitism. We call the annihilation of the Jews a “holocaust,” but the
annihilation of men a “battle.” When Jews were slaughtered, we were horrified;
when men are slaughtered, the battle is glorified. Hitler called Jewish death camps
“work camps.” We call male-only draft registration “male power.” The Germans
who smelled the flesh from the nearby ovens and chose to buy the explanation of
“work camps” are now judged just as guilty as those who ran the ovens. Are the
voters who support male-only draft registration and buy the explanation of “male
power” just as guilty as those who make the laws to register only men? Yes. The
voters elect the lawmakers.
In brief, attitudes create politics and politics precedes equality. The biggest hope
comes with asking parents whether they want their sons to be more disposable than
their daughters . . . with asking sons to value their own lives equally to their
girlfriends’. . . with helping draft-age women understand the connection not only
between responsibilities and rights but between responsibilities and respect . . . with
helping draft-age women think of whether they want to bring up their own sons with
the feeling that merely because they are boys they have to be prepared to kill . . .
with helping everyone understand it is time now for an evolutionary shift that we all
have an opportunity to pioneer.
Political shifts come from refraining the fundamentals: by demanding, for
example, that whatever killing both sexes vote for, both sexes do; by explaining why
we will never get rid of the “innocent woman/guilty man” if we keep women
innocent and keep men killing; by understanding that men will continue to be
perpetrators of violence as long as we give men unequal responsibility for violence.
What can each of us do while we are waiting for this paradigm shift to occur—
while twenty-seven men are still being killed for each woman? We can express our
appreciation. Kay Schwartz and her son chose something very simple.
On the tenth anniversary of the end of the war, my son made a banner on the
computer, which we put across the front of the garage. The banner said
“Vietnam—10 years—We Remember. To Those Who Died—Thank You. To
Those Who Returned—Welcome Home.” . . . I was sitting on the front porch
having coffee and a young man came by delivering telephone books. He went
up to the garage and read the banner. He came over to my porch and put the
telephone books down, and stood there crying.
He said, “Lady, I love your sign.”
I started crying and said, “I’m sorry it’s ten years late.”
We were both crying and then he said, “Lady, it is never too late.”
—KAY SCHWARTZ, Addison, Illinois
104
CHAPTER 6
The Suicide Sex: If Men Have the Power, Why Do They
Commit Suicide More?
ITEM. A husband whose wife dies is about ten times more likely to commit
suicide than a wife whose husband dies.
1
ITEM. Unemployed men commit suicide at twice the rate of employed men.
Among women, there is no difference in the rate of suicide based on whether
or not the woman is employed.2
ITEM. In the middle of the Great Depression, men were 650 percent more
likely to commit suicide than women.3
ITEM. The suicide rate of adolescent boys has recently increased three times as
quickly as the girls’.
4
ITEM. Just twenty years ago, young men (between 25 and 34) committed
suicide at only twice the rate of young women; today, it is four times the rate.
(Men’s rate increased 26 percent; women’s rate decreased 33 percent.)5
The Items stimulate a range of questions: Why has boys’ suicide rate been increasing
so much more than girls’ more recently? Why is the loss of love so devastating for
men? If unemployment among men leads to suicide, is it at all comparable to rape
for a woman? Is female depression the equivalent of male suicide? Why do women
attempt suicide more often while men succeed four times as often?6 Why is the
“Suicide Class” also the “Successful Class”? Is there any possibility that men
commit suicide more because we care less—that the “Suicide Class” is the “Unloved
Class”?
Let’s start with adolescent boys. Why does boys’ suicide rate, but not girls’,
increase 25,000 percent as their sex roles become apparent?
7
WHY BOYS COMMIT MORE SUICIDE AS THEIR SEX ROLES BECOME
APPARENT
ITEM. When a Trukese boy (in the western Pacific islands) has a troubled
relationship, he is expected to respond by displaying amwunumwun, a kind of
emotional withdrawal. Trukese males commit suicide 25 times more often
than their American male counterparts.
8
Preadolescent boys and girls express emotions equally and commit suicide at
about the same rate. It is adolescence that also pressures American boys (as it does
the Trukese boys) to withdraw emotionally. And it is adolescence during which boys’
suicide rate goes from slightly less than girls’ to four times as great as girls’.
9
For both sexes, adolescence sharpens sex-role anxiety like a pencil sharpener
sharpens a pencil; the fear of rejection creates an emotional state as fragile as the
sharpened pencil’s point. Less attractive girls feel especially vulnerable . . . as
vulnerable as they feel invisible. As for the more attractive girl, she eventually
senses her dependency on a power that will fade, and as boys compete for her
attention as if she were a celebrity, she becomes, in essence, a genetic celebrity—and
genetic celebrities become entitlement dependent. As difficult as this is for girls, I
believe that something is happening to boys during this time that makes suicide a
greater probability.
By addicting boys more to girls’ bodies than vice versa, we make boys feel less
than equal to girls. This reinforces boys performing for girls, pursuing girls, and
paying for girls to compensate for their inequality. When they perform and pursue
inadequately—or feel they will never be able to earn enough to afford what they are
addicted to—this creates anxiety which, in its extreme form, leads to suicide.
Performing, pursuing, and paying—the “Three Ps”—are so anxiety provoking
because the boy senses these are metaphors for adult versions of performing,
pursuing, and paying. (So if he can’t hack it when he’s a kid . . .)
The adolescent boy notices that the boys who get the “love” of the genetic
celebrity are best able to:
Perform. Become a leader (jock, student-body president), have “potential,” or
have a car.
Pursue. She has the option to pursue, he has the expectation. He is supposed to
understand female cues when he doesn’t even understand himself. To the degree
the girl doesn’t understand herself, his fear of misreading what can’t be read
becomes overwhelming. His hormones prepare him to reach out for sex but not
for the rejection. He is supposed to initiate sex perfectly before he knows what
sex is. He knows he wants to be sexual with girls; he’s not sure if they want to
be sexual with him (and the girls he’s most interested in reject him the most).
And nowadays if he misinterprets a cue, he could be in jail. Not true for her.
This creates some anxiety.
Pay. The greater her beauty, the more he will have to pay—and therefore earn.
These “Three Ps” are what boys learn they must do to earn their way to equality
with girls’ love. The teenage female has her own set of anxieties but has, on average,
less demand to perform and more resources to attract love. Her body and mind are
more genetic gifts. Thus, a popular girl is more a genetic celebrity, a popular boy
more an earned celebrity. The more he is addicted to the genetic celebrity, the more
he must become the earned celebrity.
The Demand to Perform without the Resources to
Perform
What makes a teenage boy’s anxiety so overwhelming is that a teenage boy’s
socialization is the demand to perform without the resources to perform. As a
result, not only are his risks many, but his failures many. And so apparent. Almost
every boy feels like a silent member of the Frequent Failures Club.
Second, the biggest winners—the football players—are receiving love via selfabuse. For some boys, receiving love via self-abuse creates anxiety. But losing
love creates even more anxiety. So he is caught between the anxiety of abuse by
boys and the anxiety of rejection by girls.
The boy who performs mentally but not physically (the “nerd”) is having his
identity formed during years when the boys he least respects are getting the “love” of
the girls he most desires. On the other hand, the boy who performs physically but not
mentally often fears his hero days will end with the last day of high school.
Neither the short-term winners nor the short-term losers have the meaning of all
this sorted out. Nor do you hear them talk about it. The anxiety tightens the stomach,
is numbed by alcohol, and vented behind the wheel of a car. When a teenage male is
fifteen times more likely than the average driver to unwittingly kill someone with his
car,
10 male socialization has combined with technology to transform the protector as
killer of the enemy into protector as random access killer. It is tantamount to the
random release of killers. We defeated Michael Dukakis at the polls for releasing
Willy Horton, but all of us create Willy Hortons. We even cheer for them. And then
we marry Willy Lomans.
As a boy sees no alternative to performing, as each ritual highlights his
inadequacy amid his search for identity, as he is without permission to speak with his
peers of his fears, his isolation and self-doubt become his suicide. Thus boys’ suicide
rate goes from less than girls’ to four times greater than girls’.
11
WHY HAS BOYS’ RATE OF SUICIDE BEEN INCREASING SO MUCH MORE
QUICKLY THAN GIRLS’ RECENTLY?
Girls are preparing for a world that increasingly allows them to be whatever they
wish to be—homemakers, mothers, secretaries, executives. Girls can perform outside
the home, nurture inside the home, or do some combination, depending on their
personalities. Boys must still perform outside the home, no matter what their
personalities. For some boys, life is still a round peg in a square hole, as it used to be
for both sexes. This is especially true for gay boys, who still have little permission to
be “feminine,” versus gay girls, who now have much more permission to be
“masculine.” And perhaps as a result, gay teenage boys commit suicide three times
more often than gay teenage girls.
12
Previously, both sexes followed a narrow path of expectations to love—she:
attract, resist; he: pursue, persist. Now she has the new option to pursue; he has the
old expectation to pursue and no new options (if he expects to find love). In the past,
both sexes were anxious about sex and pregnancy. Now the Pill minimizes her
anxiety and condoms increase his. Now the pimple-faced boy must still risk rejection
while also overcoming his own fear of herpes and AIDS and reassuring her there is
nothing to fear. He must still do the sexual risk taking, but now he can be put in jail
if he takes risks too quickly or be called a wimp if he doesn’t take them quickly
enough.
A girl now has the option to take the Pill or not; a boy’s option does not include
knowing if she is taking the Pill or not. Previously, pregnancy meant trouble to both
the boy and the girl, but even more to the girl. Currently, pregnancy for a girl means
the option of a quick abortion (no matter how the boy feels) or of suing the boy for
eighteen years’ worth of child support (no matter how the boy feels). In brief, today
her feelings matter, his don’t. Each time she has sex, she has an option; each time he
has sex, he risks being the prisoner of her decision for the rest of his life.
Throughout the industrialized world, because boys have not found relief from
performing, their adolescent games still prepare them for performing. Boys still dare
each other to jump in front of moving trains, speeding cars, out of trees, or steal
13
 in
an almost ritual reenactment of their genetic heritage of proving their willingness to
sacrifice their lives to protect.
The impact of this—making men’s lives secondary to their ability to perform—is
still with us. The following TV ad plays off of that reality:
ITEM. The girl signals. Two boys drive their cars toward a cliff. The boy who
jumps out of his car first is “chicken.” One boy’s door jams; he and his car
careen over the edge, splattering onto the rocks and into the ocean. Only a
denim jacket and a pair of jeans surface. Across the TV screen we see “Union
Bay—Fashion That Lasts.”14
If a girl’s body were splattered over rocks and into the ocean, no
advertising executive would even think of exploiting that girl’s death to sell a
“fashion that lasts” . . . of using female disposability to celebrate fashion
durability. It would be seen as the quintessential example of women being the
disposable sex.
WHY IS “THE SEX WHO CAN’T LOVE” SO DEVASTATED WHEN THEY LOSE
LOVE?
The most respected feminist therapists, such as Carol Gilligan and Jean Baker
Miller, claim that a relationship loss is more pervasive for women than for men.15
 If
it is, though, why do husbands whose wives die commit suicide ten times more often
than wives whose husbands die?
16 A womanfriend of mine speculated that “it must
be because widowers are mostly retired and they can’t bury themselves in their
jobs.” So I checked. I discovered that even a 30-year-old man whose wife dies is
eleven times more likely to commit suicide than a 30-year-old man whose wife is
living.17 At age 30, when men can bury themselves in their jobs and are physically
and financially attractive to women, the loss of the one woman a man loves is so
devastating it is often not softened even by the opportunity for many women. Men
might bury themselves in their jobs, or even in another woman, but they don’t bury
the pain. In brief, it is the loss of love that devastates men.
The Military Man: The Roughest, Toughest Cream
Puff
ITEM. In the 1980s, more men in the military committed suicide than were
killed in Lebanon, Grenada, and Panama combined.18 And for each suicide,
there were an estimated eight attempts.
19
We often think of the military man as being focused more on power and sex than
on sensitivity and love; but the military man seems most likely to commit suicide
not when he’s lost a promotion or been rejected in sex but when he’s been rejected in
love.
20 The second biggest reason? Lack of friends.
21 Third? Lack of respect from
family (e.g., a family still not respecting him after they’ve seen him on graduation
day).
22
 The common denominators? The absence of love and family respect.
Why is “the sex who can’t love” so devastated when they lose love? Why are men
such “rough, tough cream puffs”? Here’s why.
Suppose you lost all your relationships in one fell swoop and couldn’t discuss the
loss with anyone for more than three minutes at a time? That’s what divorce or the
death of a wife can feel like to a man: his wife is often “all his relationships”—his
total connection to intimacy. (He feels he has about a three-minute window of time
to discuss a divorce with a colleague at work—often his “best friend.”)
Feminist therapists telling the therapeutic community that women are more
relationship focused and therefore hurt more from relationship loss is like saying a
man is more financially focused and therefore should receive a better monetary
settlement after divorce. This takes an advantage of female socialization and uses it
as an excuse to get her another advantage—under the guise of “victim.” The result?
We care for grieving women and isolate grieving men, reinforcing the atmosphere
for male suicide. As a womanfriend of mine put it, “When my grandfather died,
grandma immediately joined the Greeley Widows’ Society . . . I’ve never heard of a
Greeley Widowers’ Society.” We don’t even think of support systems for widowed
men, let alone fund them.
DO WOMEN REFUSE TO COMMIT SUICIDE BECAUSE IT IS A SELFISH ACT?
ITEM. Jimmy Stewart’s film character considers killing himself for his $5,000
insurance policy for his wife. The film is called It’s a Wonderful Life.
(Wonder what he would do if it were a horrible life!)
ITEM. When the farming crisis led to foreclosures and bankruptcies in the
upper midwestern states in the early 1980s, the suicide rate among male
farmers tripled.23
When I discuss the male suicide rate in workshops, a woman will often ask, “But
isn’t suicide a selfish act? It leaves behind people who need you and love you.”
That’s correct—but much more correct for women. Here’s why. When a woman is
divorced, she has physical custody of the children 90 percent of the time. She feels
an everyday connection to her loved ones, to her feeling of being needed. In my
listening to thousands of women and men whose relatives or friends have committed
suicide, I observed that people who feel genuinely loved and needed rarely
commit suicide. Since the woman is more likely to be leaving behind people she
knows need her and love her, she is less likely to commit suicide.
In contrast, men commit suicide more often when they are unemployed or lose
their life savings in a depression because then the man feels that by killing himself,
he is “killing the burden.” For him, then, committing suicide is not a selfish act,
but an act of love—relieving his loved ones of a burden. (At least that’s the way he
sees it at that moment.) However, if he thinks he’ll be able to earn more money again
—and not be a burden—he stays alive. Or if someone really convinces him he’s not a
burden even if he does remain unemployed, he’ll live.
When a woman gets angry at a man for committing suicide, she is usually
assuming selfishness on his part because that’s what it would have been for her,
given her situation. But it isn’t usually his.
The single biggest solution to male suicide is making men feel needed as humans.
Not just as wallets. When men feel needed primarily as wallets, they are more likely
to commit suicide when their wallets are empty.
Why Do Women Attempt Suicide More Often Than
Men?
Why is a woman three times more likely than a man to attempt suicide? We often
hear it is because she wants attention, but that doesn’t leave us with an understanding
of what she wants the attention to accomplish: She wants to become the priority of
those she loves rather than always prioritizing them. She is tired of love being
defined as her being there for others rather than others being there for her. That is
accomplished by an “attempted” suicide—which is really not an attempted suicide
but a warning signal, just as an orange traffic light is not an attempted red light but a
warning signal.
Many men have a deep need to send warning signals, but their belief that they
have no right to ask others to rescue them from a disaster they feel they must have
brought upon themselves keeps them from even letting themselves know they have
that need. They also know that the admission of some failure can in reality lead to
more failure, because when colleagues and friends see some failure, the result is
fewer referrals, fewer promotions, and therefore a greater likelihood of financial
failure. This gives men but a tiny opening in which to experiment with asking others
for help. So they tough it out in isolation. If they succeed, fine; if they don’t, well, no
one will love them, they’re a nothing; no, they’re worse than a nothing—they are a
burden.
I believe men who commit suicide, then, do it when they feel either that (1) no one
loves them or needs them (and therefore it is not selfish) or, worse, (2) that they are
a burden on those they love.
WHY IS THE “SUICIDE CLASS” THE “SUCCESSFUL CLASS”?
The “Suicide Class” is 91 percent white,
24 usually well educated, and at least middle
class. They are the “Success Class.” Or at least they were—until they lost their job or
their savings. But why suicide when I’ve been saying it’s feeling not loved or needed
that’s the catalyst? Because the men who are successful have become the most
dependent on success to attract love. When this man loses his success, he often
fears he will lose love. Is this true? Well, it’s usually about two parts fact, one part
fear. It’s usually a fact that his wife might not have considered him eligible had he
been a supermarket checkout clerk, and it might be a fact that the success it took to
attract love made him a specialist more in success than love; but he might also be
underestimating his wife’s or womanfriend’s real love. Nevertheless, the fact and
fear are both real for him, thus the connection between men, love, success, and
suicide. Or, should we say, the disconnection between men and life.
IS UNEMPLOYMENT TO A MAN THE PSYCHOLOGICAL EQUIVALENT OF RAPE TO
A WOMAN?
What do you call a Texas oilman? . . . Oh, waiter!
—JAY LENO, “Tonight” show
ITEM. Once upon a time a woman met a talking frog. The frog said it was
under a wicked spell . . . it was really a Texas oilman.
“If you’ll kiss me, you’ll break the spell,” the frog explained. “Then I’ll
love you and take care of you the rest of your life.” But the woman did
nothing.
“What’s the matter?” asked the talking frog.
“You must be kidding!” the woman said, laughing. “You can get a whole
lot more for a talking frog!”
ITEM. George Reeves, television’s Superman, had gone a long period without
being able to find other acting jobs. He was now 45. His fiancée watched him
walk upstairs and heard him pull open a drawer. She announced to friends,
“He’s going to kill himself.” A few seconds later a shot rang out. Superman
was dead. Superman had been unemployed.25
Many women report that rape leaves them feeling humiliated, violated, helpless,
angry, guilty, self-blaming, depressive, lower in self-esteem, and suicidal. Their
vulnerability leaves them feeling powerless, as if the whole world were an elephant
and they are an ant. Similarly, men who are fired or experience any of “the three
unemployments—underemployment, unemployment, and the fear of
unemployment”
26—often feel humiliated, violated, helpless, angry, guilty, selfblaming, depressive, lower in self-esteem, and suicidal. Their vulnerability leaves
them feeling powerless, as if the whole world were an elephant and they are an ant.
Unemployment deprives men of that which has given many men the respect and
love of women; rape violates the body that has given many women the appreciation
and love of men. Few men feel they chose unemployment, just as few women feel
they chose to be raped.
Of course, unemployment affects women and rape also affects men. But the
unemployed man is the subject of ridicule. The unemployed woman is not (no Texas
oilwoman jokes abound). The attractive, unemployed woman with the potential for
being a homemaker is sought after by many men; the attractive, unemployed man
with the potential for being a homemaker is not sought after by many women.
Despite the similarity between the unemployment of men and the rape of women,
no one would dare joke about the worthlessness of a raped woman. When men are
valued according to net worth, men begin to confuse net worth with self-worth. No
hope for work means no hope for love means no hope for life . . . means suicide. We
will help men more when unemployment hotlines are as common as rape hotlines,
when jokes about the unemployed man are as uncommon as jokes about the raped
woman.
WHY FORCED EARLY RETIREMENT CAN LEAD MEN TO SUICIDE AND
DEPRESSION
When a man is forced into early retirement, he is often being “given up for a younger
man.” Being forced into early retirement can be to a man what being “given up
for a younger woman” is for a woman.When that is compounded by forced
unemployment, feeling to men like rape feels to a woman, it becomes easy to
understand why men who are retired or fired are soon expired.
Why do many men get more upset by retirement than women do from the “empty
nest”—when their children leave home? When females retire from children, they
can try a career; when a man retires from a career, his children are gone. Often
they only grudgingly return (a la “Cat’s in the Cradle”). We empathize with the new
woman who has grown up and “forgotten to have children,”27 but not with the man
who has always (due to the responsibility of providing the family’s financial womb),
in essence, “forgotten to have children.” But no men’s movement explains a man’s
feelings of “powerlessness” for being his child’s wallet while feeling deprived of his
child’s love.
WHEN IT COMES TO MALE SUICIDE, DO WE KNOW THE HALF OF IT?
When a teacher I know asked her class, “If you were going to commit suicide, how
would you do it?” most of the girls said, “By overdosing on pills or drugs.” But half
the boys said they would get drunk and either drive off a cliff or into a telephone
pole.
The method the girls chose—overdosing—becomes a statistic called “attempted
suicide” or “suicide” (a la Marilyn Monroe). The method the boys chose gets
recorded as a drunk-driving accident. Is it possible that we would have a more
realistic picture of the numbers of male suicide attempts if we studied the
frustrations of boys prior to drunk-driving accidents? If we did, perhaps we would be
adding to the number of male suicides about half the number of deaths from drunkdriving “accidents,” giving us a more accurate estimate of the number of actual male
suicides.
The suicide rate of elderly men is also underreported. Just as elderly men commit
suicide directly at a rate 14.5 times that of elderly women,28 nurses note they seem
to be more likely to just fail to take their medicine. But these deaths are not recorded
as suicide.
When do men stop taking medicine? When there is no woman around. Because
men can’t live without being served? No. Because men can’t live without being
loved.
Perhaps the greatest cover-up of men’s suicides emanates from the fact that if an
insurance policy is less than two years old and a spouse commits suicide, the policy
will not pay.29 Therefore it is likely that thousands of suicides get covered up as
accidents each year. Practically speaking, since elderly men are far more likely to
commit suicide, when it comes to our fathers and grandfathers committing suicide,
we might not know the half of it.
When a Man Commits Suicide, a Woman Is Wounded
When either sex is hurt, so are the ones they love. A friend of mine walked in on her
dad hanging from a rope. There has hardly been a day of her life she has not had to
deal with the consequences. Similarly, many women in my workshops have shared
with me their fear that if they left their alcoholic husband, he might commit suicide.
These fears are well founded, as recent studies prove.
30 That dilemma traps many
women.
The solution? Until we do a better job of reaching out to men to be involved in
men’s groups and other support systems, hundreds of thousands of women will feel
guilty leaving husbands. Were suicide a women’s issue, would not special Women’s
Suicide Units in hospitals be federally funded? Would not every church and
community group have Women’s Suicide Support Groups? Would there not be
corporate seminars that were federally financed to help women who were
unemployed or fired? None of this will happen for men (and, therefore, for women)
until we have the same compassion for men’s powerlessness as we do for women’s.
IS FEMALE DEPRESSION THE EQUIVALENT OF MALE SUICIDE?
Myth. Women experience more depression.
Fact. Women do not experience more depression, they report more
depression. New studies find that clinicians fail to recognize depression in
two thirds of men versus half of women. Women are also more likely than
men to be diagnosed as suffering from depression even when it was later
discovered they were not.
31
It is only when we actively solicit men and
women that we discover that equal numbers of men and women experience
depression.32
Myth. Female depression is the equivalent of male suicide.
Perspective. Female depression is not the equivalent of male suicide.
Reporting depression empowers women; suicide does not empower men.
Reporting depression allows the woman to get help; suicide leaves everyone
helpless. Reporting depression is part of the solution. Suicide is the only
symptom without a chance of solution.
Women report depression more because they seek out doctors more, have more of
their problems identified (e.g., anorexia, bulimia, burnout, depression, spouse abuse),
and have a support system making it safer to report depression. The expression of
depression is better than the repression of depression. The expression of
depression is the single best hope for preventing the “common cold” of depression
from becoming the “pneumonia” of suicide. It is, therefore, part of the solution.
What makes if safe for women to report depression? Womanfriends listen,
women’s centers listen, and women’s shelters both listen and protect. For example,
women’s crisis lines are there to listen to the 12 percent of American wives who
suffer spousal abuse, or to stories of a daughter being sexually abused by Dad. (But
who listens to the 12 percent of American husbands who suffer spousal abuse,
33
 or to
stories of a son being sexually abused by Mom?)
Her problems are given names by women’s books and feminist psychologists, and
then popularized in every women’s magazine. There are doctors for women’s
problems, but it is hard to name the male equivalent of an ob/gyn. In all these ways,
when it comes to expressing problems, “when women speak, everyone listens.”
Isn’t Depression More a Woman’s Issue Because It Is
Associated with Women’s Dependency on Men?
The reporting of depression is often associated with the dependency of women on
men.34 But it is dependency on men successful enough to allow a woman the time to
think about more than survival. Which is why, when we think about women who
report depression, we think of middle-class women, not working-class women. The
working-class woman is too worried about survival to report depression. Depression
is a diagnosis that tends to increase among those with the luxury of worrying
about something other than survival. The more a person is in Stage II, the more
that person can afford to focus on depression.
In contrast, the more successful the man is in the workplace, the more his
depression must be repressed, not expressed. And what gets repressed in one place
comes up in another—via alcoholism or suicide.
The solution? The woman who shares economic responsibilities feels more
focused and challenged, less unfocused and depressed; her workplace gives her
sources of approval besides her husband. She develops, in brief, the skills to control
her own life: a major antidepressant.
If the Expression of Depression Is Part of the Solution,
Who Is Helping Men Express Depression?
Are men taking responsibility to help themselves express their depression? Hardly.
Men are still most likely to buy adventure books, financial journals, and sports
magazines that teach men to solve problems, overcome barriers, or repress feelings.
There are few men’s shelters, “masculist” psychologists, men’s crisis lines, or men’s
centers. The biggest “men’s center” is San Quentin.
Are psychologists helping men? Once sought out, yes. But when the American
Psychological Association first discovered that people born in the last thirty years
report depression more, most agreed it was due to young people being more
psychology minded and more willing to report depression.35 They saw the reporting
of depression as a sign of people being empowered. However, when it was later
found that women report depression more, a task force was formed to explore the
problem, and the head of the task force immediately announced that women
doubtless reported depression more because they were the greater victims of recent
social change. The moment depression was associated more with women, the
reporting of it went from being seen as evidence of progress to being seen as
evidence of victimization.36
 And by the American Psychological Association!
Similarly, Dan Kiley (of Peter Pan Syndrome fame) estimates that between 10 and
20 million women live with a man and still feel alone.
37 Why only women? Here’s
his explanation: “The vast majority of these sufferers are females (males typically do
not let lonely feelings manifest themselves).”
In fact, people who suffer but cannot express it are suffering more deeply. They
need more help, not less.
Isn’t it bad therapy to identify only the woman as a victim? Yes. But it’s good
politics. Why? Singling out the woman allows us to make her feel special. But
special as what? Special as a victim.
The solution? Focus on the couple. Or on the issue—for both sexes. But this would
require us to tell the woman equally as often, “Your husband is also feeling lonely
with you, perhaps because he is also involved in a dysfunctional relationship.” It is a
sign of our respect for women when we are equally willing to ask a woman to look at
the ways she might also be contributing to a dysfunctional relationship.
The woman-as-victim approach results in self-improvement books telling their
female readers they take too much responsibility for the happiness and welfare of
others. What is fairer is that both sexes do this in different ways. For example, when
women cry, men take too much responsibility for trying to solve their problems.
The typical husband of this woman is characterized as “critical, demanding, and
uncommunicative.” But how can a man be critical and demanding if he’s not
communicating? Well, it is possible, but when his criticism is heard rather than
labeled, it is often the first step to real communication.
We need to hear when men communicate rather than deny they are communicating
because they do it imperfectly, and then deny they suffer because they don’t
communicate. Until we do, men will not report their depression to therapists—or to
anyone. They will be rough, tough cream puffs: the suicide class.
CHAPTER 7
Why Do Women Live Longer?
IS IT BIOLOGY?
ITEM. In Bangladesh today, men live longer than women. In Harlem today,
women live longer than men. Correction. In Harlem, women live much longer
than men.1
 If biology is the only variable, why these differences?
WHAT OUR LIFE SPAN TELLS US ABOUT WHO HAS THE POWER
When we learn that nonwhites have about 80 percent of the chance of whites to reach
85,2
 we know that it is because of the relative powerlessness of nonwhites. But. . .
ITEM. A boy infant is only half as likely as a girl infant to live to age 85.3
ITEM. When a man is about 25, his anxiety about “making it” is at its height.
Here are the odds of a person living out that year:
Odds of Living Out This Year (25-Year-Olds)
4
Females (white) 1,754 to 1
Females (black) 943 to 1
Males (white) 561 to 1
Males (black) 311 to 1
In graph form, this looks like:
ITEM. Blacks die earlier than whites from twelve of the fifteen leading causes
of death. Men die earlier than women from all fifteen of the leading causes of
death.6
THE INDUSTRIALIZATION FACTOR
ITEM. The more industrialized a society becomes, the more both sexes’ life
expectancies increase. But industrialization increases women’s life
expectancy roughly twice as much as men’s.
7
In preindustrialized societies (e.g., Italy and Ireland in the nineteenth century), a
gap of only one to two years between the life spans of women and men was
common.8 When Robert Kennedy, Jr., examined his heritage, he found that rural
Irishwomen around the turn of the century had a life expectancy that was actually
lower than men’s.
10 Women who lived in the countryside died more than men from
tuberculosis, diptheria, pneumonia, measles, heart disease, burns, and scalds.
11
 When
women moved to the cities, as they did in England in the early 1800s, their death rate
declined by more than a third.12
 What happened?
Male-Female Ratio of Age-Adjusted Death Rates for the 15 Leading Causes of
Death
9*
Rank** Cause Male to Female
1. Heart disease 1.9 to 1
2. Cancerous cysts 1.5 to 1
3. Cerebrovascular diseases 1.2 to 1
4. Accidents and adverse effects 2.7 to 1
5. Obstructive lung disease 2.0 to 1
6. Pneumonia and influenza 1.8 to 1
7. Diabetes mellitus 1.1 to 1
8. Suicide 3.9 to 1
9. Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis 2.3 to 1
10. Hardening of the arteries 1.3 to 1
11. Inflammation of the kidneys 1.5 to 1
12. Homicide 2.0 to 1
13. Blood infections 1.4 to 1
14. Deaths around the time of birth*** 1.3 to 1
15. AIDS 9.1 to 1
* The original chart with the technical names of the diseases is in the endnote.
** Rank based on number of deaths.
*** Inasmuch as deaths from this cause occur among infants, ratios are based on
infant mortality rates rather than on age-adjusted death rates.
When women and men have approximately equal life expectancies, it seems to be
because women die not only in childbirth (fewer than thought) but about equally
from contagious, parasitic diseases; poor sanitation and water; inadequate health
care; and diseases of malnutrition. In industrialized societies, early deaths are caused
more by diseases triggered by stress, which breaks down the immune system. It is
since stress has become the key factor that men have died so much sooner than
women.
Industrialization’s Double Standard
Industrialization pulled men away from the farm and family and into the factory,
alienating millions of men from their source of love. Industrialization allowed
women to be connected with the family and, as we discussed above, increasingly
surrounded with fewer children and more conveniences to handle those children,
more control over whether or not to have children, less likelihood of dying in
childbirth, and less likelihood of dying from almost all diseases. It was this
combination that led to women living almost 50 percent longer in 1990 than in
1920.13 What we have come to call male power, then, actually produced female
power. It literally gave women life. It was an almost all-female club that took the
first bus from the Industrial Revolution to the Fulfillment Revolution.
Men’s new role—performing away from home—is enough to lead either sex to
drugs, suicide, and accidents. The result is reflected in the song title “Only the Good
Die Young.” What two things do those who died young have in common? Think of
Jim Morrison, Jim Croce, Jimi Hendrix, John Belushi, Janis Joplin, Buddy Holly,
Charlie Parker, Patsy Cline, Elvis, Martin Luther King, and the Kennedys. They were
all good performers; and they all spent most of their lives away from home—
disconnected from their center, from their source of love. And in one way or another,
it killed them.
Industrialization made performing away from home the male role. The fact that
members of both sexes who performed away from home were vulnerable gives us a
clue as to the impact of role over biology.
Don’t women today perform away from home? Yes, but when the first child
comes, two thirds of working women do not return to the workforce for at least a
year.
14 Husbands suddenly support three people rather than one. Overall, women are
forty-three times more likely than men to leave the workforce for six months or
longer for family reasons.
15 It is the options that allow a woman to tailor her role
to her personality,whereas the male mandate—to work full time—does not allow
him flexibility to suit his personality. If he expects to provide well, he expects to
wear a suit, not to wear what suits him.
Why has the gap between women’s and men’s life span been reduced slightly
(from eight to seven years) between 1975 and 1990? In part because men’s health
habits are becoming more constructive, women’s more destructive. Thus women are
dying more from what the Chinese call “the disease of affluence”—breast cancer.
But women are also working more away from home and suffering the stress-related
diseases that go with the territory.
On the other hand, why has the gap not decreased even more? Because the husband
of even the full-time working woman still works nine hours more per week outside
the home and commutes yet another two hours more per week.16 Her equal work
burden still provides more balance between work and home. If her husband is
reasonably successful, she can tailor this balance not only to her personality but also
to her stage in life. Her greater options, greater balance, and greater connection to the
family still keep her alive seven years longer.
Industrialization, then, has broadened women’s options and deepened men’s
mold. Her juggling act allows her connection to everything; his intensifying act
creates disconnection from love. Both are better off than they were, but her
connection creates life, his disconnection creates death.
“Making a killing” on Wall Street thus became the updated version of the killerprotector: he still gets killed; she still gets protected. Or, more accurately, he
protects both of them better, but protects her much better than he protects himself.
THE GENETIC FACTOR
If men had genetically superior immune systems, this would be our rationale for
paying more attention to female health: “women are fragile; women need
protection.” However, women’s double-X chromosomes give them a kind of genetic
backup system.
17 That is, if a woman has a defective gene along one thread of her X
chromosome, the odds are very high that the matching gene on the other X will be
perfect.
18
 Men don’t have that backup system.
So while women have that initial advantage, it is not an all-encompassing
advantage. In birds, butterflies, and moths, it is the males who have this genetic
backup system and the males still die sooner.
19 And in humans, almost all premature
deaths after the first year are related to stress-induced diseases and pressures related
to men’s role—from suicides to heart attacks, from cancer to murder.
More powerfully, the vulnerability of men because of their social role cannot be
separated from their vulnerability because of their biology. For example, when men
reflexively rescue women, they are not only more likely to get physically stabbed,
shot, or punched but these rescuing behaviors generate “emergency hormones.” For
examples, testosterone is generated, but testosterone weakens his immune system;
20
adrenaline (or epinephrine) is generated, but adrenaline also causes his blood to be
more likely to clot, making him more vulnerable to heart failure.
Just as countries build missiles “just in case” and then find the cost of those
missiles has taxed their ability to strengthen themselves in other ways, men similarly
pay a biological price for their external role as women’s constantly available, unpaid
bodyguards.
WHY THE MALE ROLE IS SO LIFE DEPLETING
When boys and girls are young (1 to 4), boys die only slightly more frequently than
girls. Once adult sex roles are experienced—between ages 15 and 24—men die at a
rate more than three times that of women.21 The male role, then, might be thought of
as being about three times as life depleting for men as is the female role for
women.22 We discussed above how the need of boys to perform, pay, and pursue to
be equal to girls’ love led boys to anxiety that sometimes resulted in suicide. It also
leads to a series of coping mechanisms that prepare boys to die more quietly even as
they are succeeding more overtly. Two examples:
Male Pattern Flaw Finding
If you’ve ever had an adolescent son (or been one), you know a boy’s “best friend” is
the one with whom he trades “wit-covered put-downs.” Why is “the put-down trade”
the commerce of male adolescence? And why is this “male pattern flaw finding” so
damaging?
The put-down trade is our adolescent son’s rehearsal for taking criticism as an
adult. Taking criticism is a prerequisite to success. The upside is that it prepares men
to handle criticism at work and in their personal relationships without taking it
personally. The downside is the “hidden tax.”
The hidden tax? The New England Journal of Medicine has recently reported that
speaking about one’s faults creates abnormalities in the pulsations of our heart. Tiny
abnormalities? No. Abnormalities as great as those produced by riding a stationary
bicycle to the point of either exhaustion or chest pain.23 Perhaps the criticism, then,
contributes to men being four times more likely than women to suffer heart disease
before age fifty.24
 In essence, our sons might be practicing heart-disease training.
While men are bonding by giving each other criticism, women are bonding by
giving each other support. The price men pay is the feeling of isolation and
loneliness. Only now we are discovering that loneliness is a strong predictor of
heart disease.
25 Heart disease, then, is the hidden tax of the put-down trade. Male
pattern flaw finding becomes male pattern heart attacks.
Male Nurturance
In almost every men’s group I have formed, men discuss problems they face at work
—especially feelings of being unappreciated or criticized by bosses and colleagues.
If we ask a man whether he has discussed this with his wife or womanfriend, he
usually says he has, but only superficially. Why? He says he doesn’t want to worry
her.
Not worrying his wife about work fears is one of many male forms of nurturance
—protecting the woman he loves from insecurity. So he puts on a facade of security
that prevents him from asking for help through his deepest insecurities.
It is this male dilemma that creates the stress that silently damages men’s immune
systems. He might seek temporary satisfaction from a “substitute wife” (a second
woman, second job, second drink, or second needle). . . which is one reason he is
three times more likely than a woman to have a drinking problem.
26
If he doesn’t
turn to an escape, an escape turns to him: cancer, a heart attack . . .
Killing Him Softly
These coping mechanisms—or defense mechanisms—kill men a lot more softly than
in the past. Fewer men die in coal mines, more die inside when a lifetime of doing
everything he could to support a family leads to his income becoming an incentive
for his wife to leave him. When he sees his children walk out the door and be turned
against him, his spirit burns out as quickly as the flame of brandy on a cherries
jubilee.
When the demands to perform outpace the resources to perform, men become the
disposable sex:
No group of men is more a victim of the demands to perform without the
resources to perform than the black boy and his dad.
THE BLACK MALE: NOT-SO-BENIGN NEGLECT
The only group that can expect to live shorter lives in 1990 than in 1980 is black
men.32 Why? For starters, it is black men who experience the greatest gap between
the Stage I expectation to survive by being a physical slave and the Stage II need to
be a master of technology. Thus the black male now lives nine years fewer than the
black female.
33 Nevertheless, we hear more about the double jeopardy of racism and
sexism encountered by the black female.
More black males are in the prison system than are in the college system.
34 That
is, an incredible one out of four black males is either in jail, prison, on probation, or
on parole.
35 That’s almost 50 percent greater than the number in college.
36
 This does
not even come close to being true of black women. If it were, imagine the number of
job training, education, and rehabilitation programs we’d be sponsoring for black
women. The black male does not face double jeopardy, he faces quadruple jeopardy:
racism, sexism, antagonism, and neglect.
For different reasons, few whites or blacks are willing even to discuss how the use
of the black male as a field slave required a greater dependency on physical strength
for most black men than it did for most black women—and that it is physical
strength that current technology makes increasingly irrelevant. Similarly, when
white females or males worked hard, their families benefited. But when black
females or males worked hard, someone else benefited. So for the white person, hard
work meant survival; for the black slave, hard work meant the survival of someone
else—at the expense of self. Our unwillingness to discuss this has prevented us from
developing affirmative-action programs encouraging, for example black father-black
son businesses (rather than giving the black mother money to keep the father away
from the son).
The black man is sometimes called an endangered species but receives little of the
protection an endangered species is normally accorded. In regions where the owl is
endangered, we wouldn’t think of depriving the male owl of its children or the owl’s
children of their dad. Yet the U.S. government has a huge program that creates
exactly that outcome for the male human who is poor, and especially for the male
human who is black and poor. It is called Aid to Families with Dependent Children;
it deprives a family of aid if the dad is present, thus depriving the father of the two
most important incentives for living: love and feeling needed.
DOESN’T MEDICAL RESEARCH NEGLECT WOMEN?
The belief that sexism has led to a focus on men’s health at the expense of women’s
has led both the federal government and private industry to focus on women’s health
at the expense of men’s. Thus the government has recently established an Office of
Research on Women’s Health but no Office of Research on Men’s Health.37
It has
also established an Office of Minority Health that defines women as a minority,38
but no Office of Minority Health that defines men as a minority (due to only men
dying at a younger age from all fifteen of the major causes of death). The belief in
women’s neglect has led private hospitals and health-care companies to start
women’s health-care centers but almost no men’s health-care centers.
39 So let’s look
at the myths versus the realities.
Overall Myth. Less money and attention are given to female health than
male health.
Supporting Myth #1. “Less than 20 percent of the research budget of the
National Institutes of Health [NIH] is spent on women’s health.”40
Fact. No governmental agency focusing on health spends as much on men’s
health as on women’s health. The reason less than 20 percent of the research
budget of the NIH is spent on women’s health is because 85 percent of the
research budget is spent on nongender-specific health issues (or basic
science); 10 percent is spent on women’s health; 5 percent is spent on men’s
health. (This is the analysis of the NIH’s Office of Research on Women’s
Health.41
)
Supporting Myth #2. Sexism is the reason that more studies have been done
on men in almost all areas of medical research.
Fact. In a search of more than three thousand medical journals listed in Index
Medicus, twenty-three articles were written on women’s health for each one
written on men’s.
42
Fact/Perspective. With that larger picture in mind, it is true new products and
potentially dangerous drugs were often tested on prisoners. But this is
because we care less about prisoners; and they were often tried on men
because we care less about men. Similarly, sulfa drugs, LSD, and other
experimental research was often conducted by making guinea pigs of military
men. Did the men in the military get anything in return? Yes. Time off from
time which only men were required to serve. In brief, we do more research
on men in prison, men in the military, and men in general than we do on
women for the same reason we do more research on rats than we do on
humans.
Supporting Myth #3. If diseases were killing men as fast as breast cancer is
killing women, men would get the funding to solve the problem.
Fact. A woman is 14 percent more likely to die from breast cancer than a
man is from prostate cancer,
43 yet funding for breast cancer research is 660
percent greater than funding for prostate cancer research.44 The death-tofunding ratio is 47 to 1 in women’s favor.
Fact. The death rate for prostate cancer has grown at almost twice the rate of
breast cancer in the last five years.
45
Fact. Black men in the United States have the highest incidence in the world
of cancer of the prostate.
46
Supporting Myth #4. Virtually all of women’s health has been neglected—
from ovarian cancer to menopause. The neglect comes in both research and
treatment.
Fact. There is a neglect in research for women’s health such as ovarian
cancer and menopause that is now being remedied by the new Office of
Research on Women’s Health of the NIH; there is also a neglect in research
in the following seventeen areas of men’s health that is not being adequately
remedied by anyone:
A men’s birth control pill
Suicide
Posttraumatic stress syndrome
Circumcision as a possible trauma-producing experience
The male midlife crisis
Dyslexia
The causes of male violence
Criminal recidivism
Homelessness
Steroid abuse
Color blindness
Testicular cancer
Prostate cancer
Hearing loss over age 30
Sexual impotence
Nonspecific urethritis
Epididymitis (a disease of the tubes that transmit sperm)
Klinefelter’s disease, ALD, and other male-only inherited diseases
Fact. Men are more likely to suffer from mental illness; women are almost
twice as likely to be treated for mental illness.
47
Yes, there is a need for more research on women’s health—as there is a need for
more basic research and more research on men’s health. Yet all of these needs for
specific research must not be dictated so much by gender politics that the basic
research (DNA, cellular, transplant, etc.) gets neglected—research which can help
both sexes live longer. So how can we do it all? We can start by funding medical
researchers more than missile researchers.
Supporting Myth #5. Women are now as vulnerable as men to death from
heart attacks, but sexism is why only men have been studied.
First, the vulnerability to death from heart attacks. . . .
Fact. Compared to other diseases, heart attacks have now become the number
one killer of women. But men are still far more vulnerable to death from
heart attacks than women: before the age of 65, men still die from heart
attacks at a ratio of almost 3 to 1 vis-à-vis women.48 Even after the age of 85,
men’s death rate is still slightly higher.
49
Put another way, almost three quarters of women who die of heart
attacks are 75 or older.
50 By this time, the average man has been dead for
three years.
51
Second, concerning the cause célèbre of medical sexism—that only men had been
studied related to the effects of aspirin on heart attacks. . . .
Fact. Yes, there was a study on only male physicians on the effects of aspirin
on heart attacks.
52 And there was a simultaneous study conducted only on
female nurses (also on the effects of aspirin on heart attacks).
53 The press
touted only the male study as sexism. Yet the women’s study was longer in
duration and there were four women studied for each man.54
Would more research on why men die of heart disease so much earlier serve any
real purposes? Yes. For example, when men with heart attacks were randomly put
into two groups, one group experiencing group therapy, the other group not, the men
in therapy reversed coronary artery blockage; the men not in therapy experienced an
increase.
55
If heart attacks are induced by stress and reduced by stress control, we
need to know more about the types of stress that induce it and the types of therapy
that reduce it. The answers will help both sexes.
Nevertheless, one-sex studies—whether with the intent of preventing heart attacks
or preventing spouse abuse—should be rare. The rule of thumb for funding a one-sex
study should be to require proof that the other sex doesn’t need studying rather than
accepting the assumption that the other sex doesn’t need studying.
Supporting Myth #6. Sexism is the reason men with heart attack symptoms
are more likely to receive the most advanced tests and most effective
operations: coronary bypass and angioplasty.
Fact. Coronary bypass operations are more than twice as likely to lead to
death for women than for men.
56 Why? In part, because women as a group
have smaller coronary arteries which are more likely to close after the
operation.57 And in part because almost three quarters of women who have
heart disease are over 75 and are also much more likely to have cancer of the
breast or other complications that make the demands of surgery far more
likely to lead to death.58 As a result, a woman is more likely than a 60-yearold man to refuse a coronary bypass or angioplasty operation. Which is why
she is also less likely to ask for a costly and somewhat demanding diagnostic
test.
The policy of informed consent means the final decision is not the
doctor’s, but the patient’s—and these are the circumstances the patient
considers that lead to fewer tests and less surgery. To call the female
patient’s decision sexism is to call her stupid for saving her own life.
Fact. When age and other complicating factors (e.g., diabetes, hypertension,
obesity) are controlled for, there is no difference between the treatment of
men versus women with heart attacks.
59
In brief, medical research has been perhaps the single biggest contributor to
women’s life span increasing almost 50 percent since 1920. Medical research was
responsible for a female pill (but no male pill), fewer female deaths in childbirth,
and research on the diseases women once died of in equal numbers to men (TB,
diphtheria, polio). It is ironic that feminists are calling it sexism against women
when it is women’s lives that have gone from one year longer than men’s to seven
years longer than men’s. What would feminists be calling the medical community if
men lived longer? Or if women died at a younger age of every one of the fifteen
major causes of death?
THE POLITICS OF THE BREAST VERSUS THE POLITICS OF THE PROSTATE
Why does breast cancer receive over 600 percent more funding than prostate cancer
despite men being almost as likely to die from prostate cancer? Is it possible that we
pretty much know what we need to know about prostate problems? Let’s look.
ITEM. In the 1920s, a new operation for enlarged prostates replaced an old one.
For sixty years no one studied the records to determine whether the new
operation was as beneficial as the old one. When these studies were done,
they found the new operation resulted in a 45 percent greater chance of dying
in the five years after surgery. Finally, in 1989, seventy years later, the data
were published in the New England Journal of Medicine.
60
From prostate cancer research we know that a man with a vasectomy might be four
times more likely to have prostate cancer than a man without a vasectomy.61 A
similar connection has been found in mice. Despite these findings, the shortage of
research funds has not allowed scientists to explore whether prostate cancer is caused
by vasectomies or by something correlated with the vasectomy (e.g., testosterone
level).
Similarly, testicular cancer is one of the most common cancers in men 15 to 34.
When detected early, it has an 87 percent survival rate.
62 But it is only women whom
we educate to do early detection of their cancer:
63
If we educated men to go for routine rectal exams for prostate cancer prevention
and to do routine testicular self-exams—the way we educate women to do routine
breast self-exams—we would keep tens of thousands of men alive just as we are now
keeping tens of thousands of women alive. Supreme Court Justices Blackmun and
Stevens had their cancer of the prostate detected through just one of those routine
exams.
64
 They caught it in time to live.
WASN’T THE LACK OF RESEARCH ON THE PILL AN EXAMPLE OF NOT CARING
ABOUT WOMEN?
When birth control pills were available in Europe but not in the United States,
American women created an uproar about how the unwillingness to make the pill
available showed a contempt for the lives of women who might die in childbirth or
via abortions. But when the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released birth
control pills with dosages of hormones that were later found to be unnecessarily
high, they were attacked for not caring about women enough to do the necessary tests
to make the dosage level as low as possible.
65
In brief, when women’s lives were at stake we stumbled all over ourselves until
we were caught between a rock and a hard place. When men’s lives were at stake,
even readily available data sat dormant for more than half a century without a single
person studying it.
DON’T MALE DOCTORS TREAT MEN’S SYMPTOMS MORE SERIOUSLY?
The feeling that male doctors treat men more seriously seemed to have been
respectably documented when the Journal of the American Medical Association
(JAMA) reported on such a study conducted by Lawrence Schneiderman.66 But when
I spoke with Dr. Schneiderman, he explained that he had, in fact, done two studies:
one found that men were treated slightly more seriously; the second found no
difference. The first study not only made the prestigious JAMA but also received
wide media attention.67 The second was published in a small, nonprestigious journal
and was ignored by the media.
68
In the first study, though, the female patients had
visited the doctor 150 percent more often than the male patients; in the second study,
the female and male patients had visited the doctor equally as often.
Is it necessarily sexism that a doctor will treat a man more seriously? Not if men
are more likely to end up in the hospital,
69 more likely to die sooner of all fifteen
major causes of death, and less likely to seek help until the symptoms have reached
an advanced stage. Given that, the second study suggests that men get equal
treatment for worse problems. Which is really sexism against men.
None of this denies that many doctors are more sensitive to efficiency than to their
patients. Insensitivity is the shadow side of dealing daily with death. And there is no
doubt that patients feel more condescension than attention. Condescension is the
shadow side of protection. Do women get more condescension than men? Probably.
Women get more protection than men. And condescension is the shadow side of
protection. . . .
TOWARD SOLUTIONS
Although a government study found that men’s health was much worse than
women’s health or the health of any minority group, headlines around the country
read: “Minorities Face Large Health Care Gap.”70 They did not say: “Men Face
Large Health Care Gap.” Why? Because we associate the sacrifice of men’s lives
with the saving of the rest of us, and this association leads us to carry in our
unconscious an incentive not to care about men living longer. When that changes, the
government will be initiating searches for our POWs, not stonewalling searches. But
nothing will really change until we effect a disassociation.
If we care enough to start an Office of Men’s Health, will it really make any
difference? Yes. An Office of Men’s Health can introduce us to men’s problems we
haven’t even heard of. Remember the boy in grammar school or high school with
enlarged breasts and speech problems? In my school, the kids called a boy like this
“Blubber” and “Baby Huey.” But if he had Klinefelter’s disease, he had a
chromosomal condition (47 chromosomes instead of 46) that affects only boys (1 out
of every 400) and that also made him sterile. If this boy had Klinefelter’s, his parents
probably didn’t know it; neither did his teachers; neither did he. He needed those
who loved him to know how to love him, not to tell him to eat less or speak more
clearly. He needed a support group giving him love, not a peer group calling him
“Blubber.” I am sure he was left with a lifetime of psychological damage that each of
us could have helped him avoid. An Office of Men’s Health could have helped us
help him.*
* Until that time, contact Klinefelter Syndrome and Associates, Box 119, Roseville, CA 95661-0119.
A good education program could keep more men from dying of prostate cancer
each year than were killed each year in the Vietnam War.
71 And good research can
help us know to what degree the vasectomies that are linked to prostate cancer in
mice are also linked to prostate cancer in men.72
Although cancer of the testes is about ten times more likely to develop among men
whose testes descended into the scrotum after age 6, I have yet to meet a man who
knows at what age his testes had descended into his scrotum. Few men know that it is
relevant to know. And few mothers or fathers know enough to let their sons know.**
An Office of Men’s Health could provide this type of education, but not without
asking a few questions—such as, “Why do we show on TV a real woman’s breasts
and not even a pencil outline of a man’s penis and testicles?”
** If you wish to pursue this, call 1-800-4-CANCER and ask for “Testicular Self-examinations,” NIH
Publication No. 87-2636.
An Office of Men’s Health can pioneer suicide crisis hotlines nationwide, create
support networks for elderly men who are 1,350 percent more likely to commit
suicide than women their age, and education programs for high school guidance
counselors on the connections between adolescent male stress and adolescent male
suicide.
An Office of Men’s Health could educate men about why men are seven times
more likely than women to be arrested for drunk driving73 while only three times
more likely than women to be hospitalized for alcoholism.
74
We often interpret women’s increased drinking and smoking as reflections of
women’s increased stress level (which it often is) but rarely interpret the facts that
men are three times more likely to be alcoholics and more likely to die of lung
cancer as reflections of men’s continuing higher stress level. In brief, we keep
ourselves open to new ways of understanding (and helping) women, which is
wonderful, but fail to use the same mind-set to better understand (and help) men.
We have a choice. We can continue socializing our sons to fight our fires and be
amazed when they fight their feelings. Or we can reach out to counter boys’
socialization and the socialization of girls to love the boys who pay, perform, and
pursue; to stop subsidizing male child abuse in the form of football and calling it
education; to develop programs to prevent men from being 95 percent of the
prisoners and 85 percent of the homeless; to do for men what we would be doing for
women if women used to live one year less but now live seven years less, used to be
equal victims of the fifteen major causes of death and were suddenly the first victims
of every one of the fifteen major causes of death.
CHAPTER 8
The Insanity Track
A male said to me once after years of standing on the platform of the subway,
“I die a little bit down there every day, but I know I am doing so for my
family.”
—BILL MOYERS, coauthor, The Power of Myth
1
I’ve never done a single thing I’ve wanted to in my whole life.
—SINCLAIR LEWIS, Babbitt
What distinguishes the married male executive from the married female executive?
The higher up the married male executive goes, the less likely is his wife to work
outside the home. (Eighty-seven percent of wives of top executives [vice-president
and above] work inside the home, not outside the home.
2
) Conversely, almost all the
husbands of female executives work full time outside the home. So the married male
executive has a wife who is a financial burden. A married female executive has a
husband who is a financial buffer. The married male executive has more home
support from his wife, but he pays for that by treating his profession more as an
obligation; she has less home support, but she can treat her profession more as an
opportunity.
A man in one of my workshops put it this way: “When I was fired, the mortgage
payment became the mortgage nightmare. When my wife got sick and I hesitated—
just for a moment—to find the best and most expensive doctor, I felt guilty. And
when I saw my children say good-bye to their best friends because we had to move, it
broke my heart. Just days after I had watched them cry saying good-bye, I got a heart
attack.”
When we hear a female executive say, “What I need is a wife,” everyone says,
“Yeah!”; no one says, “Take on the financial burden of a husband and you’ll find a
‘wife.’ ” Or, “Just ask a man to be a househusband and you’ll find one.” In my
workshops, I have met thousands of men willing to parent, cook, manage the home,
and arrange the social life in exchange for the income of an executive woman he
loves. I meet few executive women volunteering to financially support these men.
And I see few ads in the personals saying, “Successful woman wants handsome
househusband.”
It is exactly, then, the tendency of a family to mean “financial burden” to an
executive man and “financial buffer” to an executive woman that leads to men being
more likely to fall into the “lawyer trap,” the “doctor-as-slave trap,” and the “paper
warrior” incinerator. . . .
The Lawyer Trap
ITEM. Forty-one percent of lawyers would enter another profession if they had
to do it all over again.3
ITEM. The alcoholism rate among lawyers is almost twice as high as among
the general population.4
Many lawyers enter law with the fantasy of becoming a Perry Mason. Instead they
become a paper mason. They expect to work with people. They become isolated from
people. They desire to be a legal pioneer. They become a legal prostitute.
Both male and female lawyers are much more likely to feel like prostitutes when
they work for corporations. One woman who quit being a corporate lawyer to become
a mountain trail guide put it like this: “Lawyers are trained to separate their feelings
from the position the client wants them to take, which serves you well as a lawyer,
but it is lousy for you as a human being.”5
While both sexes are disillusioned by this pioneer ideal and prostitute feel and
often face an $80,000 or so debt when they have completed law school, I’ve heard
only the younger male lawyers say what a friend of mine said: “I’ve always wanted
to enter public service law, but it pays so little; unless I go into corporate law, I’ll
never be able to get married and have kids.”
It has been my men friends, then, who have been most likely to succumb to the
bribe of big salaries and least likely to quit when they hated what they were doing.
When corporate law did not fit their personalities, the men were more likely to
change their personalities than to change their careers. This made them more
vulnerable to the lawyer trap: To earn the big salary, he has to bill clients for sixty to
eighty hours of work per week. But since many staff meetings and administrative
tasks are not billable to clients, the attorney’s real work week becomes seventy-five
to ninety hours.
6
 Thus, the lawyer trap.
The trap is also a setup for corruption. For example, when Anita Hill worked at a
private firm, she was suspected of falsifying time sheets and billing clients for work
she had not done. Why? A former colleague feels “she couldn’t meet the demands
placed on young associates at the firm.”7 She left to work for the government and
then a university—she was not supporting a man and children.
In their search for pay and respect, many lawyers find instead chest pains,
hypertension, arthritis, and insomnia—in their thirties. It is just this greater
willingness by men to prostitute themselves for the pay-and-respect bribe that makes
us think of a man when we hear a “lawyer joke.”
Doctor as Slave
ITEM. First-year residents in pediatrics and obstetrics averaged 90 hours per
week, with one in ten surgical residents exceeding 122 hours per week.8
ITEM. Medical residents in New York who are “on call” average 2.4 hours of
sleep per night.
9
When a young woman’s death in a New York hospital was attributed to mistakes
made by exhausted doctors, a state committee was appointed to determine whether
doctors’ long hours were jeopardizing patients.
10 The result after one female died?
New York became the first state in the nation to recommend limits for doctors’
hours: “no more than 24-hour shifts and 80-hour weeks.”11
In two lengthy New York
Times articles on the committee’s work, though, there was not one mention of how
the doctors’ long hours damaged the doctors’ lives, hurt their marriages,
deprived them of time with their children, or turned them into slaves.
A Central African legend illustrates the universality of the understanding that
training to be a medical doctor is done at the risk of one’s life. The legend goes . . .
Once upon a time there was a half-man: one-legged, one-armed, so onesided that, if viewed from the off-side, he was invisible. If he encountered
you, he would challenge you to a fight. You did not have to accept. And if you
did accept and lost, you would die. But if you accepted and won, he would
show you how to use so many medicines that you could become a proficient
doctor.
12
When I taught at the School of Medicine at the University of California in San
Diego a few years ago, I saw young, fresh, bright, first-year med students enter
medical school “on top of the world.” A few years later, most of the men were
drained, distant, and preoccupied. They had become half-men. Most of the women,
however, had become “three-quarter-women.” Why the difference?
First, with a few exceptions, most of the women in my classes, usually first-year
students, knew by the end of the first year that they would choose a field which (1)
created the fewest demands at odd hours and (2) gave them more contact with human
life than human death. Nationwide, this propensity leads female doctors to choose
fields such as child psychiatry or adult psychiatry; to avoid all surgical
specializations and all cardiovascular and pulmonary disease specializations.
13
In
brief, the women avoided becoming half-women by avoiding the fields that would
put them in constant contact with death or make them prisoners of other people’s
schedules. The men could learn from these women.
The male students were more likely to compete for the long-term, ideal position—
one giving them control over their lives as doctors. Since the competition for the
ideal positions was fierce, many men compromised, chose the contact-with-death
specialties, and worked 100-hour weeks, earning money that only their families
would have time to spend. In the process of gaining control of their lives as doctors,
they lost control over their lives as people.
Unfortunately, the process of gaining money in his life usually meant alienating
the wife in his life. Sometimes this leads to a legal divorce, but more often to a
psychological divorce. Which is why a survey of doctors’ wives reported in
Medical/Mrs found the doctors’ wives harboring hostility that was “stunning to
behold.”14 Yet the wives remained married to the doctors. Why? More than anything
else, the wives said, they wanted security from marriage. Apparently their husbands
picked up their wives’ desire for security more than their wives’ hostility toward the
persons who provided it. The men, then, were often prostitutes to an illusion of
emotional security. At least their wives had the reality of economic security.
The “Paper Warrior”
15
ITEM. The Japanese call it karoshi—death from overwork. In the past twenty
years in Japan, sudden deaths among top executives have increased 1,400
percent.
16
Drawing by Leo Cullum; © 1983 The New Yorker Magazine, Inc.
A survey by the Japanese government found that executives average seventy
hours per week: twelve-hour workdays, six days per week.17
It is not unusual for
these executives to go without a single vacation day.18
When I was in Japan, I discovered that the workday was only part of the work
assignment. The office-to-home commute usually exceeded an hour each way—
adding another ten hours to the seventy-hour week. More than 95 percent of the
people boarding commuter trains during rush hour and later were men. Dinner
meetings with clients, while on one level pleasant, rarely proved to be stress free
since a good impression could create a deal and a bad impression could break a deal.
How do Japanese executives prepare for this corporate subservience? A typical
Japanese executive training program is called “hell camp.”19 The executives are
asked to do things such as stand on their heads and shout a fifteen-page speech
backward. The executive does not graduate from hell camp until he passes through a
structure. “Passing” each step requires him to encounter a new set of humiliations.
Why does executive training look so much like subservience training? Is this
really big men playing little boys’ games? Does it have its equivalent in the United
States?
First, the purpose. Rent a video of Full Metal Jacket—a portrayal of life in the
U.S. Army, especially in boot camp. The sergeant humiliates the men, kicks them,
puts their lives at risk. Why? “Your purpose is not to be individuals—but to be a
machine.” A killing machine. A prerequisite is the devaluation of self: the man who
values himself will not risk death on the front line. Military boot camp is America’s
hell camp.
On a gut level, we have less trouble associating this subservience with army
privates than with Japanese executives. Yet the similarity between hell camp and
boot camp is that they both turn men into efficient “machines” by devaluing them as
humans, thus making the male-as-individual subservient to either the corporate goal
or the military goal.
What strikes us about the differences between the men in boot camp and the top
male executives, though, are the perks, status, and income. These are really bribes
for the individual to sacrifice individuality. The more the corporation or the army
trusts an individual to serve its end consistently and intelligently, the more it gives
that person perks, status, and income. Many men interpret this as standing out as an
individual when, in fact, they stand out for their superior performance as a piece of
the machinery.
The irony is that he is being honored as an individual for conformity to a
group. The army uniform, the corporate uniform, the academic uniform, all
represent his conformity. Whether a promotion or a Purple Heart, each
represents individual recognition for a superior level of conformity—a superior
subservience to a larger machine. Within this framework he might make effective
decisions, take total responsibility, and lead well, but he leads well because he knows
the rules for leadership, and those he leads know the rules to follow. But the rigidity
of the framework is what makes his individuality more akin to subservience. And in
the process, men who reach high levels are often “high-level mediocres.”
Playing boys’ games is preparation for making their lives secondary to their roles.
Put-downs, hazing, and daring each other to take risks—even of life—are preparation
for the devaluation of self necessary to make a boy regard his life as less important
than his role. First, his role in sports (basketball and ice hockey players are injured
even more than football players), then in an army, a company, an academic
institution. . . . And gangs? Just poorly financed football teams. Male adolescence is
a universal male boot camp.
Is it, then, men playing boys’ games or . . . boys playing men’s games?
SAVING THE “PAPER WARRIOR” FROM HIMSELF
The “paper warrior” is a prisoner of approval. He rarely changes until his marriage
fails or his career fails. The moment his career fails, he is dumped back out into a job
market which demands he work even harder to prove himself again (after all, he has
just failed). The moment his marriage fails, he gets dumped back out into the meat
market where he finds himself valued more if he’s a top corporate lawyer than if he’s
a kindergarten teacher. His periods of self-determination are short-lived. He is
vulnerable to hints to remain “driven.”
And do we give those hints! Try to find a couch in a men’s room. (Only once in
my life have I seen so much as a chair in a men’s room—even at exclusive hotels.)
Try to find a national leader who admits he takes naps. Why? We ridiculed Ronald
Reagan for taking naps rather than applauding him. Ironically, Nancy Reagan
explained in her memoirs that he did not take naps and that it was a struggle just to
get him to stretch out on a couch and rest even during long flights. She said, “I could
never understand where this idea came from, because the press received a copy of his
schedule every day, and knew he didn’t come back for a nap.”20
Didn’t Reagan gain his reputation in part from “nodding off” in public meetings?
Yes, in part. But Nancy Reagan explains, “It is true that Ronnie once nodded off
during a public meeting with the Pope in 1982. . . . He got almost no sleep that night,
and early the next morning we flew to Rome, where we drove straight to the Vatican
for the meeting with the Pope.”21
The point? We don’t subject housewives to national ridicule for taking naps
during the day. Why not encourage the “executive nap” and the “employee nap.”
The One-Minute Manager could use a Five-Minute Nap. Or a meditation room next
to the exercise room. Some Japanese companies provide workers with glassenclosed
capsules that surround them with darkness and soothing music. “When time is up,
the worker’s face is blasted with cold air and he is sent back to work.”22
(The cold
air I can do without, but the nap . . .)
Ultimately, though, only the paper warrior can save himself from the “insanity
track.” Women can help by altering their system of approval—by “marrying down”
as often as they “marry up.” But realistically few women will change if men are too
weak to ask.
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN MEN “JUST SAY NO” TO PROVIDING A FINANCIAL
WOMB?
ITEM. Black men, Indian men, and gay men have the toughest time among
American males. And they all have something in common: they do not
provide an economic security blanket for women.
The Men Who Couldn’t Protect Her: The Black and
Indian Man
Indian men could not adequately protect their food, water, and land from white
invaders. Despite legends and myths that trained the Indian man to sacrifice himself,
when legends, bows, and arrows could not keep up with technology, guns, and
bullets, his family was confined to the reservations of their defeat. Unable to protect
by killing buffalo or by “making a killing” on Wall Street, the Indian man became
disposable. He received little love and, with little love, found much liquor.
Similarly, as those black men with a slave heritage entered an industrialized era
without adequate training to protect their families, they were also rejected by
women. Only the black male performers—usually physical performers such as the
Wilt Chamberlains and Magic Johnsons—found thousands of women. Black men
who could not perform were subject to ridicule in novels and films (e.g., The Color
Purple, The Women of Brewster Place).
As a result of this inadequate preparation to protect, many African-American men
often chose aberrant, quick fix, lotterytype attempts to “make it”—via drug dealing,
gambling, or the lottery itself. When these methods failed to bring them the money
to protect, they, as with Indian men, found themselves inadequate for women’s love,
gambling for a last hope of love, and, if they failed, drugging themselves to death.
The Men Who Wouldn’t Protect Her: The Gay Man
The ostracism incurred for being a gay man runs deeper than it does for being black
or Indian. Black men and Indian men who could not provide adequate protection for
women at least wanted to protect women—they just didn’t do it well enough. Gays,
though, weren’t even trying to take care of women. So we called their unwillingness
to protect women “immorality.” And we ostracized them—as in cutting them off
from survival. Like witches, we called them heretics. The very word faggot means a
bundle of sticks that were burned in the fire. When homosexuals were burned at the
stake as heretics, they were called “faggots.”23
Why? Well, think about it. Gay sex meant two hours of sexual pleasure in
exchange for two hours of sexual pleasure. Heterosexual sex meant two hours of
sexual pleasure in exchange for a lifetime of responsibility. Heterosexuality was a
bad deal! The fear behind homophobia was that no one would be providing for the
next generation. Everybody would be having fun. Thus “fun” became a sign of
immaturity; “hedonism” in many forms became illegal. Most cultures, then,
tolerated homosexuality only when they were no longer worried about survival (e.g.,
the United States middle class after World War II and the Greeks and Romans once
they had the security of an empire).
Do we actually care less about the lives of men who are unwilling to reproduce
and to protect? Our initial lack of attention to AIDS—until it became apparent that
heterosexuals were also at risk—makes our attitude quite transparent.
The Men Who Fail to Protect Her: The Homeless Man
ITEM. Ninety-six percent of the adult homeless in San Francisco are men.24
 In
other cities it is less—a median of 85 percent men.25
ITEM. There are three times as many homeless men living on the streets by
themselves as there are homeless children, adolescents, and adult women
combined who are living on the streets by themselves.
26
Single Individual Homeless Living on the Streets by Themselves
Children or adolescents (19 or younger) 6%
Adult women 20%
Adult men 74%
When we think of the homeless, we often think of a woman and her children. In
fact, nationwide, only 16 percent of the homeless are in a family group of any type.
27
And even when family groupings are counted, there are still more single men among
the homeless than there are children, single women, married women, or married men
combined.
28
We also tend to think of homeless families being the worst off, but studies of the
homeless find that they are treated the best—the most likely to be sheltered, fed, and
reemployed. By far the worst off are the single individual homeless.
29
When I have delivered food and clothing to the homeless, I was struck by the
degree to which the street homeless—the unsheltered homeless—were men and
boys. I can still remember one of these men shivering and cuddling his four children
on a filthy mattress. His one coat was used to cover his two youngest children. When
I lived in New York, I can remember a man competing with a rat for garbage, his
freezing hand sorting out wilted lettuce from baby diapers and tampons.
Almost every report on the homeless has a sentence like this one (from an official
report on California’s homeless): “While women are a small part of the homeless
(estimated at 10 percent in California), they face special problems.”30 Which is fine.
But there was no section on the problems men face.
Homeless men are not just without a home, they are without love and virtually
without hope of finding love as long as they are homeless. Many once had homes,
children, and a wife, but when they lost their ability to protect, they also lost
everyone they loved. On the street, they joined an almost all-male club.
Why do we resist giving help to homeless men? In part because we don’t
understand how our pressure on men to support families often forces men to take
transient jobs that are but a step away from homelessness (the death-of-a-salesman
jobs, the migrant worker jobs, the merchant marine jobs, the trucker, the road and
railroad builders . . .). And in part because we respond differently to men who fail. . .
.
Do We React Differently When a Man and a Woman
Fail to Protect?
Remember when almost all the homeless were men? We called them “bums.” Then
some women appeared. We called the women “bag ladies.” When about 15 percent
were women, we called them all “homeless” and we suddenly began to care. This
distinction—between “bums” and “bag ladies”—is only a metaphor for the
difference in our attitude toward men who fail versus women who fail.
ITEM. When a male captain failed to control his ship and the resultant oil spill
destroyed wildlife, the names Exxon Valdez and Captain Joseph Hazelwood
became infamous. Captain Hazelwood was put on trial, fined, and
imprisoned. He became the pitiful butt of jokes by Johnny Carson and Jay
Leno. His drinking was highlighted. The fact that a sudden schedule change
had pushed an exhausted captain and crew back to sea and into a ruined career
was ignored.
ITEM. When a female air traffic controller failed at her job and the resultant
air crash killed thirty-four humans (not wildlife), her colleagues took her to a
hotel to shield her from publicity. They spent days comforting her. Instead of
being the butt of jokes, she received humor therapy, paid for by taxes.
31
Rather than sue her, the Federal Aviation Administration provided her with a
counselor. Instead of publicizing her name, the National Transportation
Safety Board cooperated in keeping her identity secret from the public.
32 To
this day, her name remains virtually unknown.
Headlines in papers from the Los Angeles Times to The New York Times focused
on her grief, not the grief of the families of those killed or the ruined lives of those
injured.
To this day, I have yet to see an article focusing on Captain Hazelwood’s grief. I
am a strong supporter of the humor therapy the government supplied the woman, but
I can also imagine the public’s response had the government trained Captain
Hazelwood to laugh after Exxon Valdez. When a man fails to protect, we persecute
the man; when a woman fails to protect, we protect the woman. We care, in brief,
about female grief.
IF MEN EXPERIENCE BEING FIRED AS BEING RAPED, DO THEY EXPERIENCE
THE BOSS WHO FIRES AS A RAPIST?
If being fired or involuntarily unemployed is the male version of rape,* then the boss
who fires an employee is unconsciously experienced as a type of rapist. Because this
boss is usually a man, millions of men who fire a few to save the jobs of many feel
they are one part rapist and one part savior. Because few people understand the
manager’s internal conflict, the manager feels isolated, lonely, even alienated from
parts of himself. A setup for alcoholism.
* See chapter 6, section titled Is Unemployment to a Man the Psychological Equivalent of Rape to a Woman?
His drinking usually leads to others attacking him for his drunkenness. Friends
often try to hear his problem but, because he can’t articulate what he doesn’t
understand, both he and his friends feel helpless.
In most areas of life, we can turn to education to deepen understanding. But most
executives discover the academic community also views the executive who fires as a
type of rapist, although the academic’s anger is disguised in ideas. Thus Marxist
ideology—lamenting, in essence, the rape of the working class—might be the
academic’s way of disguising his anger toward the executive who fires.
Some solutions? First, understand that the manager who fires is usually just
playing out the downside of the savior role—saving the jobs of many by keeping the
company competitive and therefore alive. Second, develop employee transition
programs to assist the employee in his or her retraining for a new career opportunity.
Third, develop industry-wide manager transition programs to help these managers
feel as valuable to a sick company as surgeons feel to a sick person.
TOWARD THE SANITY TRACK
The Warrior of Love Vs. the Warrior of Money
Men’s immediate path from the Insanity Track to the Sanity Track
33
 is in demanding
that both sexes have the freedom to strike a balance between homeplace and
workplace. Men must expect their wives to financially support them to be fathers as
much as they now financially support their wives to be mothers. Women must have
our approval to marry the warrior of love rather than the warrior of money. This
means that men must be strong enough to speak up to women who refer to a man
primarily as a financial identity. For example, when a woman says, “I just met this
wonderful lawyer . . . ,” men must have the guts to ask, “How often have you said I
just met this wonderful father’?” or “How would you feel if I said I just met this
wonderful, large-breasted woman’?”
We can also learn a lot from some workplace changes that have evolved since
women’s participation increased. For example, when psychologists and psychiatrists
were mostly males, five to twelve years of postgraduate work were required. When
more women entered therapy professions, two to three years of training became
acceptable for MSWs and MFCCs. Within a decade, insurance companies loosened
their restrictions and were covering MSWs with only a two-year degree and a year of
training. If the reverse had been the case, we would have heard of “the sudden
loosening of restrictions when men entered the field—typical of a male-dominated
system.”
Female participation, though, has made both therapy and other fields more
flexible. As women entered medicine, states began placing limits on the numbers of
hours doctors could work for the first time. In the therapeutic community, therapists
can now work as few as five hours a week. Fields that male therapists would not
permit for themselves were quickly allowed once women entered—massage therapy,
sex therapy, addiction therapy, feminist therapy. Both clients and therapists
benefited from the choices. When it was predominantly a male profession,
psychiatrists’ suicide rate was high, and even 46 percent of the less pressured clinical
psychologists acknowledged by the 1970s that if they had to live their lives over
again, they would choose different careers.
34 The entrance of females, flexible work
hours, and less training made “career track” compatible with “sanity track.”
As females enter the workplace, will our tendency to protect women create rules
that will also protect men? Yes and no. Yes, when, for example, the new concern for
doctors working fewer than eighty hours per week also affects men. No, when
working-class jobs get divided into the males taking the hazardous jobs at
inconvenient times in locations like Alaska and women taking safer jobs at
convenient times in locations like Santa Fe and Santa Barbara. And in professional
careers, if males take irregular hours and specialties such as surgery, while females
take regular hours and specialties like psychiatry, then we will only reinforce the
female-protected class and the male-disposable class.
CHAPTER 9
Violence against Whom?
ITEM. For every woman who is murdered, three men are murdered.1
ITEM. With the exception of rape, the more violent the crime, the more likely
the victim is a man.2
ITEM. Males are the primary victims of all violent crimes except rape. These
violent crimes (excluding rape) have increased by 36 percent.
3 Rape, the one
violent crime in which females are the primary victims, has decreased by 33
percent.
4
ITEM. Forcible rape constitutes less than 6 percent of all violent crimes;
violent crimes of which men are the primary victims constitute the remaining
94 percent.
5
ITEM. The average American has 1 chance in 153 of being murdered; a black
man has 1 chance in 28 of being murdered.6
ITEM. When the Department of Justice conducted a nationwide survey, it
found that Americans rated a wife stabbing her husband to death as 41
percent less severe than a husband stabbing his wife to death.7
ITEM.Wives report that they were more likely to assault their husbands than
their husbands were to assault them. (This according to the National Family
Violence Survey’s nationwide random sampling of households.
8
)
ITEM. Blacks are six times more likely than whites to be victims of
homicides.
9 Forty-five percent of black males will become victims of violent
crime three or more times.
10
AREN’T MEN THE PERPETRATORS OF THIS VIOLENCE, AND ISN’T THIS
VIOLENCE A REFLECTION OF MALE POWER?
We have no problem seeing this last Item as a reflection of black powerlessness; but
we rarely see men’s greater likelihood of being victims of violence as a reflection of
male powerlessness. When we hear men are the greater victims of crime, we tend to
say, “Well, it’s men hurting other men.” When we hear that blacks are the greater
victims, we consider it racist to say, “Well, it’s blacks hurting blacks.” The victim is
a victim no matter who the perpetrator was.
But why do men commit most of the violent crime? Is it a reflection of male
power? Hardly. Blacks do not commit proportionately more crimes than whites
because blacks have more power. Flint, Michigan, gives us a clue.
In the mid-1980s, Flint was faced with the closing of a number of General Motors
plants, forcing 30,000 auto workers to leave the area and leaving numerous others
unemployed.11 By 1985, a town formerly low in its crime rate reported huge
increases not only in suicides and alcoholism, but in spouse abuse, rape, and murder.
Flint soon had a higher rate of violent crime than New York City. And it reported
285 rapes in 1985, a staggering figure for a city of 150,000.
What does this tell us? It gives us a hint that murder, rape, and spouse abuse, like
suicide and alcoholism, are but a minute’s worth of superficial power to compensate
for years of underlying powerlessness. They are manifestations of hopelessness
committed by the powerless, which is why they are acts committed
disproportionately by blacks and by men.
Crime, especially crime involving money, reflects the gap between the expectation
to provide and the ability to provide.
12 Thus women who work and earn enough to
meet their expectations rarely commit crimes. But women who are working and not
meeting expectations do commit more crime.
If we really want men to commit crime as infrequently as women, we can start by
not expecting men to provide for women more than we expect women to provide for
men.
OUR MOST INVISIBLE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
ITEM. In the riots resulting after the Rodney King verdict, police officers
killed ten people. All ten were men.15 Had all ten been blacks or Hispanics or
women, would it have gone unnoticed?
Why was the man as victim invisible? In part because the social expectation that
the man—not the woman—loots the store is also invisible. Did fewer women steal
because women are more moral? Not quite. First, thousands of women also looted—
but none were killed by police. Second, few men bring home a stolen TV if they
know their wife won’t watch it. Third, when blacks and Hispanics looted after the
Rodney King verdict, both political parties sensed it was at least in part because the
poor felt less hope and had less power. But the fact that men did most of the looting
led no one to conclude that men felt less hope and had less power.
Choking the Teacher
A 17-year-old Michigan high school student attempted to choke a male teacher.
16
Afterward, teachers got no additional protection.
Two months later, a 14-year-old attempted to choke a female teacher—in the same
school. The school immediately withdrew all female teachers from the school,
reducing the staff from twenty-one to nine. Now here’s the rub. The male teachers
were still expected to remain but now they had to handle classes that were more than
twice the size. The larger the class size, the greater the chance of violence.
Protecting every woman put every man in jeopardy—without the men’s consent.
Corporal Punishment as Boy Punishment
Corporal punishment in schools is still legal in twenty-nine states.
17 But in most
school districts practicing corporal punishment, a teacher who slaps a girl with a
ruler fears a parent will slap the teacher with a lawsuit. And a male teacher who
spanks a girl with his hand can forget about tenure or retirement pay. In practice,
corporal punishment is boy punishment. Many schools protest the propensity to
hit black boys more than white boys, but no schools protest the propensity to hit
exclusively boys. We don’t protest violence against boys because it is invisible.
The Invisible Sexual Abuse
When we think of sexual abuse of children, most of us think of girl children as the
victim about nine out of ten times. In reality, it is one boy to 1.7 girls.
18 We usually
think of the sexual abuser as a man. In reality, girls’ abusers are usually men, boys’
abusers are usually women—mothers, older sisters, female babysitters, and older
female relatives.
19 We cannot discover this by polling child-abuse centers. Polling
child-abuse centers will always uncover more girls because, when girls are abused,
we offer them help. It is only when we poll both sexes equally as adults and ask them
parallel questions about their childhood that the abuse against both sexes becomes
visible.
Why do we overlook men who need help—be they the victims of sexual abuse,
spouse abuse, PTSD, or prostate cancer, or the 85 percent male homeless?
Historically, woman-as-victim attracts men; man-as-victim repulses women.
Even today, when a woman’s tire goes flat, she will suddenly allow a strange man off
the highway an opportunity to help her. If his tire goes flat, she rarely stops to help a
man, despite the opportunity she’s had to look him over first.
CALVIN AND HOBBES 1986 copyright Watterson. Dist. by UNIVERSAL PRESS SYNDICATE.
Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved
Men will make progress to the degree society understands that the attraction to
woman-as-victim is a reflection of male low self-concept: a feeling that a man is
worthy of a woman only if he can do something for her—that he is conditionally
visible.
The “War against Women”?
. . . attitudes toward women help breed violent crimes against them and can
rob them of full equality in American life. . . . It is unthinkable that my
granddaughters not have the same opportunity as my grandsons. . . . This war
against women must stop.
—PRESIDENT BUSH, June 26, 1989, to the American Association of University
Women
20
The headlines after President Bush’s speech read “The War on Women Must
Stop.”21
Imagine President Clinton delivering the following speech to an American
Association of University Men (which, of course, would no longer be allowed to
exist):
My fellow Americans . . .
. . . attitudes toward boys help breed violent boys who become violent dads
and husbands. So Hillary and I are asking, “Why do we cheer for our sons to
be violent and then put them in jail when they grow up to be violent?”
It is immoral to use our education dollars to train our sons to play “smash
face,” er, pardon me, football, in junior high school.
22 To tell boys this age
we will applaud for you if you mutilate yourselves is not education, it is child
abuse. And to give that message only to boys is sexism that deprives our sons
of the right to choose. When Hillary and I see how our cheers encourage boys
to swallow their fears and repress their tears, we realize it is time to repress
our cheers so our boys can express their fears.
Football scholarships are mutilation scholarships. If cheerleaders were as
likely as football players to have herniated disks and dislocated shoulders,
fractured vertebrae and damaged knees that haunted them into old age, would
we be using taxpayer money to support cheerleading? Even Hillary doesn’t
think so.
We feel it is immoral to teach our sons to increase their sex appeal by
increasing their risk of concussions. Would we encourage girls to increase
their sex appeal by using their bodies—by having sex on the fifty-yard line
with boys from another school? Which of us would yell, “First of ten, do it
again”? Oh, my . . . Our men will become gentler when cheerleaders are
shouting, “First and ten, be gentle again.”
Hillary and I realize football is only a metaphor for preparing our sons to
be sixteen times as likely as our daughters to die at work; for preparing only
your 18-year-old son to register for the draft. We realize we can no longer
claim to favor equality between the sexes and then make your sons the
disposable sex.
So I am introducing today the ELA: the Equal Life Amendment. None of us
can tolerate being part of a country that robs men of an equal life.
This war against our sons must stop. It is America’s longest war. And it is
preparation for nuclear war. It is our most unrecognized domestic violence.
And it is preparation for future domestic violence.
—PRESIDENT CLINTON, June 26, the future American Association of
University Men convention
WHEN VIOLENCE AGAINST MEN DOES BECOME VISIBLE. DO WE STILL
IGNORE IT?
ITEM. When a female jogger in Central Park in 1989 was raped and
brutalized,23 “Take Back the Night” demonstrations were nationwide. The
solution? A headline in an Ellen Goodman column read “Safety for Women?
Try Removing Men.”24
ITEM. When a male jogger in Central Park in 1989 was hospitalized after
being brutally beaten on the head with a club, he reported the incident to the
police.
25 Coincidentally, he had witnessed two similar incidents of men being
kicked, punched, or beaten in Central Park within the previous month. He had
also reported both of those incidents to the police. He later called the police
to see how many such attacks had occurred in the previous two months. He
was told there had been none at all.
Our anger toward men as victimizers blinds us to men as victims. The attacks the
male jogger reported—all attacks on men—were never acknowledged as even having
occurred. If a woman had reported three separate rapes to the police and not a single
one was even acknowledged as having been reported—much less investigated—it
would be hard to imagine the degree of outrage. When crimes against women are
more readily recorded, crimes against women become more readily visible.
Violent crimes against innocent women create distrust toward innocent men.
Every man who invites a woman back to his home has to risk rejection not only
because he is expected to do the asking but because the rape she just read about or
heard about adds to her likelihood of rejecting him. He is tainted with suspicion even
if he himself has also been victimized by other men or been injured while protecting
women.
WHAT DO WE CALL VIOLENCE AGAINST AN INFANT BOY?
I saw them strap my son spread-eagle and put this steel thing on his penis.
As soon as I heard my boy scream, I knew it was very wrong. I’ve never
heard a kid cry like that before. I’ll never forget it.
26
When we commit violence against an infant girl, we call it child abuse; when we
commit violence against an infant boy, we call it circumcision. Circumcision is
America’s most common surgical procedure.
27 The need to remove the foreskin on
an infant boy’s penis has been rejected by almost all other medically advanced
countries: Norway, France, Sweden, England, Denmark, Japan, and Finland. The
circumcision rate in Britain has plummeted from 50 percent in 1950 to less than 0.5
percent today.28
Circumcision in the United States is routinely performed without anesthesia.
29
Yet, as the New England Journal of Medicine reports, when newborns receive
anesthesia to protect them from pain during surgery, it dramatically improves their
chances of surviving.30 The anesthesia reduces the infant’s stress and prevents
infection and blood clots.
Do babies who are being circumcised actually feel the pain? According to the
Journal of the American Medical Association, babies being circumcised cry
vigorously and experience “dramatic changes in heart and respiratory rates, and in
transcutaneous oxygen and plasma cortisol levels.”31
If babies make it through this initial period of trauma, what is the long-term
impact? Unstudied. We also don’t have clear enough data on the conditions under
which circumcision might help prevent or cause cancer, and prevent or cause
infection. As a result, we have to rely on indirect data, such as our knowledge that
other newborn traumas, such as incubator isolation, do seem to affect later
development and behavior.
32
 Or the fact that the lack of circumcision has not seemed
to lead to infection, hygiene problems, or cancer in Canadian and Australian men.33
But the lack of information leaves us less than certain, and this ignorance persists
despite the fact that a nationwide study on the long-term impact of male
circumcision could be conducted for less than it cost us to conduct any two minutes
of the Persian Gulf War.
34
Perhaps the biggest setback to the questioning of circumcision occurred when a
study found that wives of uncircumcised men had more cervical cancer than wives of
circumcised men.35 This study received enormous publicity.36 When two follow-up
studies refuted the female-as-victim perspective, both received almost no
publicity.37
The most frequent reason given for circumcision relates to health and sanitation. It
is definitely true that circumcision reduces the necessity for cleaning; an intact penis
will have more smegma appearing on the outside of the penis, requiring a gentle soap
and water washing. But the smegma is a natural lubricant, like body and hair oils. In
countries where an intact penis is the norm, a boy learns to clean his penis just like
he learns to wash his hair, take a bath, or clean under his fingernails. No one suggests
removing the fingernails so cleaning will not have to be done.
Edward Wallerstein, probably the country’s most knowledgeable urologist on
circumcision issues, explains that almost every reason used for circumcision could
also be used to justify removing a girl’s clitoral hood.38 Females produce smegma
identical to males’ under their clitoral hood, the female equivalent of the tip of the
penis. As a result, dirt and germs, as well as odor and infection, can occur if it is not
cleaned. But we do not circumcise the female’s clitoral hood to prevent smegma
secretion.
When circumcision of the clitoral hood is done in some African tribes, we see it as
a barbaric example of our disregard for women. Yet in the United States, when the
same surgery is performed on boy infants, we call it healthy. Rabbis often justify
continuing the tradition of circumcision on the eighth day for health reasons. But if a
boy dies before the eighth day, circumcision is performed before he is buried—after
he is dead. Obviously it is not for health reasons. Something else is going on.
Were we to still be circumcising the hood of the female clitoris, we would not
have difficulty considering this a continuation of our tradition to keep girls sexually
repressed. America’s reflexive continuation of circumcision-without-research
reflects the continuation of our tradition to desensitize boys to feelings of pain, to
prepare them to question the disposability of their bodies no more than they would
question the disposability of their foreskins.
VIOLENCE AGAINST MALE ADULTS BY ANY OTHER NAME IS . . .
ITEM. A Coke ad shows a man willing to “go for the Coke” at the risk of a
shark’s fin slicing through his testicles as it simulates a buzz saw.
Coca-Cola knew that only a man’s life was worth, well, a little bit less than a
Coke!
The average American child watches more than 40,000 people killed on TV prior
to high school graduation—before the age of consent.
39 Of those killed on TV
entertainment programs, about 97 percent are men.40 Yet the feminist slogan is
“There is never an excuse for violence against women.”
Why does the percentage of men killed seem a little exaggerated? In part, because
when almost 100 percent men are killed in westerns and war movies, we don’t call
westerns “violence against men”—we call them “entertainment.” And in part
because entire programs often focus on a woman’s life being in jeopardy, leaving us
with the emotional impression of violence against her.
When a woman is so much as wounded, as in the 1992 western Unforgiven, the
entire film focuses on punishing those who hurt her. About a dozen men are killed in
the process of teaching two men that a woman had better not be hurt. (Notice I said
“about a dozen”—the men who died were less visible than the one woman hurt.) In
woman-in-jeopardy films, the woman is typically saved while many men die
saving her. A man who puts a woman in jeopardy is Unforgiven. Because a woman
in jeopardy is unforgotten. The men dead from attempting to save her are forgotten.
So the 97 percent of men killed are invisible.
Do American Films Exploit Violence against Women?
It is tempting to answer, “No, American films exploit violence against both sexes,”
but that’s not quite fair. What is fair is that while our attention has been called to
violence against women in film, approximately 95 percent of those killed in movies
are men.41As with TV, not only are the westerns and war movies virtually orgies of
men killing other men, but so are murder mysteries and women-in-jeopardy films.
And think of who gets killed in Good-fellas, West Side Story, Boyz ’n the Hood,
Hoffa, or in any film on the mob or on gangs. All six of these film types persist
because we repeatedly pay to watch men murder men—and even boys murder boys.
In contrast, the unwritten, unconscious rule of thumb in the movie industry is that
“Innocent women don’t get killed after their third appearance.” Here’s how the rule
works. (But beware; once you read this, you will be able to predict the outcome of
almost any fictional woman-in-jeopardy movie.)
As a rule, a woman will not be killed unless:
It is a horror movie (killing a man is not horrible enough to make it a horror
movie).
She is shown to not be a “real woman,” thereby undoing her special right as a
woman to protection. That is, she is an alien (e.g., Aliens, Bladerunner); she has
all the negative characteristics of a man (Aliens); or she is an out-and-out
protagonist who is clearly crazy and a murderer (e.g., Misery, Fatal Attraction).
She threatens the life of an innocent woman (Shining Through, Fatal Attraction,
and Total Recall).
She has been seen in no more than three scenes (we have not gotten to know her
—she is not a “real woman” to us).
The rest of the movie is focused on avenging her death (Death Wish), making it,
in essence, a morality film showing us that a woman killed leads to a man
killed.
In contrast, in the woman-in-jeopardy movie, it is not just the life of the man who
puts the woman in jeopardy that is expendable, it is also the lives of innocent men.
For example, in Silence of the Lambs, the fact that a man had killed women off
screen and there was the possibility of a woman being killed on screen created the
excuse to have us watch on screen the murder of many innocent men (the prison
guards), but no women.
The innocent prison guards were not just mutilated heartlessly and thoroughly,
they were murdered incidentally. Their mutilation was a plot additive—as invisible
as salt, serving only as spice for the main dish of concern for Jodie Foster. Were
innocent women prison guards murdered, it would never have been as a plot additive.
Only the murder of men can be as invisible as salt. Had this unspoken rule been
broken and innocent women been killed as an additive, we can predict that the
outrage would have made the film so politically incorrect as to prevent it from
making a sweep of the Academy Awards.
Overall, then, women-in-jeopardy movies are often an excuse for kill-the-man
movies.
What happens if a novel violates the “innocent women don’t get killed after their
third appearance” rule of thumb? We can predict two things: (1) the novel will not be
made into a film and (2) if any violence is protested, only the violence against
women will be protested. For example, the novel American Psycho involved the
graphic murder of men, women, and a boy (it featured the deaths of eight men and a
little boy, including the actual murder of three of those men and the little boy).
42
Hundreds of nationwide protests and articles focused only on its violence against
women. We can predict the novel will not be made into a major American film,
much less be eligible for Academy Awards.
Women-in-jeopardy movies are, in essence, the updated versions of men dying to
save the princess from the dragon to earn her love. They are modern-day training
films for teaching women to select the best protectors while weeding out the rest.
And then we call the woman “victim” and the man “powerful.”
Violence against Men As Women’s Liberation
Thelma and Louise was widely touted as a film of women’s liberation. (It was, for
example, the only film celebrated by the National Organization for Women at its
twenty-fifth convention.) Never in American history have two men been celebrated
as heroes of men’s liberation after they deserted their wives, met one female jerk
after another, and then killed one woman and left another woman stuffed in a trunk
in 120-degree desert heat. Male serial killers are condemned—not celebrated—at
men’s liberation conventions. The moment a men’s movement calls it a sign of
empowerment or brotherhood when men kill women is the moment I will protest it
as fascism.
When men protested, the common reaction was, “Isn’t it interesting that when
men kill, no one protests, but now that women kill, there’s a protest?” Which, of
course, missed the point of the protest. Men kill men in gang movies, cop movies,
mob films, westerns, murder mysteries, and war movies; if a man kills a woman, he
is killed by other men. Men frequently die protecting women; women almost never
die to protect a man. In contrast, Thelma and Louise did not show any women trying
to apprehend the two women who killed the men; it did not show any women trying
to kill any other women; it did not show any woman dying to protect a man.
The “Shoot a Man, Find a Human” School of Film
In the 1990s, the killing of men in films reached a new level: it is not called violence
against men, it is called male self-help.
In Regarding Henry, brain damage from bullet wounds “kills” an arrogant attorney
and transforms him into a caring attorney; in Doctor, cancer “kills” the arrogant
doctor and transforms him into a caring doctor; in Doc Hollywood, a car accident
“kills” Doc Hollywood and transforms him into Doc Sensitive; in Defending Your
Life and Switch, it took death itself to transform insensitive executive-type men into
caring executive types; in Robin Hood, it takes war and a mutilated dad hanging from
a rope to “kill” Robin’s spoiled-nobleman past and transform him into a hero of the
poor.
Taken together, two doctors, a lawyer, an executive, and a nobleman symbolize the
feeling that the only man worth preserving is the man who emerges as he is dying. If
a spate of films suggested that when a black, a woman, or a Jew is dying, something
worth preserving finally emerges . . .
DEATH AT THE TOP; THE ONE-SHOT PLEBESCITE
In real life, unlike in the movies, the more a man is a hero, the more likely he is to
die or be killed. A quarter of American presidents have died in office, many by
assassination. Almost every liberal, charismatic male leader of the 1960s through the
‘80s was assassinated or mysteriously killed. Not just the Kennedys, King, and
Malcolm X of the United States, but Salvador Allende of Chile, Patrice Lumumba of
the Belgian Congo, Olaf Palme of Sweden, Anwar Sadat of Egypt, and Dag
Hammarskjold of the United Nations. They were all “done away with” when
someone perceived that the role they were playing was no longer protecting their
interests. Assassination, the modern-day equivalent of regicide, has left many male
leaders giving their lives for their country in politics just as men do in the military.
Thus today the male leaders are buried, their wives are alive.
WHAT ARE WE DOING TO STOP THIS VIOLENCE AGAINST MEN?
The sexist perception that violence by anyone against only women is antiwoman
while violence by a woman against only men is just generic violence creates a
political demand for laws that are even more protective of women. For example,
when we publicized studies of battered women but ignored a dozen studies pointing
to equal numbers of battered men,43 we felt justified in legislating a “battered
woman syndrome,” but didn’t even think of a “battered man syndrome.” Soon, the
battered woman syndrome became but one of twelve defenses potentially available
for a woman who killed, but not available for a man who killed. Now, if the media
even simulates violence against women, we might call it a civil rights violation while
real-life violence against men in football and wrestling is called education.
Now, more than 20 years after the original publication of The Myth of Male
Power, in the average person’s mind domestic violence still means violence against
women. Yet as of 2013, a bibliography of 341 scholarly investigations (with an
aggregate sample size of almost a half-million), finds that both sexes are about
equally violent toward their love partners.
44
Most of these studies are conducted by female academics who were originally
skeptical that women are equally violent in domestic situations. These studies
typically find that women acknowledge they are more likely than men to initiate, and
that men and women hurt each other about equally at every level of violence.
45
Men, though, are far less likely to call the police, and far more likely to attribute
their injuries to a sport accident. And no one can hear what men don’t say. Thus our
image of men as the perpetrators remains the same.
Although men are more likely than women to be victims of all violent crime
except rape, as of 2013, the Violence against Women Act provides $659 million per
year for the next five years to make violence against women a hate crime and a
violation of women’s civil rights, but not violence against men a hate crime and an
act against men’s civil rights. Its subtitles tell the story: Safe Streets for Women,
Safe Homes for Women, Civil Rights against Women (emphasis supplied) . . . In
brief, it legislates sexual inequality.
The only way such an act could be constitutional is if women were subject to much
more violence than men. Because it is men who are subject to much more violence—
and to equal domestic violence (as I document in Women Can’t Hear What Men
Don’t Say)—a Violence against Women Act is a clear violation of the 14th
Amendment’s “equal protection” clause—the basis of Civil Rights legislation.
By law, all governmental acts are molded and modified based on testimony before
the relevant congressional committee. The testimony is supposed to reflect all sides
of an issue. But in this case, only women testified—fifteen women and no men—
before the Committee on the Judiciary.46 No man who requested permission to
testify was permitted.
What can we do to stop violence against both sexes? We can start by decreasing
the expectation on men to be our killers and protectors—from our personal
bodyguards to our nation’s bodyguards. And we can stop electing legislators who
feel they must protect women and forget men. The process starts with remembering
that legislators cannot hear what we do not say.
CHAPTER 10
If We Cared As Much about Saving Males As Saving
Whales, Then . . .
In the preceding chapters, we saw how survival historically depended on a woman
choosing a man who would die to protect her. We also saw why choosing male
killers to protect us now threatens survival. But what are some of the most important
gut-level internal responses we must confront if we are to stop dividing the sexes
into the disposable sex vs. the protected sex? And how is our tendency to do that
already affecting our ecology and preparing us for two legal systems—one to
prosecute the “perpetrator”sex and one to protect the “victim” sex? The best
confrontation starts with self, so I’ll start by confronting myself.
A few years ago, I was walking in the woods with a womanfriend when a man
jumped out in front of us. Within a second, my womanfriend had jumped back and I
had jumped forward. Whether we did it because of differences in our size or
differences in our socialization made little difference. Like most men, I
unconsciously bring to my relationships with a woman an unspoken understanding:
“My body, not my choice.”
I wish this happened only in the woods. But when I have been with a woman in my
home and a suspicious noise scared us, it took a long time before I no longer felt
guilty asking her to accompany me as we checked it out. (The first time a woman
volunteered to go with me, my respect for her increased enormously.)
Most men are not only women’s unpaid bodyguards, they actually pay to be a
woman’s bodyguard: when they pay for the date, pay for the weekend, and therefore
pay for the walk, they are really paying to be her bodyguard. It is one of many male
forms of indirect nurturance. By calling it “power,” we have made the nurturance
invisible.
Don’t many women today protect themselves, and protect children too? Yes, and
yes. Women often protect themselves and risk their lives to protect children, but a
woman will rarely risk her life to protect an adult man. We have all read of a mother
lifting a car to save a child, but not to save an adult man.
In Stage II societies, confronting the desire to save the female first starts with the
propensity to save girls first.
SAVE-A-GIRL FUND
ITEM. When Children International seeks sponsors for children, seventeen out
of eighteen of the children it shows are female.
1 The viewer is told, “When
you adopt a child, she will write, she will have food, she . . .”
In other ads, poverty itself is defined as “hunger and a little girl . . .”
Why this focus on the suffering girl? The organizations are trying to raise money.
Their experience has taught them that we care more about saving girls.
HOW IGNORING MALE ECOLOGY DESTROYS GLOBAL ECOLOGY
At Three Mile Island, where 80 percent of the workers were men,2 sleep loss and
exhaustion led to a failure to recognize the loss of coolant water.
3 By morning, the
lack of coolant water caused the near meltdown of the reactor. Workers’ sleep loss
was also found to be the common denominator for the explosion of the space shuttle
Challenger and the catastrophe at Chernobyl.
4 And as we saw above, when the Exxon
Valdez spilled oil, although the captain was blamed, investigators later conceded that
the underlying culprit was the decision to send the exhausted crew back to sea after
skipping their scheduled day’s rest.
5
Had workers been rested, some of the worst ecological disasters in our history
might have been prevented. In a karmic sense, our world’s ecology was being
punished for not caring about male ecology.
SHOULDN’T A FUTURE MOTHER BE MORE PROTECTED THAN A FUTURE
FATHER?
Our desire to give special protection to working women who are of childbearing
years seems especially understandable. Geneticists are now finding, though, that
exposing men of child-creating years to chemical toxins might hurt the children just
as much. Why? All the eggs a woman has are present and whole before birth. But to
create sperm, cells have to divide.
6 And it is when the cells are dividing and their
borders are newly forming that they are especially vulnerable to toxins and therefore
to genetic damage. A safe sperm gathers no defects.
The causes of 60 to 80 percent of birth defects are still not known; scientists have
discovered approximately 30 of an estimated 900 chemicals that are toxic to human
development. When we consider that it is men who are primarily exposed to toxic
chemicals, we get a sense of the degree to which caring for our children’s safety also
means caring for men’s safety. Elmo Zumwalt, Jr., was just the tip of the iceberg.
THE FALLACY OF THE WORKPLACE AS A SOURCE OF FULFILLMENT
One of the biggest fallacies of the women’s movement was expecting work to
mean “power” and “self-fulfillment.” Employers wouldn’t have to pay people if
they were giving away power and self-fulfillment. For those employees able to feel
freedom and fulfillment on the job—well, “more power to ’em.” But the average
man knows the employer is paying to use his body during work in exchange for
freeing his body after work. Additional benefits from the employer come from
creating additional benefits for the employer. They are not expected, they are earned.
At least that’s the way the average man sees it.
But how does understanding this translate into the way we interact with men every
day?
DOES AN AWARENESS OF MEN’S PROBLEMS MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE IN OUR
EVERYDAY EXPERIENCE OF MEN?
While on a flight to Houston recently, I met an aerospace worker employed at
Boeing. My old tendency would have been to ask him—maybe debate with him—
about the Stealth bomber that Boeing helps produce; but instead I asked him about
his working conditions. I discovered that he was working with chemicals which
could cause memory loss, fatigue, and possibly hepatitis. He told me that he couldn’t
be specific about the names of those chemicals—they were confidential. When I
asked him why he didn’t see a doctor, he told me the chemicals were so confidential
that they couldn’t be disclosed to a doctor. When I pressed, “Isn’t your life more
important than confidentiality?” he answered, “It’s not just my life. . . . If I lose my
job, it’s my wife and my two kids who suffer.” With a tad of encouragement, he then
showed me a picture of his wife and two children in front of their Christmas tree.
WHY DON’T MEN SEEM TO BE THAT CONCERNED ABOUT WOMEN AS
PROSTITUTES?
I am often asked why men don’t get as worked up as they might about women—
particularly poor women—having to use their bodies as prostitutes. Because most
men unconsciously experience themselves as prostitutes every day—the miner, the
firefighter, the construction worker, the logger, the soldier, the meatpacker—these
men are prostitutes in the direct sense: they sacrifice their bodies for money and for
their families.
The middle-class man is a prostitute of a different sort: he recalls that when his
children were born, he gave up his dreams of becoming a novelist and began the
nightmare of writing ad copy for a product he didn’t believe in—something he would
have to do every workday for the rest of his life. The poorer the man, the more he
feels this. To men, prostitution is not a female-only occupation.
Most men barely allow themselves even to think about the freedom to look within
until after their families are as economically secure as they desire. But many a man
finds that just as his goal is within reach, his family is wishing for a nicer home, a
better car, a private college. If he is one of the rare men able to satisfy his family
enough to look within, he fears discovering the prostitute he has become in the
process of providing for others. This is men’s version of subservience—of “wife and
children first, husband last.”
HOW CONSERVATIVES AND LIBERALS BOTH REINFORCE MALE DISPOSABILITY
Both conservatives and liberals reinforce the protection of women and the
disposability of men. Conservatives justify it—they call it sex roles. Liberals call it
sexism if it hurts women, but blame men if it hurts men. For example, male-only
clubs hurt women and therefore liberals call it sexism; male-only draft registration
hurts men so liberals blame men for causing the wars they’ve just required only men
to fight. Both parties rationalize biology as destiny if it helps women or hurts only
men. Similarly, almost all protective legislation is supported by liberals if it protects
women.* When it comes to protecting women and disposing of men, both parties are
conservative—both are Stage I parties. The underlying justification is the
unquestioned assumption of woman as victim.
Female Victim Power, AKA Gulf of Tonkin Power
Victim Power is to relationships what Gulf of Tonkin Power is to warfare. Lyndon
Johnson could get away with falsely accusing the Communists of attacking an
American ship in the Gulf of Tonkin because he knew the assumption of Americans
as innocents and Communists as perpetrators would make Congress afraid to
question the accuracy of his accusation. In America today, women have Gulf of
Tonkin power: the assumption of their innocence gives them the power to make
an accusation without being cross-examined in the same way a man would be.
The degree to which the government has substituted protecting women for
questioning women creates the most shocking part of this book: Government as
Substitute Husband.
PART III
GOVERNMENT AS SUBSTITUTE HUSBAND
An Overview
When only one sex wins, both sexes lose.
—WARREN FARRELL
When a woman committed a crime in the United States in the 1800s, it was her
husband who served time.
1 Similarly, under English law, when a family went into
debt, it was the husband who went to debtor’s prison. When it comes to male-female
issues, men’s unconscious lawmaking was programmed to protect women. Laws
were almost always made by men, but not for men.
The discoveries of this chapter are that in an era of alleged female independence,
one law after another came to be made with such attention to protecting women that
if a man’s constitutional rights conflict with a woman’s protection, most of his rights
disintegrate before most of her protection disintegrates.
That is what is happening legally. But what is happening legally almost always
reflects what is happening on a deeper level psychologically. We will see that when
divorces left women without husband-as-savior, many women looked for substitute
saviors; and when divorces left men without a source of love, men competed to
obtain women’s love by finding new ways of saving women.
The search for saviors and the competition to save appeared in various garbs. New
Age women went from father to husband to guru; men competed to be their guru.
Traditional women went from father to husband to “God the Father”; men competed
to be their “fathers” (priests, ministers, and rabbis). Feminist women went from
father to husband to options: the option to save themselves or to turn to the biggest
savior of all—government as substitute husband; men competed to turn the
government into a substitute husband.
Divorces led to bodies of men (called legislatures) protecting women collectively
as other men (called husbands) failed to protect women individually. This meant
raising taxes mostly on other men to provide money mostly for women. When
divorces deprive women of husbands to protect them, then, our collective
unconscious still wants to protect women.
And women’s collective unconscious still wants the protection. For example, a
San Diego police officer is now serving a fifty-six-year sentence for raping women
on local beaches; his wife is suing the police department for the income that he
cannot now provide her . . . she expects the government to be her substitute husband.
She is also suing the department for having hired him to begin with . . . she expects
the government to be a better judge of her husband’s character than she was able to
be.
2
 The more things change . . .
Do these man-made laws reflect male values? In part. Part of men’s values is to
protect women even more than themselves. Are these laws made in men’s selfinterest? Sort of. Men who want female love learn to look out for women’s interests
more than their own.
Doesn’t the fact that almost all legislators are men prove that men are in charge
and can choose when to and when not to look out for women’s interests?
Theoretically, yes. But practically speaking, the American legal system cannot be
separated from the voter. And in the 1992 presidential election, 54 percent of the
voters were female, 46 percent male.
3
(Women’s votes outnumber men’s by more
than 7 million.)
Overall, a legislator is to the voter what a chauffeur is to the employer—both look
like they’re in charge but both can be fired if they don’t go where they’re told. When
legislators do not appear to be protecting women, it is almost always because women
differ on what constitutes protection. (For example, women voted almost equally for
Republicans and Democrats during the combination of the four presidential elections
prior to Clinton.)
We will see how the legal bias for special protection for women has begun to
wreak havoc with the Constitution’s guarantee of equal protection. How the 1980s,
for example, witnessed two definitions of self-defense: one for men and one for
women; and two definitions of first-degree murder—depending on your sex. We will
see how, by the ‘90s, there were twelve defenses that were potentially available for a
woman who killed but not for a man who killed. How, at many colleges, a woman
could have a man kicked out of school for date rape—even after she had chosen to
drink and chosen to say “yes” while drinking.
These chapters will give us a view of why sexual harassment and date rape
legislation are now occurring; the dilemmas they will create for business,
government, the law, and ultimately women themselves in the twenty-first century;
and the steps we can take before we paint ourselves into a corner.
We will look at how the original feminist stance against legal discrimination
based on biological differences has changed to one of favoring the use of biological
differences if they expand women’s rights—such as the right both to bear a child
despite the father’s objection and then to sue the father for eighteen years of support.
We will look at the dilemma for employers of granting women special rights while
being required to treat women with equal respect. For example, feminist support for
a pregnant woman’s special rights to disability pay soon made pregnancy the only
workplace “disability” that did not occur in the workplace, and the only disability
that the employee purposely created.
These “protect women” laws have already been put into place in what has been,
perhaps, the quietest legal revolution in history. In 1970, feminist legal scholarship
was virtually unheard of. Today, most of the books and articles in a recent seventyone-page bibliography on women and legal scholarship are written by feminist legal
scholars.
4 No scholar of prominence has criticized feminism in the law journals.
When asked why, Yale Law School professor Geoffrey Hazard explained that in the
“politically correct” atmosphere of the universities, any dissent would leave a
scholar labeled as antiwoman.5
But we still haven’t proven that the system does protect women. Or that there
really are two laws—a male law and a female law.
* Liberal support for legislation making violence against women (but not violence against men) a “hate
crime”; support for protection of mostly women from sexual harassment hazards, but not protection of mostly
men from death profession hazards; support for easing requirements for aid to mothers with dependent
children, but not to fathers; and support for nearly all of the female-only legal protections (the focus of Part
III).
* Liberal support for legislation making violence against women (but not violence against men) a “hate crime”;
support for protection of mostly women from sexual harassment hazards, but not protection of mostly men
from death profession hazards; support for easing requirements for aid to mothers with dependent children, but
not to fathers; and support for nearly all of the female-only legal protections (the focus of Part III).
CHAPTER 11
How the System Protects Women, Or . . . Two Different
Laws We Live In
UNEQUAL TIME FOR EQUAL CRIME
ITEM. A man convicted of murder is twenty times more likely than a woman
convicted of murder to receive the death penalty.1
ITEM. Between 1976 and 2002, approximately 41,700 women murdered 41,400
men. But only four of these 41,700 women were executed for killing only
men (and no women or children).
2
ITEM. Since the 1976 reinstatement of the death penalty, 120 men—and only 1
woman—have actually been executed.3 The woman, from North Carolina,
said she preferred to be executed.
ITEM. In North Carolina, a man who commits second-degree murder receives
a sentence an average of 12.6 years longer than a woman who commits
second-degree murder.
4
ITEM. The U.S. Department of Justice records the following sentence
differences nationwide:
ITEM. Being male contributes to a longer sentence more than race or any other
factor—legal or extralegal.
6 Yet sentencing guidelines were introduced
largely to end racial discrimination.
Do sentencing guidelines reduce discrimination against men? Sort of. . . .
ITEM. The sentencing guidelines of the state of Washington are among the
strictest. Overall sentences of men, however, are still 23 percent longer than
those of women.7 Even when offense histories are the same and the
seriousness of crime is the same, women are 57 percent more likely to
receive treatment sentences than prison sentences.
8 Women are also more
likely to be made eligible for early departure from prison; and once made
eligible, are another 59 percent more likely to actually be released early. Here
are some examples from 1991:
Percentage of First-time Offenders Eligible for Early Departure Who Were in Fact
Released Early, by Sex
9
Female Male
Residential burglary 63 35
Assault 3 20 13
Burglary 2 40 32
Theft 2 38 25
Theft 1 17 9
Forgery 48 35
Bail jump/Class B or C 36 15
ITEM. Prosecutors consistently note that women almost always receive lower
bail for equal crimes.
10
In essence, there are two bails: the male bail and the female bail. Women are also
more likely to be released on their own recognizance. But the real sexism begins
before the bail. . . .
PARTNERS IN CRIME, NOT IN DOING TIME
Plea Bargain as Female Bargain
In plea bargaining with a married couple, often we say, “Well, let’s get the
man.” We’re satisfied with getting the husband to plead guilty and dropping
the charges against the woman. Of course, then he has a criminal record, she
doesn’t. If they both repeat the crime, he can “legitimately” receive a longer
sentence.
—Assistant Prosecutor J. DENNIS KOHLER
11
ITEM. A husband and wife run an illegal drug business out of their home—
both of them packaging drugs on their kitchen table. After their trial, the
husband is labeled the “kingpin” and put in prison. The wife goes free on
probation. A defense lawyer for drug dealers calls this double standard the
“drug dealer pattern.”12
The drug dealer pattern and the plea bargain as female bargain violate the
Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee against discrimination according to sex. If
prosecutors systematically told only the white man that charges would be dropped
against him if he testified against the black man, we would have a racial crisis.
In the case of a man and a woman, both will often agree to the man taking the rap
—despite the man being more likely to receive a longer sentence and more likely to
be raped in prison. If blacks were agreeing to do that for whites, the black
community would be smart enough to call that “learned subservience.”
When Men Are in Charge, Men Do More Time; When
Women Are in Charge, Men Do More Time . . . How’s
That?
When a man and woman jointly commit a crime, but the man is “in charge,” the
woman gets a much shorter sentence or no sentence because she is said to be
brainwashed, powerless, and an unwilling follower. When a woman is in charge and a
man works for her, does his claim to be brainwashed carry any weight? In the
McMartin Preschool case, Peggy McMartin was the school’s director and had hired
her 19-year-old grandson—a college dropout.
13 After working for five years under
his grandmother’s direction, he and his grandmother were both indicted on fifty-two
counts of child molestation. His grandmother’s bail was one third of his
14 and he
spent nearly five years in jail before the jury finally ruled that the two were not
guilty. She—the director—spent less than two years in jail.
Had a male school director hired his 19-year-old granddaughter, would the
granddaughter have been put in jail for five years prior to the verdict? Would we
have tolerated the longest trial in U.S. criminal history while a girl found not guilty
nevertheless spent half her twenties in prison for allegedly touching children?
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT: THE MALE-ONLY DEATH PENALTY
[The executioner] found it difficult to reconcile himself to the task of
destroying the life of a member of the sex which his whole upbringing had
taught him was deserving of respect and tenderness as the giver of life.
15
ITEM. Twenty-three Americans have been executed and later found innocent.
All twenty-three were men.16
ITEM. Approximately 1,900 women commit homicide in the United States
each year.
17
ITEM. When women commit homicide, almost 90 percent of their victims are
men.18
Since 1954, then, approximately 70,000 women have murdered; their victims
include about 60,000 men, but, as we saw in the second Item of this chapter, not one
woman has been executed after killing only a man.
19
For nearly four decades now, we have become increasingly protective of women
and decreasingly protective of men—even if that man is a boy and a legal minor, as
was Heath Wilkins. Here’s how this happens.
ITEM. Marjorie Filipiak and 16-year-old Heath Wilkins both pled guilty to
being coconspirators in a murder. Neither was a hardened criminal. Heath
Wilkins got the death sentence; Marjorie Filipiak went free.
20
ITEM. When Heath Wilkins was found to have been a victim of child sexual
abuse, it did not deter the judge from giving him the death sentence.
21 When
Josephine Mesa was found to have been the victim of child abuse, the jury
freed her.
22 Josephine Mesa had killed her 23-month-old son with a toilet
plunger.
INSIDE PRISON, USA
Women felons go to a former school a few miles east of the state capitol.
The men’s institutions are prisons, plain and hard. They offer cells, guards,
cell block gangs. . . . The women’s institution feels like the school it was built
to be, and its staff encourages reform and rehabilitation.
—Attorney David D. Butler,
23
 describing differences in Iowa
ITEM. Any given man in prison is still 1,000 percent as likely as any given
woman to die via suicide, homicide, or execution.24
Although women’s prisons are safer than men’s prisons and designed more for
rehabilitation, virtually all the recent press coverage has focused on the plight of the
female prisoner—as if that plight were unique to the female prisoner. The result?
States such as California are now financing the study of only female prisoner health
issues.
25 And states like Wisconsin are spending $2,000 per month for female
prisoners as against $1,000 per month for male prisoners.
26
Women’s prisons, as a rule, do suffer one area of discrimination—job training.
Men are more likely to be trained in skills for higher-paying jobs such as welder or
mechanic while many women’s facilities focus more on skills for lower-paying jobs
such as beautician or launderer.
27
 This needs to be changed.
Nevertheless, now that the female prison population has increased so that 6
percent of the country’s inmates are female,
28 many states are developing programs
that offer women special privileges. Mothers in Lancaster, Massachusetts, have
special facilities in which to see their children; fathers do not.
29
In New York’s
Bedford Hills Corrections Facility, mothers have a live-in nursery; fathers do not. In
Minnesota, women’s prisons are built in residential communities alongside schools;
hard-core female prisoners are placed in battered women’s shelters to do community
service. No equivalent exists for men.
Once in prison, women tend to be “dependent” prisoners: they lean more heavily
than their male counterparts on the prison staff, on drug rehabilitation programs, and
on counselors.
30 They also tend to make more use of the prison medical facilities for
headaches, upset stomachs, and other complaints.
HOW THE INEQUALITY IS RATIONALIZED
Sentence Compounding
When the state gives the female the first option to plea-bargain and receives extra
evidence about a man in exchange for repressing evidence about a woman, this leads
the press to report the evidence against the man, which leads the public to reinforce
its stereotype of man-as-criminal, woman-as-innocent. Thus the initial belief that
women are more innocent becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy which becomes the
rationalization for continuing to allow the woman the first option to plea-bargain.
Should they both commit a second crime, not only is the man the only one with a
prison record, which justifies his getting a longer sentence, but his longer time in
prison is also more likely to harden him, something a jury will pick up on and
something that contributes to his higher recidivism rate. In these respects, men’s
criminal records are multiplied, women’s minimized. And so, discrimination begets
discrimination begets discrimination.
How the Commissions on Gender Bias Rationalize
Gender Bias
Recently, state commissions on gender bias have reported that it is women who are
victims of discrimination. For example:
ITEM. When women go free on probation while men get prison sentences, the
state commissions on gender bias say women are victims of discrimination
because women receive longer periods of probation!31
The commissions also mention that women are discriminated against because
there are fewer women’s institutions, forcing relatives to go farther to visit them.
Not mentioned is the reason: There is rarely any need for more than one women’s
prison near a city because of all the discrimination in favor of women. Were women
to receive equal charges, equal bail, and equal sentencing, there would be more
women’s prisons.
For women to have the privilege of avoiding prison by going free on probation,
doing less time when sentenced, or receiving treatment sentences rather than prison
sentences—and then to complain about there being fewer prisons, well. . . there
could hardly be a better example of chutzpa. Yet The New York Times reports these
conclusions without questioning them.
32
Why wouldn’t a government commission on gender bias see through this gender
bias? Because these “government” commissions are not really government
commissions—they are feminist commissions. That is, the government relies upon
recommendations of organizations such as the feminist National Organization for
Women and the mostly feminist National Association of Women Judges in choosing
which issues to research and which to ignore.
33
They are government commissions only in the sense that they are paid for by the
government—meaning us. Even the key staff members are more likely to be women
than men—frequently feminist activists, almost never a men’s movement activist.
34
Thus the commissions were able to see the overcrowding in women’s prisons
while ignoring the more intense overcrowding in men’s prisons; they were able to
see how women’s prisons need to pay attention to problems unique to women, but
not how men’s prisons also need to pay more attention to problems more common
among men, such as male-to-male rape.
A feminist government commission on gender bias is the equivalent of a
Republican government commission on political party bias. Imagine having a
government commission on political party bias sponsored by one political party,
staffed by the same party, systematically having the other party excluded, its
findings unquestioned in The New York Times, and having your taxes increased to
pay the bill. If a political party did this, we’d call it a scandal; when feminists do
this, it’s called official. Feminism has become gender politics’ one-party system.
Is It Just the Feminists Who Rationalize Sex Bias?
While it is understandable how a feminist-sponsored commission on sex bias would
be a commission with sex bias, similar bias is also common in reports from maledominated government agencies such as the U.S. Department of Justice. For
example:
The U.S. Department of Justice reports that men have longer sentences than
women.35 They rationalize the longer sentences by pointing out that men are more
likely to be sent to prison than women and prison sentences tend to be longer.
36
 (Jail
is for shorter sentences, so naturally the sex with the longer sentences would go to
prison.) Here’s the sexism: Why are men more likely to be given longer sentences
for the same crime and equivalent criminal histories to begin with?
Imagine reading a government report saying a sister and brother stole bubble gum,
and the boy was sent to prison while the girl was confined to her room. If it then
explained that the boy was kept in prison longer simply because prison sentences
tend to be longer than room confinement, wouldn’t we be asking, “Wait, that misses
the point: Why was the boy put in prison and the girl put in her room for the same
crime to begin with?”
The need to deny sexism when it cuts against men then, runs much deeper than
feminism: it is part of our collective unconscious process of using government-asprotector to substitute for male-as-protector.
The Chivalry Factor
37
White middle-class people in the criminal justice system basically look at
women as incapable of committing some of the crimes they are charged with.
They therefore try to find rationales as to why the woman wasn’t really
involved. But the women who are being dealt with sympathetically are the
white, middle-class women, not the poor and minorities.
—BARBARA SWARTZ, Director, Women’s Prison Project
38
The Chivalry Factor works this way. The courts are designed to give equal
protection. The more a judge (or jury) sees women as the weaker sex, the more the
judge reasons (usually unconsciously) that the court needs to give a woman extra
protection (to compensate for her being the weaker sex) in order for the result to be
equal protection. This is the reasoning process of the judges we call chauvinistic,
chivalrous, or patriarchal. It is also the reasoning process of the adolescent feminist.
The chauvinist and feminist are both female protective. Many female judges, though,
are less female protective than either chauvinists or feminists. As one attorney put it,
“If there were more women judges, more women would go to jail.”39
Chivalry’s Integrated Circuit: Judge, Jury, Lawyers,
and Female Client
I tell women what to wear, how to dress, how to make up their hair. They
must have a great deal of sex appeal to the men on the jury—and to the judge,
too. But at the same time she can’t antagonize the women on the jury by
being too flashy-looking. If she cries softly while the case is going on, that’s
wonderful.
—ATTORNEY FRANK P. LUCIANNA
40
“It’s difficult for a prosecutor to harshly cross-examine a woman, or he’ll alienate
the jury. He has to walk on eggshells,” New Jersey lawyer Michael Breslin
explains.
41 He finds the protective instinct operates for everyone but is especially
prevalent among older jurors. So if he is defending a woman, he tries to select older
jurors. A criminal attorney specializing in civil rights put it bluntly: “I always prefer
to represent a female client; the system is clearly biased in her favor.”42
Judge, jury, lawyers, female clients, and police, then, all contribute to chivalry’s
integrated circuit. Lawyers in many cities report that a jury is so unlikely to convict a
woman of drunk driving that police do not even bother to arrest her.
43
It’s true that
“it’s a male system with male chauvinist judges”—and it’s unfair. The men who
receive longer sentences find it quite unfair.
This protect-the-woman instinct penetrates not only criminal law but family law.
It is fairly obvious in the area of fathers versus mothers: we tell women they have
the right to children but tell men they have to fight for children. It is less obvious
in the double standard of community property. Remember Jim and Tammy Faye
Bakker? . . .
THE DOUBLE STANDARD OF COMMUNITY PROPERTY: HER RIGHTS, HIS
RESPONSIBILITY
When Tammy Faye Bakker divorced Jim, community property laws guaranteed
Tammy Faye rights to half of the profits of their ministry. Why? Marriage makes a
couple legal equals. How a couple divides roles is private business, but community
property laws were supposed to make equal rights and responsibilities for the
couple’s profits or debts public business. But do they?
Although Jim and Tammy Faye had equal rights to profits no matter what role she
played, when the business got into trouble, Jim got forty years in prison and Tammy
Faye got none. Tammy Faye did not have to even appear in court.
On the surface, this appears justifiable if she didn’t know what was going on. But
if equality means a woman shares legal rights to the profits of a marriage no matter
what role she plays or how illegally those profits were accrued, then equality also
means a woman shares legal responsibility for any illegalities in creating those
profits—no matter what role she plays. If community property is “couple profit”
regardless of role, it must become “couple responsibility” regardless of role.
But shouldn’t we hold a man more responsible if the financial operations for
which he was assigned role responsibility get into legal trouble? Sure, if he
systematically falsifies information despite his wife’s questioning. But if the
married man is held more responsible for finances that go legally awry, then the
married woman should be held more responsible for children who go awry. No
one even suggests we make only the mother financially responsible for damage
caused by the minor “since the father was unaware of what was going on.” We would
say his lack of awareness was part of what created the delinquency. An unaware
father is considered negligent, not innocent.
When a child goes awry, not only are both parents equally responsible but,
practically speaking, the man usually earns the additional money required to pay
damages. No one tells the mother, “You yelled at your husband for criticizing your
mothering, so he backed off—so now you are responsible for the half million dollars
of liability incurred from your son driving without insurance. You, mother, can
either pay or spend forty years in prison.” So the man pays when there’s a mess up in
the male role or in the female role.
Community property without community responsibility reinforces traditional sex
roles: it encourages women to assign their husbands all the financial risks. By saying
“You sign that legal document” or “You sign the check,” she can avoid the downside
of prison but receive the upside of profits. If he makes a fortune through tax evasion,
inside trading, drug dealing, or a Ponzi scheme and gets away with it, she shares the
profits. If he gets caught, only he goes to prison. In its present version, community
property is equal rights without equal responsibilities. Which is not equality.
When a woman senses her financial innocence will allow her to share a profit
margin but not a prison cell, she is usually unaware how her innocence makes him
more likely to become guilty than he would had she been involved in the finances.
The greater her financial innocence, the more the financial burden falls on him and
the more likely he is to handle that burden by flirting with the boundaries of the law.
Just as, if he never paid any attention to the children, his “innocence” would make
her feel more overburdened and abusive to the children. Few judges have looked at
this connection between her financial innocence and his financial guilt.
When a wife’s financial innocence is accompanied by financial pressure, a
husband is an accident waiting to happen. As he feels the psychological pressure for
a larger home, he first tries something marginally legal. If it works, expectations rise
and he soon feels a new pressure (to send the kids to a better college), so he tries
something illegal. If he gets caught, he doesn’t tell the court: “I felt this
psychological pressure from my wife, Your Honor. I had this feeling of ‘learned
helplessness.’ “ If he did, he would be laughed out of court.
Both sexes sharing community property but with male-only responsibility returns
us to an era of woman-as-child. It makes family teamwork dependent on female
innocence rather than female equality. It returns us to the Stage I family in which the
division of labor led to a division of interests. When both sexes share property and
share responsibility, we have an integration of labor and an integration of interests—
a Stage II family with Stage II teamwork. A Stage II family unit. And a Stage II
united family.
How Community Property without Community
Responsibility Hurts Women
Community property without community responsibility ultimately boomerangs
against women. When ignorance allows her to share a fortune but not share a jail
cell, then ignorance pays in the short run. But in the long run, it creates the most
ubiquitous form of female “learned helplessness”—financial learned helplessness.
Thus if she has doubts about her marriage and knows her financial ignorance is not
her best postdivorce survival tool, she fears expressing her feelings and begins to
feel like a marital prostitute.
The feeling of being a marital prostitute is part of the female morality dilemma.
We cannot really consider ourselves moral until we know what compromises we are
willing to make to provide financially for our family. But being financially ignorant
allows many women the luxury of focusing on spirituality or on the family rather
than having to “dirty their hands” with finances. It teaches a woman who ignores the
moral responsibilities of financial responsibility to consider herself morally
superior. Yet exactly as she is feeling this moral superiority, she is also feeling like a
marital prostitute. Thus creating the female morality dilemma.
The collective unconscious that supports shared community property with maleonly financial responsibility is the same collective unconscious that retains its need
to see woman as child. In a Stage I world, this division was understandable. But by
the year 2020, it is likely that a woman will become president of the United States
(probably one who is first elected vice president). To see this woman as a child is to
predict that a child will soon run the country. Is that an exaggeration? Well, think of
how we treated Geraldine Ferraro as a child: When her husband’s money financed
her run for Congress, we thought of it as “family money”—at least half hers; yet as
soon as the money was thought to have been produced illegally, only her husband
risked a possible prison sentence, and her husband was seen as having “dragged
Geraldine Ferraro down.” We did not treat Ms. Ferraro as if she were equally
responsible. Did we unconsciously think of her as a child? Let’s look.
Had a househusband run for office on money produced by his wife, we would have
thought he was “using” her. We would have questioned whether a man who could not
financially support his family could financially lead a country. And if his wife
earned the money illegally, we would say, “If he can’t keep corruption out of his
home, how can he keep it out of government? . . . If he can’t share responsibility for
corruption with the one person he loves, how can he share it with the thousand
strangers he appoints?”
Yet when a feminist who was a potential U.S. president used money produced by
her husband, no one questioned it. Nor did we question her right to share the money
while avoiding responsibility for illegalities incurred in its creation. No one asked,
“If they were a team ‘for better,’ why weren’t they a team ‘for worse’?” We saw the
attack on him as sexism against her, rather than as sexism against him. (When a
man is a candidate and a woman a spouse, the man gets investigated; when the
reverse is true, the man still gets investigated. That’s sexism against men.)
Encouraging women to run for high political office cannot be separated from
simultaneously treating women like full adults—not as adults when it comes to
rights and children when it comes to responsibilities. The alternative? Having a
country run by a child. The solution? Sharing community property and sharing
community responsibility—creating a Stage II family for a Stage II country.
CHAPTER 12
Women Who Kill Too Much and the Courts That Free
Them: The Twelve “Female-Only
” Defenses
Neither men nor women are exempt from killing loved ones. The difference is in
what happens to them when they do. Twelve distinct female-only defenses allow a
woman who commits a premeditated murder to have the charges dropped or
significantly reduced. No man has successfully used any of these defenses in similar
circumstances. Nor do men have any equivalent “maleonly” defenses. Each of these
defenses therefore violates the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of equal
protection to both sexes under the law. And all twelve defenses combined create
overwhelming evidence of a double standard of self-defense that will be wreaking
havoc in the legal system for decades and be affecting for a lifetime our children’s
decisions as to whether to marry.
I. THE “INNOCENT WOMAN” DEFENSE
I am starting with the “Innocent Woman Defense” because it underlies all twelve
defenses. At first I had called this the “Female Credibility Principle” because of the
tendency to see women as more credible than men because of being thought more
innocent. However, even when women admitted making false allegations that they
were raped or that their husbands abused them, for example, their admission that
they lied was often not believed. Therefore the belief in the innocent woman ran even
deeper than the tendency to believe women. Bessie Reese, for example. . . .
Bessie Reese’s husband went on a trip and decided not to return to Bessie. Since
her husband had gone with James Richardson, Bessie decided to retaliate by
poisoning the lunches of the seven Richardson children. All seven children died.1
Bessie Reese never became a suspect. She was never given a polygraph test. Was
she deserving of such credibility? Not exactly. She had gone to trial for the poisoning
of her first husband. (She was set free.
2
) And she was found guilty of shooting her
second husband. (She did a short stint in jail.)
James Richardson got the death sentence. Yet James and his wife were eight miles
away working in a citrus grove in Arcadia, Florida, when Bessie was serving the
children lunch. Richardson was falsely accused of failing a polygraph test—yet the
prosecutor who handled the Richardson appeal acknowledges that no one during the
original trial ever saw the test.
3
James Richardson literally watched his own coffin being built. But . . . the death
sentence was temporarily commuted in 1972. And then, after James spent two
decades in prison, Bessie Reese finally confessed to poisoning the children. But the
belief in “the innocent woman” and “the guilty man” was strong enough that even a
second signed affidavit by Bessie did not lead to a new trial for James. Which
illustrates the basis of the “Innocent Woman Defense”—the “Innocent Woman
Principle”: women are believed when they say they are innocent of violence and
most easily doubted when they say they are guilty of violence.
It took political protests over the racism (James was black; Bessie was white) to
lead to a new trial and Richardson’s release (after twenty-one years in prison).
I asked the new prosecutor why Bessie Reese had never been a suspect. He
couldn’t give an official answer, only that “several of the townsfolk had seen the
sheriff stop by Bessie Reese’s home at all times of night and day” for months.
4 He
could only say, “The rumor was they were having an affair.”
The Visibility of Racism versus the Invisibility of
Sexism
This case became known only as an example of racism. But were it only racism, then
Mrs. Richardson, who is black, would also have been investigated. Although Mrs.
Richardson was at the same place as her husband when the poisonings occurred,
neither she nor Bessie ever became a serious suspect. In essence, neither woman
became a serious suspect—only the man.
Sexism permeated the Bessie Reese case. It was inherent in the entire
community’s unwillingness to create the political pressure necessary for Bessie to
become a suspect despite her history of husband killing and the rumors of her affair.
And perhaps the most dominant sexism was how Bessie’s sexual power led to the
sheriff protecting Bessie at the cost of transforming himself from a stopper of crime
to a criminal.
The cost of protecting women who kill is the same as the cost of protecting men
who kill: the killer continues to kill—not just disposable men but precious children.
To this day, Bessie Reese has not been charged with the murders to which she
confessed.5
What It Takes to Doubt a Woman’s Innocence
Tawana Brawley
ITEM. Black 15-year-old Tawana Brawley claimed she’d been gang-raped by
white racists, stuffed into a plastic garbage bag, and covered with excrement.
6
But a doctor testified that there was no evidence of either rape or assault. And
a woman testified that she had seen Tawana climb into the plastic garbage
bag of her own accord. Then cotton wads were found in Tawana’s nose so she
wouldn’t have to smell the excrement. Nevertheless, Governor Mario Cuomo
of New York said, “You can’t tell me she did it to herself unless you give me
some motive.”
In fact, Governor Cuomo was given a motive: Tawana and her mother were trying
to provide an excuse to the mother’s live-in companion for Tawana’s failure to
return home. But perhaps the governor’s need to see a woman as innocent and his
fear of being called racist and sexist did not allow him even to acknowledge hearing
what turned out to be the motive.
The country recognized only the racism behind Tawana Brawley’s hoax, not the
sexism of two women conspiring to concoct a story of multiple male
perpetrators/single female victim. No one confronted her for perpetrating the
stereotype of male as rapist. Or men as gang rapists. Or of playing into females’
fears of men; or of forcing every man to have to prove himself even more before he
becomes worthy of a female’s trust. The racism was visible; the sexism, invisible.
The Arsenic and Old Lace Case
When Blanche Taylor Moore and her husband went on a honeymoon and he suddenly
had to be taken to the hospital, the doctor discovered he had been poisoned by
arsenic. The dose wasn’t enough to kill him, so Blanche gave him a couple of extra
poisoned milk shakes. When the story got out, some people recalled that Blanche’s
first husband had died from arsenic poisoning. Others remembered a boyfriend had
“died of a heart attack.” But now the police became suspicious. They dug up her
boyfriend’s body and discovered his corpse retained a toxic dose of arsenic. Her
father’s body was then exhumed; it also contained arsenic.
7
As Blanche’s activities became public, people began calling the police saying they
had reason to believe that Blanche had killed their relatives as well. Blanche had
remained innocent for a quarter century. To my knowledge, no man in American
history has ever been assumed innocent while his mother, first wife, and a
womanfriend died of poisoning and a second wife almost died of poisoning.
Especially when all this happened in one community, as it did with Blanche.
Is it possible that by not subjecting Blanche to the type of investigation to which a
man would have been subjected she was able to kill people for a quarter of a century?
The Excedrin Poisonings: “Take Two and I’ll Bury You
in the Morning”
For five years Stella Nickell studied library books on how to poison, and even
experimented on her husband, Bruce.
8 Finally she got it right: she laced Excedrin
with cyanide and waited for Bruce to get his final headache. The coroner’s report did
not detect the cyanide and therefore recorded Bruce as dying from pulmonary
emphysema. But this angered Stella. She wanted the cyanide to be discovered so the
death could be listed as accidental and blamed on the altered Excedrin. Why? If he
died of an accident, she would collect $176,000 in insurance money (versus $71,000
if he died of a heart attack). So to prove it was an accident, she put cyanide in the
Excedrin in local supermarkets. A beautiful woman named Sue Snow bought some
Excedrin and was killed.9
Immediately eightyfive FBI agents and police officers got
into the act. Ultimately Stella was convicted. But only Stella’s greed led to Stella’s
conviction.
As with Blanche Taylor Moore, when we work from the unconscious assumption
“she’s a woman, she’s innocent, don’t investigate” we risk the lives of other innocent
women and men. The release of Willy Horton was enough to ruin a presidential
candidate, but the initial refusal even to investigate Stella and Blanche left us with
female Willy Hortons roaming free—free to mother, collect insurance, remarry—but
instead of being called a criminal on probation, they were called a mother who was
widowed. In this sheepskin their serial killing female style snatched yet another
body.
What It Takes to Believe a Man
When Delissa Carter stabbed her mother to death, she said her husband, Nathaniel,
had done it—that she saw him do it.
10 Two witnesses testified to Nathaniel’s
presence in Peekskill, New York, at the time of the slaying (a considerable distance
from the murder scene). Although Delissa was at the scene of the crime, the New
York State Supreme Court took her word over a man’s and two witnesses. Nathaniel
was sentenced to twenty-five years to life in prison. Had three unusual events not
occurred, Nathaniel would never have been found innocent.
11 By that time, though,
Nathaniel had already served more than a year in prison.
When a woman and man are each trying to persuade a judge and jury to believe
them—when their credibility is pitted against each other—she is unconsciously
assumed innocent unless proven guilty; he is presumed guilty unless proven
innocent. The Innocent Woman Principle underlies not only the Innocent Woman
Defense, but almost all the others as well.
II. THE PMS DEFENSE (“MY BODY. NO CHOICE”)
In 1970, when Dr. Edgar Berman said women’s hormones during menstruation and
menopause could have a detrimental influence on women’s decision making,
feminists were outraged. He was soon served up as the quintessential example of
medical male chauvinism.
12
But by the 1980s, some feminists were saying that PMS was the reason a woman
who deliberately killed a man should go free. In England, the PMS defense freed
Christine English after she confessed to killing her boyfriend by deliberately
ramming him into a utility pole with her car; and, after killing a coworker, Sandie
Smith was put on probation—with one condition: she must report monthly for
injections of progesterone to control symptoms of PMS.
13
By the 1990s, the PMS defense paved the way for other hormonal defenses. Sheryl
Lynn Massip could place her 6-month-old son under a car, run over him repeatedly,
and then, uncertain he was dead, do it again, then claim postpartum depression and
be given outpatient medical help.14
 No feminist protested.
In the 1970s, then, feminists were saying, “My body, my choice.” By the ‘80s and
‘90s, they were saying, “ ‘My body, my choice’ if that increases my freedom to kill,”
and “ ‘My body, no choice’ if that increases my freedom to kill.”
Ms. magazine justified these contradictions with, “Well, each woman is
different.”15 True. But PMS as a legal defense for murder is sexism against women
waiting to happen. Why? If a woman could murder while under the influence of
PMS, couldn’t she be a reckless driver while under the influence . . . and if she
doesn’t know when she is under the influence, doesn’t this become a reason not to let
women drive? We are back to women as children.
The “hormones affect some women more than others” excuse allows one woman
to apply for an executive position and say, “Hire me—PMS doesn’t affect me,” while
another murders and says, “Free me—PMS affects me.” It also allows a woman to
get a job as an executive, murder later, and say, with legal clout, “Free me—PMS
just started affecting me.” If raging hormones continue to be a legal defense for
females who murder, it will soon be a legitimate question for female employment.
Discrimination for women begets discrimination against women.
The PMS Defense also paves the way for the TP Defense—the Testosterone
Poisoning Defense. If women can murder and claim PMS, why can’t men rape and
claim testosterone poisoning? The solution? Punish the crime—with female or male
hormones as only a minor mitigating factor.
III. THE HUSBAND DEFENSE
The film I Love You to Death was based on the true story of a woman who tried to
kill her husband when she discovered he had been unfaithful. She and her mom tried
to poison him, then hired muggers to beat him and shoot him through the head. A
fluke led to their being caught and sent to jail. Miraculously, the husband survived.
The husband’s first response? Soon after he recovered, he informed authorities
that he would not press charges. His second response? He defended his wife’s
attempts to kill him. He felt so guilty being sexually “unfaithful” that he thanked his
wife! He then reproposed to her. She verbally abused him, then accepted.
I Love You to Death was a true story produced as a comedy. Imagine the protests if
a true story of a husband attempting to murder his wife was produced as a comedy.
Is this Husband Defense an isolated example? No. You won’t believe this one. . . .
The headline summarizes it: “Woman Who Shot Mate 5 Times Gets Probation.”16
When Jennifer Eidenschink and her husband, Steven, separated, Jennifer bought a
gun. She invited Steven over to remove a deer head from the wall, and then, while his
hands were occupied, she unloaded all eight shots from her .22-caliber
semiautomatic pistol.
17
 Five shots entered him—three in the abdomen.
Steven, an athlete, suffered irreparable nerve damage and a permanent limp that
would prevent him from playing the sports that meant so much to him. Jennifer said
he had abused her. But because Steven survived, he was able to present evidence that
made her acknowledge she was lying.18
 The Dane County Court of Wisconsin did not
sentence her to a single day in jail or prison . . . just counseling and two and one half
weeks of voluntary service. For attempted murder. The judge was influenced by two
things: the children’s needs for their mother, and Steven’s testimony on his wife’s
behalf.
19
 But that’s only the beginning. . . .
When Steven recovered, he moved back in with his wife—just like in the movie!
Oh yes, the state did order Jennifer to pay $22,000 for her husband’s medical bills.
But Jennifer was not working. Guess who paid his wife’s bill for shooting him?
It’s easy to think, “Oh, my God, they deserve each other!” But something else is
going on here. I call this the Husband Defense because I have yet to hear of a wife
providing the legal defense for a husband who premeditated her murder.
The Husband Defense is quintessential learned helplessness. When women display
even a fraction of this learned helplessness, we recognize it not only as a disease but
as a disease that overpowers her to such a degree that it can now be used as a defense
to kill a man and go free. When a man experiences this learned helplessness, he can
never use it to get away with trying to kill her, only to defend her for trying to kill
him. It works like this . . .
IV. THE “BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME” DEFENSE. AKA
LEARNED HELPLESSNESS
ITEM. December 1990. The governor of Ohio releases from prison twenty-five
women who had been convicted of killing or assaulting their husbands or
companions.
20 Each woman claimed the man had abused her. Within months,
other governors had followed suit.
21
Until 1982, anyone who called a premeditated murder selfdefense would have
been laughed out of court. But in 1982, Lenore Walker won the first legal victory for
her women-only theory of learned helplessness, which suggests that a woman whose
husband or boyfriend batters her becomes fearful for her life and helpless to leave
him so if she kills him, it is really self-defense—even if she had premeditated his
murder.
22
The woman is said to be a victim of the Battered Woman Syndrome. Is it possible
a woman could kill, let’s say, for insurance money? Lenore Walker says no: she
claims, “Women don’t kill men unless they’ve been pushed to a point of
desperation.”23
Ironically, feminists had often said, “There’s never an excuse for
violence against a woman.” Now they were saying, “But there’s always an excuse for
violence against a man . . . if a woman does it.” That sexism is now called the law in
fifteen states.
By the 1990s, states such as California and Ohio allowed a woman to kill her
sleeping husband and claim self-defense because she “felt helpless.”24 Allowing a
woman to claim self-defense after killing a man who was asleep gave these states a
female-only definition of self-defense. For the first time in American history,
premeditated murder, normally called first-degree murder (the worst kind), was
called self-defense—but only if a woman was accused; and only if a man was
murdered. Which leaves us with a Battered Woman Syndrome but no Battered Man
Syndrome—as if women were the only victims of learned helplessness.
Do both sexes suffer from feelings of learned helplessness? Yes. For example. . . .
What Happens When a Man Has “Battered Man
Syndrome”?
Tom Hayhurst grew up watching his mother throw phones and dishes at his dad. His
dad never returned the beatings25 and was too emotionally dependent to leave.
Finally, his dad fatally shot himself in the head.
Tom’s mom abused each of the children as well. The children eventually moved
away, except for Tom’s sister, who was developmental disabled. But then Tom’s
mother was seriously injured in a car accident. She asked Tom to return home to help
her and his disabled sister. Tom left his job in Arizona and took care of his mom
without pay. This left him with too little money to afford an apartment. Because he
knew he couldn’t handle living with his mother, he lived in a van in the driveway.
However, as the court report reads, “She began verbal and physical abuse of him,
brandishing a knife, and throwing objects at him.”26 “Finally,” Tom explains, “I just
blew it. I grabbed a crowbar and hit her.” The blow from the crowbar killed her.
Tom, a slight-built man, was evaluated by the psychologist as “driven by a sense
of duty and altruism . . . passive and nonaggressive . . . one who appreciates life’s
aesthetics.” Tom was given fifteen years to life in prison—meaning he would be
subjected to convicts who typically seek slight-built men to rape. Unlike mothers
who kill husbands and are freed on probation to care for their children, Tom was not
freed to continue the care he had been giving his disabled sister.
Few humans could claim a more impeccable history of learned helplessness than a
son who watched his dad kill himself rather than walk away or fight back. Few
humans could feel more trapped than a son who was living in poverty so he could
help a disabled mom and sister. And few people who kill can say that every family
member was so severely abused prior to one defending himself.
What type of sentence would have been given had Tom been a Theresa—a
daughter quitting her job to respond to the desperate call of an abusive dad and
disabled brother? If Theresa’s dad had continued abusing her and she finally
responded by hitting him and accidentally killing him, would she have gotten any
sentence? Or been put on probation, given counseling, become a feminist hero, and
had a TV movie made about her “devotion in the face of abuse”—a movie ending
happily with her “fighting back and breaking the cycle of dependence,” with her
freeing herself to take care of her developmentally disabled brother without the
abusive dad around?
The Burning Bed Murders
In 1984, Farrah Fawcett starred in an NBC-TV movie called The Burning Bed, based
on a true incident in which an abused wife murdered her husband by burning him to
death while he slept. The courts freed her because she had been abused.27 The TV
movie’s Nielsen rating exceeded that of the World Series, making it “one of the
highest-rated TV movies of all time”
28
In Why Men Are the Way They Are, I
expressed fear that the movie’s popularity reflected a willingness to hear the
message that if a woman feels she is abused, she can choose to kill her husband
rather than leave him. Ultimately, this had to lead either to a sex-biased system of
selfdefense or to also allowing men who are abused by women to kill women rather
than leave women.
Since the mid-eighties, Burning Bed murders have abounded. Judy Norman of
North Carolina murdered her husband by shooting him in the head while he slept.
She claimed self-defense because she had been abused. The state supreme court held
that self-defense was applicable only to cases in which one is in imminent danger of
being killed, and that, although she had been abused, she could have walked out
while he was sleeping. When the supreme court failed to rescue her, the governor
stepped in. He commuted her sentence. Judy served only two months, during which
she worked on her high school diploma.
29
By 1990, Ohio became the fifteenth state
30
to allow women to murder their
sleeping husbands and possibly get away with the murder by claiming past abuse
(their husbands were not in a position to argue the claim). They were not required to
prove they were in imminent danger of being killed without any possible physical
escape. On this basis, the governor of Ohio released from prison “The Ohio Twentyfive.”31
What Are the Rationales behind Freeing These
Women?
RATIONALE #1: When a woman is repeatedly physically abused, the emotional
consequences are with her for years, making the attack on her abuser a form
of emotional self-defense.
Fact. The emotional consequences of physical abuse are with many women
for years. And the emotional consequences are also with men who have been
battered for many years. The only two-sex studies that have ever been done
(more than a dozen) find women and men to be equally as likely to initiate
domestic violence at every level of severity.
32* The emotional consequences
of being stabbed or having one’s face cut with a frying pan are severe enough
to men that they are ashamed to even report it.
* The fourteen studies are described in my forthcoming book. A couple of these are in the endnotes.
Similarly, veterans of every war suffer Battered Man Syndrome in the form
of posttraumatic stress disorder. The emotional consequences are also with
them for years. But if a sufferer killed Admiral Zumwalt for ordering the
spraying of Agent Orange, he would be convicted for murder. Men who suffer
Battered Man Syndrome are not allowed to attack their abuser and call it selfdefense. They cannot do that even though the law required them to subject
themselves to battering and gave them no way to escape.
RATIONALE #2: It’s physical self-defense.
Fact. Of women imprisoned for murdering their husbands, almost one third
murdered men who were incapacitated (e.g., asleep, in wheelchairs, drunk to
the point of incapacitation). Approximately 60 percent premeditated the
murder.
33 Yet, more than half of the women who battered even the
incapacitated men later claimed self-defense (as in immediate danger).
34
RATIONALE #3: “Women don’t kill men unless they’ve been abused and pushed
to the point of desperation.”
Fact. Thirty percent of women in prison for killing men had histories of
violent offenses.
35
Fact. Some women in prison for killing their husbands have been abused by
them. However, when Dr. Coramae Richey Mann did a study of hundreds of
women imprisoned in six major cities for murdering their husbands or lovers,
not one woman was found to have been battered by a man.36 Some women,
then, do kill without first being abused.
Fact. When a woman kills a man, it is most frequently a man whose
insurance policy exceeds his immediate ability to provide for her.
37
(She
seldom kills her source of income.)
RATIONALE#4: Women are more afraid than men to report their abusers to the
authorities.
Fact. Despite fourteen separate two-sex studies finding that women and men
are equally as likely to batter,
38 more than 90 percent of police reports are
made by women about men, and more than 90 percent of temporary
restraining orders in the United States are initiated by women against men.39
Women, then, are about nine times as likely as men to report their abusers to
authorities. Male socialization to “take it like a man” makes men the sex
more fearful of reporting their abusers.
RATIONALE #5: The woman says she has nowhere to turn for help.
Fact. Ironically, during the 1980s, women’s paths for escaping their husbands
became perfected via hotlines, shelters, and women’s centers. TV ads give
women the numbers to call. Almost every community has shelters for
battered women but no shelters for battered men; most communities have
women’s centers; their only “men’s centers” are prisons. A woman has much
more closely developed networks of womenfriends who are likely to be
sympathetic to her being abused than a man does of men friends who are
likely to be sympathetic to his being abused. Only abused women have
governmentsubsidized paths of escape from their abusers, yet only abused
women are freed when they kill their abusers.
RATIONALE #6: No matter how hard a woman tries to escape, the man can still
track her down and “get her” (as in the film Sleeping with the Enemy).
Fact. Both sexes have this problem. Kevin Svoboda’s wife had been put in
jail for hiring a “hit man.” Nevertheless, this did not prevent her from trying
again. While awaiting sentencing, she again hired hit men to murder Kevin.40
She was caught only because one of her hit men turned out to be an
undercover police officer. Kevin has concluded, “I will never feel safe.” He
feels she might have wanted him dead to collect his $130,000 life insurance
policy. Should we allow Kevin to kill his wife in “self-defense”?
Similarly, Daniel Broderick tried to escape the abuse of his ex-wife,
Elizabeth Broderick. Even after Elizabeth had driven a truck through the front
door of their home, burglarized his home in defiance of a restraining order,
destroyed valuable artwork, and left repeated messages threatening to kill
him, Dan Broderick knew that, despite being one of San Diego’s best
attorneys, there was no way he could kill her first without being convicted of
first-degree murder. No Battered Man Syndrome would lighten his sentence.
Was he, though, really in danger? Well, Elizabeth bought a gun, walked into
the bedroom where Dan and his new wife, Linda, were sleeping, and emptied
her gun into both of them. Both are dead.
RATIONALE #7: The police will not take a woman seriously for complaining
about abuse, so reporting it to the police is useless.
Fact. When a woman complains in any of twelve states and many cities in
America, the police now have a mandatory policy of arresting a man, even
when there is no evidence of abuse, and even when the woman refuses to
press charges.
41 Which means that the woman is taken extremely seriously
when she complains; she is ignored only when she refuses to press charges. It
is part of the Innocent Woman Principle.
Although many mandatory arrest laws are written in gender-neutral
language, in practice they are not used to protect a man against a woman or to
protect a gay man against his possible abuser. When gay men who are
battered call the police, a common practice is to arrest both parties.
42
In communities without mandatory arrest policies, only the woman is encouraged
to press charges immediately, while she is angry, even if the police see no evidence
of abuse; she is generally not told that if she later drops those charges, the man can
be put on trial anyway; that is, he can be put on trial against her will—by the
government. Again, she is treated overly seriously when she complains, but like a
child when she says, “Let me take responsibility.” The belief in her innocence
outweighs the belief in her.
How the Battered Woman Syndrome Works in Real
Life
Marlene Wagshall waited until her husband, Joshua, was asleep. She then stood
beside their bed, assumed a crouched, combat position that she had trained for,
pointed a .357 Magnum at his chest, and squeezed the trigger.
43 Their daughter
watched, terror stricken, as her dad struggled to close the door so she would not see
him die. That was the last time she saw her dad.
After eighteen hours on the operating table and the removal of his spleen, parts of
his liver, his pancreas, and upper intestine, Joshua survived, in part. His children,
though, were gone—Marlene had kidnapped them.
The grand jury found Marlene indictable not only for attempted murder but for
numerous other counts. However, feminist District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman
reduced the attempted murder charge to second-degree assault and accepted a plea
for Marlene to spend one day in jail. After one day, Marlene could be free on five
years’ probation.44
Why? Marlene claimed she was a victim of the Battered Wife Syndrome.
However, there was no corroborative evidence—no children as witnesses, no hospital
records, no accounts of neighbors. Newspaper accounts suggested she had found
photographs of her husband with a nude woman and that she took her gun to him in a
rage. Josh testified, however, that the confrontation was systematic and methodical.
Think about it. If every wife has permission to kill a husband who has an
extramarital sexual relationship, and we use the Fourteenth Amendment to protect
men equally, we would have to give husbands permission to kill each wife who has
an extramarital relationship. The result of this equality? We’d all be investing in
funeral parlors.
Does freedom for women who shoot men have the potential for becoming even
more commonplace? Elizabeth Holtzman, the district attorney who plea-bargained
murder and kidnapping down to one day in jail, is now, as comptroller of the city of
New York, one of the country’s highest female officials—a potential future
candidate for president of the United States or a Supreme Court appointment.
Is the Battered Woman Syndrome Defense Really a
Political Defense?
Delia Alaniz paid a destitute young man $200 to kill her husband. But when she was
caught and found guilty, Hispanic and feminist groups inundated the governor’s
office with telephone calls; they staged vigils and organized marches. They wanted
her claim of having been abused to be enough to release her from prison.45 The
pressure on the governor increased when 60 Minutes responded with a piece that
neglected the perspective of the dead husband (or his family and friends) but was
sympathetic only to her plight.
46
(Only at the end of “60 Minutes” did Harry
Reasoner mention as an aside that the woman had a lover at the time of her hiring the
hit man.)
Governor Gardner of Washington felt the pressure.
47 He freed Alaniz after a year
and ten months. The young man she hired—from a disadvantaged background—is
still serving a thirty-year prison term.
48
(No one asks if he is also a victim of abuse,
as was Alaniz. And if he was, could he also kill his abusive parents and then receive
a governor’s pardon?)
When Governor Gardner freed Delia Alaniz, he explained, “Violence against
women and children is all too common in our society.”49 Now notice this: She kills
him, and violence against women is the only problem. She exploits a disadvantaged
youth, and violence against women is still the only issue. . . . When a woman kills a
man, the only thing we know is that the woman is violent and the man is dead. The
message the Learned Helplessness Defense and the Battered Woman Syndrome
sends to women is: A dead husband is better than a live witness. The best defense
is a dead offense.
Do feminists express the same concern when a wife has repeatedly abused her
husband? Betty King of Florida had thrown acid on her husband, Eddie, slashed his
face with a carpet knife, left him in a parking lot with a knife in his back, and shot
him with a gun—all on separate occasions. Eddie King reported none of these
incidents. The only two for which Betty was reported and arrested were those seen by
witnesses in public (one of the stabbings took place in a bar).
50
Finally, during a shouting match at a friend’s house, Betty King once again
reached into her purse to shoot Eddie. Fearing for his life, he pulled out a gun and
shot her first. An investigation confirmed his life was, in fact, imminently threatened.
Yet feminists and the media led an outcry of opposition to the verdict of selfdefense
for Eddie—an abused husband.
How the Learned Helplessness Defense Perpetuates
the Abuse of Women
The Learned Helplessness Defense wreaks the most havoc when it is applied to
mothers. Studies find that mothers who murder bring up children who murder.
51
Mothers who kill are characterized by their “simmering resentment of others for the
wrongs they have suffered, the belief they are the only ones who are so afflicted and
that the world is conspiring against them.”52 Obviously the children pick up this
attitude. Especially the girl children whose role models are their mothers. Do we
want these mothers, then, to bring up another generation of children?
Ideological feminists also often see the world as a conspiracy. Even Gloria
Steinem still speaks in terms of “us” versus “the enemy.”53 They see others as being
responsible for the wrongs they have suffered. These characteristics are almost
identical to those found by Kirkpatrick and Humphrey
54
in their studies of
women who murder. The Learned Helplessness Defense turns a dangerous
personality problem into a legal defense. It reinforces some women’s beliefs that
they can solve a problem by murdering the problem.
To free this woman to be a mother is to transfer the psychology of helplessness
to the next generation of children. When mothers who kill are returned to their
daughters, we are training daughters who will kill. Which is why fathers who are
murderers are not set free to bring up their children. And it is why creating the new
“any mother can kill and go free” legal defenses wreaks havoc on the children these
mothers raise.
V. “THE DEPRESSED MOTHER” DEFENSE: BABY BLUES AND
TERRIBLE TWOS
The Baby Blues
Remember Sheryl Lynn Massip, a mother in her mid-twenties who murdered her 6-
month-old son by crushing its head under the wheel of the family car? Massip
systematically covered up the murder until she was discovered. Then she testified
that she suffered from postpartum depression—or “baby blues.” Her sentence?
Treatment.
55
Do Dads Get the Baby Blues?
Mothers do, of course, get the baby blues. As do dads. A dad often feels like the
mother has left him for “another lover.” Husbands often say, “It’s she and the baby
cuddling on the couch and me looking on,” or, “Now I know the meaning of ‘two’s
company, three’s a crowd,’ ” or, “My wife and I used to spend lots of time together
but now we don’t”; or, “We’ve barely made love for two years—since the baby was
born.” Were the husband to kill his baby, as Sheryl Lynn did, it is unlikely we would
just treat him for baby blues or Save the Marriage Syndrome. Why does her version
of baby blues allow her to receive treatment for child murder while he would receive
life in prison for child murder with or without baby blues?
The Terrible Twos
Josephine Mesa beat her 2-year-old son to death with the wooden handle of a toilet
plunger.
56 She then buried the battered baby in a trash bin. When scavengers found
the baby outside her Oceanside, California, apartment, she denied she knew him.
When the evidence became overwhelming, she confessed. The excuse? She was
depressed. The child was going through the terrible twos. The punishment?
Counseling, probation, and antidepressants. She never spent a day behind bars.
57
(Even her own probation officer had recommended at least thirty days in jail after
Mesa had repeatedly been delinquent in showing up for appointments.)
VI. THE “MOTHERS DON’T KILL” DEFENSE
ITEM. Illinois. Paula Sims reported that her first daughter, Loralei, was
abducted by a masked gunman. In fact, she murdered Loralei. But she got
away with it.
58 So when her next daughter, Heather Lee, disappointed her, she
suffocated her, threw her in the trash barrel, and said another masked gunman
had abducted her daughter. It wasn’t until the second “masked man”
abduction that a serious search was conducted. Only the serious search led to
evidence.
Might Heather Lee be alive today if mothers did not have special immunity from
serious investigation?
VII. THE “CHILDREN NEED THEIR MOTHER” DEFENSE
ITEM. Colorado. Lory Foster’s husband had returned from Vietnam and was
going through mood swings both from posttraumatic stress syndrome and
from diabetes.
59 They had gotten into a fight and he had abused her. So she
killed him. Yet, even the prosecutor did not ask for a jail term. Why not? So
Lory could care for the children. . . .
Lory was given counseling and vocational training at state expense. In essence,
then, the state paid for her to get the help she needed after she broke the law but
didn’t pay to give him the help he needed after he obeyed the law.
What’s Really Going On Here?
Josephine Mesa, Paula Sims, and Lory Foster were all mothers who killed and who
were freed. The most frequent justification for freeing mothers who kill children is
that their children need them. But Josephine Mesa was freed even though she killed
her only son. And when Paula Sims killed her first child, her freedom allowed her to
kill her next child. Moreover, if mothers were freed because “children are the first
priority,” then fathers would be freed just as often. But they are not. Even when no
mother is available. Is the Children Need Their Mother Defense a rationalization to
free women, not a prioritization to love children?
Should a Man Be Allowed to Kill an Abusive Wife and
Be Freed Because He’s a Dad?
To my knowledge, no man has ever gone free after the premeditated murder of his
wife because the “children need their father.” Even if he had proof she intended to
kill him. Remember Dan Broderick (above), who had plenty of evidence that his exwife, Elizabeth, intended to kill him but could do nothing legal to stop her (although
he was one of San Diego’s best attorneys)? Even after Elizabeth drove a pickup truck
through the front of his house and endangered both his own life and his children’s
lives (Dan had sole custody of the children), Dan could not use a “Father Defense” to
kill Elizabeth. Nor could he use self-defense. Why not? Because when courts
consider the application of self-defense for a man, they require that he be responding
to an immediate and imminent danger to his life with no method of escape,
60 and Dan
couldn’t prove his life was in immediate physical danger until he was dead.
Should Dan Broderick have been allowed to legally kill Elizabeth based on her
threats to both his and the children’s lives? No. The law can only encourage people
like Dan to prosecute for breaking and entering, child endangerment, and attempted
murder. Similarly, it must encourage a woman who is abused to report the abuse.
Neither sex should be allowed to kill first and report later.
VIII. THE “BLAME-THE-FATHER, UNDERSTAND-THEMOTHER” DEFENSE
ITEM. Ramiro Rodriguez was driving back from the supermarket. His daughter
was sitting on his wife’s lap.61 As Ramiro made a left turn, a van crashed into
the car and his daughter was killed. Ramiro was charged with homicide. The
reason? His daughter was not placed in a safety seat.
Ramiro explained that his daughter was sick and wanted to be held so his
wife decided to hold her. Yet only Ramiro was charged.
Although it was the mother’s decision to hold Veronica (rather than put her
in a safety seat), only the father was charged with homicide. The mother was
charged with nothing. Ramiro was eventually acquitted after protests over the
racism.
62
 No one saw the sexism.
The larger picture? Both parents made a decision to have the mother do the
holding and father do the driving. Either both should be charged with vehicular
homicide—or neither. Ramiro and his wife shared parenting, but only Ramiro was
accused of homicide. How can Ramiro be accused of homicide when Sheryl Lynn
Massip deliberately crushed her baby’s head with her car and is freed?
IX. THE “MY CHILD. MY RIGHT TO ABUSE IT” DEFENSE
ITEM. Kimberly Hardy used crack cocaine just hours before her son was born.
When the son was born crack addicted, she was convicted (of delivering
cocaine to her son through the umbilical cord). This decision was reversed by
the Michigan Supreme Court.
63
ITEM. A million crack-addicted children have been born since 1987, but only
sixty of the mothers have faced criminal charges. One was convicted.64
ITEM. In the United States, 11 percent of all babies are born to drug-abusing
mothers.
65 This happens predominantly in mother-only homes
66
(although
only 21 percent of children live in mother-only homes
67
). (“Mother’s Day,”
in drug dealer terminology, is the day mothers get welfare checks and line up
at crack houses.
68
)
When a mother aborts a fetus, it is debatable whether that fetus was a human life.
But when a mother feeds crack to a fetus hours before it’s born and it is born as a
crack-addicted child, it is clearly an abused child. If the child dies immediately, it is
manslaughter. Does the right to choose mean the right to abuse?
What is really going on here? Is the issue whether or not the fetus has legal rights?
No. We already know the answer to that. For example, if a crack-addicted mother got
into a car accident and she killed the fetus of another woman, the crack-addicted
mother would be held legally responsible. A woman does not have the right to
abuse the fetus of another mother, she has the right to abuse just her own.Which
is why this defense is called the My Child, My Right to Abuse It Defense. What is
really going on here is not fetal rights, not children’s rights, but mothers’ rights. In
the case of the 3 percent of Washington, D.C., infants who die from cocaine
addiction while no mothers go to prison, the right to choose means the right to kill—
not a fetus but a child.
If we hold a drunk driver responsible for injury, why shouldn’t we hold a crackaddicted mother responsible for injury? In reality, the drunk driver injures a human
being only occasionally; the crack-addicted mother injures a human being almost
100 percent of the time. Should the mother who addicts her child to crack have any
more rights than another child abuser or drug dealer? How can we give a normal drug
dealer a life sentence but claim that a mother who deals drugs to her own child
should not so much as stand trial? If we feel compassion for the circumstances that
drove her to drugs, where is our compassion for the circumstances that drove the
drug dealer to drugs, the child abuser to abuse, the murderer . . .
The mother who addicts her child to crack cocaine is not just a drug dealer and
child abuser. In 1991 the first large wave of children prenatally exposed to crack
entered the nation’s schools. Some of these children are prone to mental retardation,
mild speech impairment, and cerebral palsy. Others acquire language slowly, offer a
jumble of markings as their names, do not understand numbers, or find it impossible
just to line up quietly.69 These children are driving the best teachers to quit,
therefore these mothers are not just abusers of their own child, they are abusers of
their community’s children.
When the crack children are separated out into special classrooms, the yearly cost
of educating them averages $15,000 per year, versus the normal $3,500 per year.
70
 It
is one of the reasons public schools cost so much more than private schools. In this
respect, average taxpayers are paying to have their own children’s education
undermined; they are subsidizing their own children’s abuse.
X. THE PLEA BARGAIN DEFENSE
Once a woman is seen as more innocent, her testimony is more valued, which leads
to prosecutors offering the woman the plea bargain in crimes committed jointly by a
woman and a man. And if a district attorney is up for reelection, the Chivalry Factor
allows him to look like a hero when his office prosecutes a man, or a bully if he
should put a woman behind bars. Moreover, he soon discovers it is easy to portray
the man as the mastermind, whereas if he prosecutes the woman, her attorney can use
the Svengali Defense. . . .
XI THE SVENGALI DEFENSE
ITEM. A beautiful woman—dubbed “The Miss America Bandit—conducted an
armed robbery of a bank. Federal sentencing guidelines called for a minimum
of four and a half to five years in federal prison. The federal judge gave her
two years because she told the judge she was in love with her hairdresser and
he had wanted her to rob the bank. The judge concluded, “Men have always
exercised malevolent influence over women, and women seem to be soft
touches for it, particularly if sex is involved. . . . It seems to me the
SvengaliTrilby relationship is the motivating force behind this lady*. . . the
main thing is sex.”71
Imagine a judge reducing a man’s sentence because he was in love and “women
have always exercised malevolent influence over men”? If justice is not the issue,
what is? The “Miss America Bandit” was beautiful. And judges, like most men,
instinctively protect beautiful women. If such an “angel” breaks the law, the judge
must do a devil hunt. (And the devil, of course, is a male.) For exactly this reason, it
was important that The Burning Bed be played by the woman considered the most
beautiful at the time: Farrah Fawcett.
Which sex is best able to persuade a sexual partner to do something immoral?
Let’s look.
XII. THE CONTRACT KILLING DEFENSE . . . DEFEND SELF BY
HIRING SOMEONE ELSE
Is Contract Killing the Female Method of Choice?
When I did the first review of my files in preparation for this section on contract
killing, I was struck by some fascinating patterns. First, all of these women hired
boys or men. Second, their targets were usually husbands, ex-husbands, or fathers—
men they once loved. Third, the targeted man usually had an insurance policy
significantly larger than the man’s next few years’ income.
72 Fourth, the women
often were never serious suspects until some coincidence exposed their plot. Fifth,
the woman usually chose one of three methods by which to kill: she (1) persuaded
her boyfriend to do the killing (in reverse Svengali style); (2) hired some young boys
from a disadvantaged background to do it for a small amount of money; or (3) hired
a professional killer, thus usually using the money her husband had earned to kill her
husband.
ITEM. Dixie Dyson tucked in her husband for his last night’s sleep. She had
arranged to have a lifelong friend and a boyfriend pretend to “break and
enter,” then “rape” her, kill her husband, then “escape.” She would collect the
insurance money.73
At the last moment, the lifelong friend backed out, but the boyfriend and
Dixie managed to kill Dixie’s husband after twenty-seven stabbings. They
were caught. Dixie “cut a deal” to reduce her sentence by reporting the
boyfriend and his friend. The friend who backed out got twenty-five years to
life for conspiracy.
74
ITEM. Deborah Ann Werner was due one third of her dad’s estate. She asked
her daughter to find some boys to murder him by plunging a knife through his
neck.75
ITEM. Diana Bogdanoff arranged to be with her husband at a secluded portion
of a nudist beach. Her husband didn’t mind, but then again, Diana hadn’t
mentioned that she had hired two young men to kill him while she watched.
After he was shot through the head, she reported the killers
76 but produced no
motive for the murder—no money was stolen and she was not sexually
molested.77
Diana did not become a suspect until an anonymous caller contacted a
nationwide crime hotline. The caller coincidentally heard about the murder
on the radio and remembered a friend describing just such a murder he had
refused to do . . . on an isolated nude beach while a woman named Diana
watched. Without this tip, Diana would never have become even a suspect.
78
ITEM. Roberta Pearce, a teacher’s aide, offered two of her 15-year-old students
$50,000 each, sex, and a car if they would do just one thing—kill her
husband.79 Roberta would get the home she and her husband were fighting
over and $200,000 in life insurance money.
ITEM. Mary Kay Cassidy and her teenage lover killed Mary Kay’s husband.80
Although the husband had told friends that he feared his wife might be trying
to kill him, his wife never became more than a routine suspect. She and her
teenage lover “mourned” the husband’s death and continued to be lovers for
months as they received sympathy from the townsfolk of Monongahela,
Pennsylvania.
By coincidence, the husband’s relatives were cleaning out the house and
discovered a wiretap apparatus with a tape of a conversation between Mary
Kay and her teenage lover as they plotted to kill her husband. The husband
had apparently begun tapping his phone just hours before he was killed. He
had never heard the tape himself. Only when confronted with the tape did
Mary Kay confess.
ITEM. Pamela Smart, a New Hampshire schoolteacher, convinced her teenage
boyfriend to kill her husband.81 Pamela and her boyfriend tried to get a
teenage girl involved in the murder. When the teenage girl gave the police a
taped conversation of Pamela Smart planning the murder, Pamela allegedly
hired a hit man to kill her.
82 Pamela never accused her husband of abusing
her. Her motive? Her husband was an insurance salesman. Yet not one of 500
newspaper articles acknowledged the possible motive of insurance money.83
The reaction? She is supported by a worldwide fan club called Friends of
Pamela Smart. When they held a vigil outside her prison, prison officials
allowed her to address a crowd of over 400 via a telephone hook-up over
stereo speakers.
84
I know of no example of a fan club for a man killing a woman—especially a
woman who had never abused him.
• • •
Perhaps the most appalling dimension of the nonprofessional contract killings is the
use by many of these women of teenage boys to conduct the murder—usually boys
from disadvantaged backgrounds. These women have committed both murder and
the psychological rape of a boy. Any adult man hiring a 15-year-old girl to kill his
wife would be on death row. Especially if he had had sex with the girl.
When professionals are hired to do contract killing, the ability to pay the money to
hire a professional implies a middle-class background. Women who hire
professionals are often middle-class women who kill their husbands with money
that their husbands earned. Thus Constantina Branco took money out of her
husband’s bank account to hire a man to kill her husband.85
What does the poor woman have in common with the middleclass woman? Neither
is likely to kill a man whose salary is currently protecting her unless his potential
insurance money exceeds his next few years’ salary.86
In essence, these women do
not kill their source of income, but they do kill to create income.
Contract killing offers potential for insight into the difference between the female
and male style of murdering the people they had once loved. The man does the
killing himself. The woman hires another man. Generally, when a man kills a
woman, he does it in a fit of rage. He is “out of control.” Contract killing is
premeditated. When a man does premeditate a murder, he often kills his wife, his
children, and then himself. The woman rarely kills herself.
Do men sometimes contract-kill women? Some men do hire contract killers to kill
women, but something happens on the way to the killing. The hit man can’t stomach
killing a woman; he turns the man who hired him in to the police!
87
(Even a hired
killer has a protective instinct when it comes to killing a woman.) So it is not that
men are completely exempt from using the contract-killing method, but that when
they do, it almost invariably, shall we say, backfires.
IF THERE WERE MALE-ONLY DEFENSES. WHAT WOULD THEY BE?
There is no male-only defense for killing a woman. Nor should there be. But if there
were, the male equivalent of the female PMS Defense would be the Testosterone
Defense; the equivalent of the Innocent Woman Defense would be the Rational Man
Defense—the equally sexist assumption that a man would not commit a crime unless
he had a rational reason to do it; there would be Father Defenses, Battered Man
Syndromes, and special defenses tailored for the burdens of the male role . . . such as
a Bodyguard Defense.
The Bodyguard Defense
Remember when Marlon Brando’s son Christian was so furious that his half-sister
Cheyenne had been “slapped around” by her boyfriend that he pulled a gun on him
and then, in a struggle, shot him?
88
 He said it was by mistake.
Should Brando have claimed the Bodyguard Defense? The rationale? If a woman
can kill a man who abuses her and then go free, why can’t another man also kill a
man who is abusing a woman and also go free?
HOW INDIVIDUAL WOMEN ARE GIVEN MORE POWER TO KILL THAN THE
ENTIRE U.S. GOVERNMENT
Taken together, the twelve female-only defenses allow almost any woman to take it
upon herself to “exercise the death penalty.” Ironically, we now consider it liberal to
favor a woman exercising the death penalty and to oppose the government exercising
the death penalty. The government is not allowed to kill someone first and declare
him or her an abuser later—only a woman can do that to a man. But perhaps most
amazing is that denial of due process is called “liberal” if a woman denies it to a
man; “totalitarian” if anyone denies due process to a woman.
DO MEN KILL WOMEN MORE THAN WOMEN KILL MEN?: THE SIX
BLINDERS
The Department of Justice tells us that men kill women twice as often as women kill
men.89 But let’s look more closely. Certainly men are more likely to be serial killers
of women. Almost always these killings follow a pattern and the man is found.
Therefore the Justice Department statistics can reflect this reality. Other killings by
men of women also provide easy evidence—the man spontaneously shoots his wife
or woman friend and then takes a gun to his own head. The evidence is lying on the
floor.
Six blinders, though, prevent us from seeing the female methods of killing. First, a
woman is more likely to poison a man than shoot him, and poisoning is often
recorded as a heart attack or accident. Thus Blanche Taylor Moore (the Arsenic and
Old Lace case) murdered men for a quarter century before she was discovered. And
Stella NickelPs Excedrin murders were blamed on vandals.
Contract killing is also less detectable because it is premeditated and often hired
out to a professional. When it is discovered, the Department of Justice registers it as
a “multiple offender killing”—it never gets recorded as a woman killing a man.90
This creates a second blinder.
While men who murder women generally come from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds, women who murder husbands or boyfriends are more likely to come
from middle-class backgrounds. Thus the third blinder: the money factor. For
example, Jean Harris (who killed the author of The Scarsdale Diet) was at one time a
private school headmistress
91
; Elizabeth Broderick had gone from elementary
schoolteacher to high society wife; Pamela Smart was a schoolteacher in New
Hampshire.
92 The money allows the best lawyers, more acquittals, and therefore
fewer female murderers to become Justice Department statistics.
Probably the most important blinders are the Chivalry Factor and the Innocent
Woman factor, which prevent many women from becoming serious suspects to begin
with. In addition, the Plea Bargain Defense sometimes leads to the dismissal of
charges. When, for example, a woman hires a boy who is a minor or a man who is a
boyfriend or professional.
When the Six Blinders—the poisoning disguise, contract killings disguised as
accidents and registered as multiple-offender killings, the money factor, the Chivalry
Factor, the Innocent Woman factor, and the Plea Bargain Defense—are combined,
we can see how we have consciously and unconsciously kept ourselves blind to
seeing women who murder men.
A distortion of statistics is created by the Six Blinders. But a distortion of
perception is created by the media’s tendency to make it international news when
men murder women (the University of Montreal murderer, the Hillside and Boston
stranglers) and, unless the man is famous, to make it local news when a woman
murders only a man.
In brief, it is impossible to know the degree to which the sexes kill each other. The
only thing we know for certain is that both sexes kill men more than they kill
women.
TOWARD A SOLUTION
No One Makes a Commitment to a Disadvantage
Laws that make one sex more powerful than the other boomerang against both sexes
—no one makes a commitment to a disadvantage. And when one sex doesn’t
commit, both sexes lose love. We can see this happening in Australia, for example,
where domestic violence is now defined to include a man raising his voice to his
wife—“the domestic decibel rule.” However, the opposite, a woman raising her voice
to her husband, is considered an understandable defense to male dominance.
93
 These
double standards have made men in Australia very fearful of getting married.
However, Australian feminists are pressing for legislation to make all laws that
apply to marriage also apply to couples living together. Laws like these have the
effect of separating the sexes.
How Can We Decrease Abuse and Murder in the
Future?
If a woman murders her husband because she feels helpless, then perhaps the man
also batters his wife because he too feels helpless. For both sexes, abuse derives not
from power but powerlessness. Abuse is a temporary display of power that usually
emerges from feelings of powerlessness and defeat.
The solution to abuse, then, does not come with creating artificial divisions
between physical and emotional abuse. It comes with resocializing both sexes to
listen in new ways—ways most of our parents never had the luxury to learn; it comes
with resocializing both sexes to select partners who are secure enough to listen
before they attack, and secure enough to leave if repeatedly attacked—either verbally
or physically.
There are no guarantees of safety to one’s life, but the solution has more to do
with avoiding the dangerous parts of town than selecting the dangerous parts of town
and shooting the people who make us fear for our life.
The solution comes with requiring communication in school, not excusing murder
in marriage. It comes with becoming as sensitive to the 20:1 ratio at which
schoolgirls hit schoolboys as we are to the 1:20 times in which schoolboys hit
schoolgirls.
94
In brief, solutions to abuse start with counseling, not killing; with both
sexes knowing how to protect themselves rather than permitting only one sex to use
the government as a protector.
CHAPTER 13
The Politics of Sex
WHY SEXUAL HARASSMENT IS SUCH A BIG ISSUE FOR WOMEN
If a woman at work caressed a man on his rear, he’d thank her, not sue her. So how
can a man understand why sexual harassment is such a big issue for women?
Men, imagine growing up always receiving compliments from women on your
mechanical abilities (as many women receive from men on their bodies). But
suddenly a social worker is responsible for evaluating you as a dad, and if she
doesn’t take you seriously, you risk losing your child. Imagine that as you’re
changing diapers, the social worker tells you how the traces of grease under your
fingernails are a real turn-on. You observe that she’s not focused on your parenting
skills. Does it feel you’re being told that “a man’s place is under the car”? If the
stakes were that your child might be taken from you if you are not taken seriously
(just as a female junior executive might lose her job if she is not taken seriously),
might you find yourself feeling ambivalent about what would, in another context,
feel like a compliment?
Now suppose the social worker’s compliments about mechanical abilities were
directed at the other men, not you. Would you be relieved? On one level, yes. But if
you found out she got these other men to give her free car repairs and afterward
evaluated these men as the best dads (!), might you become hypersensitive to
compliments given to other men about their mechanical abilities? Especially if only
one dad could get the child (just as sometimes only one woman can get the
promotion)?
It’s hard for men to “get” this because most boys got their adolescent attention
from performing and pursuing, and the workplace is just an extension of performing
and pursuing. And in the workplace, performing and pursuing mean pay and
promotions. But the adolescent girls who got the most attention got it from physical
attractiveness. For an engineer, though, physical attractiveness is not supposed to
lead to pay and promotions. So the workplace feels more alien to many women—
the workplace is not an easy extension of female adolescence.
How can a man understand this on a gut level? Think of every woman as in a
beauty contest every day of her life. (Whether attractive or unattractive, she is
evaluated by parents, relatives, boys, and other women.) In my workshops—
especially corporate workshops—I ask men to actually experience the “Female
Beauty Contest of Everyday Life.” As he’s being evaluated for his body, I ask him to
pretend the judges are mostly female executives who must decide whether to
promote him to the executive level. The men chosen as finalists are feeling
complimented but frustrated that maybe they’re being appreciated for the wrong
reasons. They experience the love/hate relationship that so many women feel toward
their bodies. On the other hand, the men not chosen as finalists feel rejected. In
different ways, each of the men feels like he is in a hostile work environment. I have
seen some men walk away in tears. These men have “walked a mile in women’s
moccasins.”
Why Do Some Women Get So Upset about Pinups at
Work?
A pinup at work symbolizes to many women that the man cares more about a
woman’s body than about a woman’s work. The woman who is serious about work
feels she has to deal with a man who wants to combine the two—without regard for
her desire. Combining the two doesn’t seem any more appropriate to her than it
would seem appropriate to a man to take a woman to her bedroom and see a bowl of
hundred-dollar bills on her night table.
Many women respond to pinups of women by bringing in pinups of men: “This’ll
show ’em.” But it has the opposite effect. It signals to men that the woman is so
interested in men’s bodies and sex that she can’t stop thinking of it while she’s
working. Which is fine with him.
How can a woman get a man to understand how she might feel about pinups? I ask
women to bring in pictures of men who are “success objects”—especially men who
become successful in their field at a young age. If she’s into computers, she might
frame a picture of Steven Jobs; or a picture of the owner of the company she works
for; or of her manager’s boss; if she’s in college, of Bon Jovi or Axl Rose . . . Or just
frame a list of “Forbes’ Wealthiest One Hundred.” Why? This helps men feel the
inadequacy many women feel looking at a pinup. Both types of pinups make our
colleagues feel inadequate—like a second choice. This feeling of rejection in the
very area for which one is usually the most valued contributes to a hostile
environment.
WHY SEXUAL HARASSMENT LEGISLATION FEELS UNFAIR TO MEN
ITEM. 1991. The University of Toronto finds a chemical engineering professor
guilty of sexual harassment for “prolonged” staring at a female student at the
university swimming pool.
1 He was guilty of creating a hostile environment
for her.
ITEM. 1991-92. Graffiti in a high school men’s room which the school
neglected to remove resulted in the school being accused of sexual
harassment and paying $15,000 for “mental anguish” to the girl mentioned in
the graffiti.
2
ITEM. 1992. Six-year-old Cheltzie claimed the boys on her bus used nasty
language and teased her. So her mom filed a sexual harassment lawsuit on
Cheltzie’s behalf. The school superintendent responded, “In the future, we’re
going to have to consider language ‘sexual harassment’ rather than a cause
for discipline.”3
In the 1960s, the term “sexual harassment” was unheard of. As women who were
divorced in the ‘60s and ’70s began to receive income from the workplace, they
began to demand the protection from the workplace that they once had in the
homeplace. Almost overnight, workplace rules changed.
Previously, few men even thought of using a lawsuit to protect themselves from an
offensive joke. A Polish man who heard a Polish joke was expected to laugh, not sue.
But men did have ways of defending themselves. If a colleague was offensive, they
avoided him. If he couldn’t be trusted, they gave him a bad reputation. If a boss was
authoritarian or overloaded them with work, some became passive-aggressive—
saying “yes, sir” and doing half the job; others worked overtime; others took the boss
aside and talked with him; others complained in a written evaluation. And if nothing
worked, they applied for a transfer or got another job.
Men never thought of suing the mouth that fed them. Why not? The mouth that fed
them also fed their families. The fights that men fought almost all helped them better
feed their families—either via higher salaries and workers’ compensation when they
were alive or via insurance or widows’ benefits when they were dead. In essence, he
fought for what protected his family more than for what protected him.
In the early 1970s, we began to hear of sexual harassment, but it most often meant
a woman being told that if she didn’t have sex with the boss, she’d lose her job. Most
everyone agreed that was harassment. Harassment soon came to include a boss
promising a quicker-than-earned promotion in exchange for sex. Almost all men
were opposed to this because it was mostly men who lost the work favor and whose
sexual favors were worth nothing. But because most men felt it was in the company’s
interest to fire a boss who exploited the company for personal pleasure, they didn’t
feel the necessity for government interference.
While men went about their business, so to speak, the federal government
expanded the legal definition of sexual harassment to anything a woman defined as a
“hostile work environment.”4 Men were oblivious until the Clarence Thomas
hearings pulled their heads out of the sand: they saw that the definition of
harassment had expanded to include discussing pornography, telling a dirty joke,
calling an employee “honey,” or taking a longer look at a shorter skirt.
Does the federal government actually make a dirty joke potentially illegal? Yes.
5
And a look? Yes. And calling an employee “honey”? Yes. All these things are illegal
if a woman decides she doesn’t like it, and if a man committed the “offense.”
Aren’t these guidelines gender neutral? Sometimes, yes; often, no. For example,
the sexual harassment guidelines mandate employers to consider it their “affirmative
duty” to “eliminate” behavior that women consider “hostile” or “intimidating”—
behavior such as “unwanted sexual advances”
6 or dirty jokes. The Department of
Labor’s guidelines are explained in a publication entitled “A Working Woman’s
Guide to Her Job Rights” (emphasis added) not “A Worker’s Guide to Job Rights.”7
Practically speaking, any man who sued a woman for discussing pornography or for
asking him out (a la Hill-Thomas) would be laughed out of the company before the
ink on the lawsuit dried.
Who defines “hostile environment”? The woman. Not even the man’s intent makes
a legal difference. In all other criminal behavior, intent makes all the difference.
Even in homicide. Sexual harassment legislation in its present form makes all
men unequal to all women. It is in blatant violation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s
guarantee of equal protection without regard of sex. Thus the political will to protect
only women prevails over the constitutional mandate to protect both sexes equally.
Suppose it is her word against his? When the guidelines of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) were first formed, a “bare assertion” of sexual
harassment—a woman’s word against a man’s—could not lead to conviction without
factual support. Ironically, when Clarence Thomas was chairman of that
commission, he was responsible for reversing that decision—now, if it’s her word
against his, a “bare assertion” of sexual harassment can stand without factual
support!
8 Clarence Thomas now knows why it is important for lawmakers to have to
live by the laws they create.
But it’s worse than that: a woman doesn’t even have to tell the man that he’s
bothering her. She can now complain to a girlfriend at work. The EEOC’s decision
number 84-1 allows complaining to a girlfriend at work to be “sufficient to support a
finding of harassment.”9
 That used to be called gossip. Now it’s called evidence.
All this led to the filing of 50,000 sexual harassment lawsuits between 1980 and
1990 alone,
10 scaring about three quarters of America’s major companies into
developing programs designed to fulfill the EEOC guidelines. In one decade,
women had gotten more protection against offensive jokes in the workplace than
men had gotten in centuries against being killed in the workplace. As women
entered the workplace and government became a substitute husband, many men felt
it was becoming more profitable to be a victim than an entrepreneur; that this was
creating a shift in the nation’s work ethic: from a nation of entrepreneurs to a nation
of victims.
“Your Lips Tell Me ‘No, No,
’ but There’s ‘Yes, Yes’ in
Your Eyes”: The Politics of Indirect Initiatives
Believe it or not, this is still not the core of what bothers most men. What is? First,
men still see women playing their old sexual games. And second, men do not see
sexual harassment legislation requiring women to take responsibility for their games.
For example, the magazine read by the largest number of single working women—
Cosmopolitan—instructs women on how to take indirect initiatives at work to which
men unconsciously respond.11 What if the wrong man responds? Other articles tell
her how to file a sexual harassment lawsuit should these indirect initiatives elicit
direct initiatives from the wrong man!12
Here are a few indirect initiatives Cosmopolitan tells women to take in the
workplace:
13
“As you pass his desk, drop a pile of papers or a purse, then stoop down to
gather them up. He’ll help. Lean close to him, put your hand on his shoulder to
steady your balance. . . .”
“If you have good legs, wear a very tight, short skirt and very high heels. Bend
over with your back to a man (to pick something up or look in a file drawer,
etc.). . . .”
“Brush up against somebody in the elevator. . . .”
“Say something slightly inappropriate during a business lunch or dinner, such
as, ‘You look great in blue.’ This should be done while you are talking about
something else—for example, ‘I was working on the Apex campaign, and did
you know you look great in blue?’ ”
The power of the woman’s indirect initiative is that it puts neither her ego nor her
career on the line. For example, Cosmopolitan advises “immediately after you meet
him—within seconds—touch him in some way, even if it’s just to pick off imaginary
lint.”14 Now, if he responds by asking her out but later calls off the relationship, he’s
subject to a harassment suit. (He “initiated.”) Once in court, few men would feel
comfortable telling a judge, “Your Honor, I asked her out because of the way she
picked imaginary lint off my jacket.”
What happens if he misses the lint hint? Cosmopolitan advises: “Look down at his
crotch . . . with a playful look or smile.”15 And if he misses the crotch cue? She can
“wear gorgeous red underwear, and show it ‘accidentally’—your blouse is open a bit,
so a man gets a peek of red lace bra. . . . You cross your legs and your skirt rides up. .
. .”
It doesn’t stop with Cosmopolitan. As women’s workforce participation increased,
Harlequin Romances discovered a formula that appealed to the working woman. It
involves a successful man pursuing a working woman, the working woman resisting,
the man overcoming her resistance, and her being “swept away.” It was the age-old
formula—he: pursue, persist; she: attract, resist. But now it was also the definition of
sexual harassment.
Were women buying this formula less? Hardly. The average woman who reads
romance novels now reads twenty books per month, about twice as many as in
1983.16
 And the Harlequin Romance working-woman formula transformed Harlequin
from a company on the verge of bankruptcy in the early 1970s to a company that now
accounts for 80 percent of the romance market.
17 And the romance market itself has
soared—now accounting for 46 percent of all United States mass market paperback
sales.
18
Being “swept away” is her fantasy, not his. He is as much victim as perpetrator. A
feeling reinforced when he sees a woman reading books called Love at Work: Using
Your Job to Find a Mate,
19 with the author’s list of the top ten high-powered
professions among men and, under each profession, the ten best jobs a woman can
get to “target your man.”20
What’s the Big Deal with a Miniskirt?
Many women ask, “What’s the big deal with a miniskirt, perfume, and a little flirting
in the workplace?” It would not be a big deal for most men if no one were making a
big deal of the man’s response.
It is a big deal, though, for the woman—if her goal is to be treated seriously at
work. Here’s why. Her indirect initiatives signal to the man her tendency to avoid
direct responsibility. Indirect initiatives signal to him that he is dealing with a
woman who is traditional. And traditionally, indirect initiatives were designed to
lead to marriage and the end of her involvement in the workplace. So the
miniskirt, perfume, and flirting unconsciously tell the man that this woman
wants an end to her involvement in the workplace—or, at least, an end to her
involvement by obligation. If you were a boss who had to choose between promoting
someone who had the option to work versus someone with the obligation to work
(e.g., to support a spouse and three children), whom would you take more seriously?
None of this female behavior is any more inherently wrong than the male form of
direct initiative taking. In almost all cultures throughout human history, women’s
indirect initiatives were their way of signaling their desire for men to take direct
initiatives. A flirtation was an invitation. In some cultures, lipstick was a woman’s
way of signaling her willingness to perform fellatio. In the South Sea islands, a fresh
flower in a woman’s hair signaled availability. The purpose of the flower, lipstick, or
the miniskirt is to put the signal out strongly enough to stimulate every man’s
interest. It is only when she has every man’s interest that she has real choice—the
choice of the “best” men.
What has been the historical importance of her barriers—her “no, noes”? It was
her way of selecting a man who could handle life’s rejections and survive, who cared
enough for her to take risks, and who would assume total responsibility should
anything go awry. In a sense, sexual harassment lawsuits are just the latest
version of the female selection process—allowing her to select for men who care
enough for her to put their career at risk; who have enough finesse to initiate without
becoming a jerk and enough guts to initiate despite a potential lawsuit. During this
process, she gets a sense of his trustworthiness, his commitment, his ability to
overcome barriers, the way he handles rejection. It allows her to select for men who
will perform, who will assume total responsibility. The more things change . . .
In the past, though, the process of his overcoming her barriers was called
“courtship.” Now it is called either “courtship” or “sexual harassment.” Here’s how
gray the boundary is. . . .
When It Works, It’s Called Courtship; When It Doesn’t,
It’s Called Harassment
When I ask women in my audiences who had entered the workplace when single and
later gotten married to “raise your hand if you married a man you met at work (or
through a workplace contact—a client, or someone to whom you were a client),”
almost two thirds raised their hands.
21 Another 15 percent of these women lived with
or had a long relationship with a man they met while on the job, but never married
him. Now here’s the dilemma.
The majority of the men these working women married were above them at work;
additionally, almost all of these men took the first initiative. Sexual initiatives by
men toward women below them at work is the most frequent definition of sexual
harassment. When it works, it’s called courtship. When it doesn’t work, it’s
called harassment.
Isn’t it harassment only when he persists? Not legally. For some women, any
initiative—even one—could make her feel uncomfortable and therefore create a
hostile environment. And that is all she needs to have her lawsuit upheld.
Many women acknowledge being married to men to whom they had at first said
“no.” By today’s standards, they are married to sexual harassers; but some of these
women are glad these men pursued.
SHOULD COWORKERS BE LOVERS?
Women especially say it is important to get to know someone before having sex with
them. The workplace gives a woman the opportunity to observe a man—how he
handles people above him and below him, his competence, his temper, his ethics,
values, habits. For most women, it works a lot better than bars. Overall, 35 million
Americans report some kind of “social-sexual” experience on their jobs each week.
22
More than 80 percent of all workers say they’ve had such an experience on their
job.23 When it works, we call it a wedding and the woman’s picture is in the paper;
when it doesn’t, we call it a lawsuit and the man’s picture is in the paper.
WHY DO MEN TELL DIRTY JOKES?
First, both sexes tell dirty jokes. Even as the mostly male Congress had passed
legislation to allow dirty jokes to constitute a “hostile environment,” female
members of Congress were circulating male-bashing humor.
24 Example? “What’s
the difference between government bonds and men?” “Bonds mature.” This was
permitted. But had the men asked, “What’s the difference between government
bonds and women?” and answered, “Bonds are worth more when they mature,” they
could be sued. Similarly, the women were joking, “Why is it a good thing there are
female astronauts?” and answering, “So someone will ask directions if the crew gets
lost in space.” Apparently the male congressmen were afraid to ask, “Who answered
when the female astronaut asked for directions?”
Although both sexes have their own styles of humor, we often heard during the
Thomas-Hill confrontation that dirty jokes were the way male bosses exert their
power over women. Hardly. Men share dirty jokes with peers, buddies, and with
anyone with whom they feel comfortable. A dirty joke is often a male boss’s
unconscious way of getting his staff to not take him so seriously and therefore not be
intimidated; his way of creating an atmosphere of easier feedback, of getting his
staff to bond. Men get confused when women say they feel left out when they’re not
included, then sue when they are included!
Ironically, at the same time millions of dollars are being spent learning about the
health benefits of humor, we are spending millions of dollars to censor a form of
humor.
25 Like “clean” jokes, dirty jokes that produce laughter stimulate our system
with oxygen. “Dirty” jokes are really no dirtier than clean jokes—they just play to
our hypocrisy: the hypocrisy that makes us call sex “dirty” and then go out and have
sex with someone we love.
When a man is attracted to a woman, being expected to take the sexual
initiative does not increase his power, it increases his paralysis. The possibility of
a lawsuit just intensifies the paralysis. Ironically, the more dangerous the waters, the
more joking serves as a way of testing the waters: if she laughs, maybe she’s
interested; if she looks disgusted, maybe she’s not. He would feel much more
powerful if she took responsibility for testing the waters.
Sexual-harassment consultants are now encouraging women to keep private
journal notes about hostile-environment behavior such as dirty jokes. Most bosses
don’t think their employees are intimidated by dirty jokes, but if they are, would like
to be told privately rather than discover a woman has kept journal notes and
complained to girlfriends on office time, and is now suing them. If a woman is
offended, he would like her to tell him, not sue him.
WHAT WOMEN SEE AS HARASSMENT, MEN SEE AS HAZING
A female navy psychologist tells her female plebes that the question “Why did you
come to the U.S. Naval Academy?” is a classic example of sexual harassment when a
man asks it.
26 Psychology Today applauded this approach.27 Yet one has to ask
whether this level of sensitivity contributes to the 50 percent higher attrition rate
among women in the services.
28 Why? It didn’t help the new women plebes
understand that every male and female plebe would be hazed for some reason—the
form of woman’s hazing took might be called “sexism,” but a short man would be
subject to “shortism” (“Which is higher, your IQ or your size?”); a stutterer, to guys
imitating his stutter; a man from the rural South to “ruralism” (guys imitating his
accent); a Jewish plebe might be called “Captain Hooknose”; a plebe who got the
praise of superiors, “ass kisser.” . . .
The underlying assumption behind hazing is that everyone has an area of
vulnerability. The function of hazing is to train the novice (or the plebe) to
survive attacks to vulnerable areas, to subordinate self to the team. The plebe
learns to laugh and toss off criticism, to use criticism as grist for improvement, not
to cave in. If a woman isn’t being hazed, she’s not being tested; therefore, she is
not being trusted.
Equality includes equal hazing—or equal training in survival skills. Which is why
hazing is most severe in professions in which survival is most at stake: firefighting,
crime fighting, the military, logging. Ironically, the Naval Academy’s course that
failed to connect harassment and hazing with survival was called “Survival Skills.”29
Yet, if a job is survival based, someone who is not hazed is not trusted.
Does the navy plebe or corporate rookie learn to “not take the attack personally”?
No. The attack often is personal. The rookie learns to take it despite the fact that the
criticism might indeed be a personal attack. The purpose of the personal attack is to
either make us a stronger link in the chain or to get rid of us should we choose to
remain a weak link. It is personal because only a personal attack can answer the key
question: “Are you willing to make your personhood subservient to the machine?”
Or, “Do you understand that you are a replaceable part?” Women protest criticism
and hazing more because fewer women have been trained to think of themselves
as such replaceable parts.
Is this system of institutionalized harassment, though, a system we want to
continue? It has trade-offs. One contribution women will make will be to curb its
excesses. Sensitive artists don’t kill dragons. But men’s defenses are the armor
that allows others not to have to wear armor. Without men’s armor, the United
States would have been helping Hitler stuff Jews into gas chambers. Harassment is
not a system that creates male power—it is a system that deflates male power. And
then promotes him to the degree he understands the larger picture—that he is
irrelevant.
The female navy psychologist, while not understanding how hazing helped
develop the characteristics needed to make sacrifices, expected only men to make all
these sacrifices. Perhaps the saddest commentary is that Psychology Today
applauded her view of hazing as sexism as if hazing were a plot against women
30
rather than understanding that hazing was actually a plot against men that was
finally being protested because it was hurting women.
CAN SEXUAL HARASSMENT LEGISLATION HURT WOMEN WHO WANT REAL
EQUALITY?
Sexual harassment legislation increases the price of hiring women and therefore
gives employers a legitimate reason to discriminate against women. A friend of mine
who ran one of the largest research firms in California let go a woman who was
unable to get along with most of the employees. A few weeks later, she sued him for
sexual harassment. He had no interest in her, had never had a complaint against him
for such behavior, nor had anyone in his company ever had a complaint against him
for sexual harassment. Well, there was one exception: The woman who filed the
complaint had herself been the subject of complaints that she had sexually harassed
two different men and discriminated against them when they were unresponsive.
Nevertheless, the legal hassle that resulted diverted the firm from its function and
catalyzed a decline that eventually led (in conjunction with the recession) to the
company’s extinction.
My friend felt as though he had been raped. At first he tried talking about it with
friends, but he could see them looking at him suspiciously. So now he keeps quiet.
But at a price. The same price women paid when they felt they had been raped but
got only looks of suspicion from friends, family, and police.
The more men a company employs, the more each woman hired forces the
company to protect itself from potential lawsuits against these men. It leaves almost
every male executive vulnerable to having his career ruined and almost every
company with male executives vulnerable to having a finely honed management
team broken up, its morale destroyed, and the remaining executives walking on
eggshells. All this is an invitation to executive hypocrisy—in which all the rules of
affirmative action are followed but everyone shuts his mouth when a woman comes
into the room, thus creating genuine discrimination and a thick-glassed ceiling.
The woman who wants real equality pays a big price. Sexual harassment
legislation often creates a hostile environment: an environment of female-aschild,one that makes even female employers more desirous of hiring men. As the
men walk on eggshells, a formerly fluid work environment becomes a paralyzed
environment.
In a global sense, if the government forces companies to protect women more and
promote women equally regardless of whether they perform equally, it damages the
ability of the nation’s industries to compete globally, thus reducing both the jobs and
promotions available to American women.
Some companies found it ironic that just as the Soviet Union was disowning Big
Brother, the United States was adopting Big Brother. (And, even more ironically, it
was feminists demanding Big Brother!)
The solution? Find out how to protect people without paralyzing the workplace—
find out who is really being hurt. This becomes clearer when we see that there are
really seven different sexual interactions occurring in the workplace.
THE SIX HIDDEN LEVELS OF ON-THE-JOB SEX
• Sexual blackmail. A boss threatens to fire an employee unless she or he is sexual.
If, for example, a male vice-president threatens to fire a female secretary unless
she has sex with him, it is in the company’s best interest to get rid of him. Why? If a
vice-president is willing to get rid of someone who is helping the company make a
profit, he’s betraying the company for sex. Almost every vice-president knows she or
he would be fired if even the slightest evidence of sexual blackmail were proven.
Which is why sexual blackmail so rarely happens in major companies.
• Sexual bribery. An executive promises a promotion in exchange for sex. This can
be explicit or implicit.
The company stands to lose a fortune if less competent employees are promoted
by an executive in exchange for sex. It is, therefore, in the company’s self-interest to
fire that executive. The employee who accepts sex in exchange for a promotion,
though, should not be allowed to sue if things don’t turn out well later. Rather, she or
he might be sued by the person losing the promotion.
• Workplace prostitution. An employee is sexual in exchange for a promotion; a
salesperson is sexual to win a sale. The sex can be given or just promised.
For example, if a female employee promises sex to get a promotion and a man
accepts, both might legitimately be subject to class-action suits from all employees
—male and female—for discrimination against them: they lost equal opportunity to
get the promotion through legitimate means.
Similarly, if a woman promises sex to win a sale from a potential customer and
succeeds, then, first, the customer’s employer should fire him—especially if, just to
enhance his sex life, he bought a product he would not otherwise have bought.
Second, the woman should be sued. By whom? By the companies competing against
her. They were competing against the illegal sale of a female body—not exactly fair
competition.
• Sexual harassment. Repeated sexual advances at work after an employee has said
“no.”
For legal action to be successful, the “no” would probably need to be in writing,
otherwise it cannot be distinguished from the courtship-in-the-workplace process
participated in by almost all single male and female employees (and many who are
less than single!). Why this distinction between a verbal “no” and a written “no”?
This is explained below.*
* See chapter 14, “The Politics of Rape.”
• Workplace flirtation. Suggestive dress, flirtatious eye contact, a combination of
touching and eye signals . . . the types of indirect initiatives Cosmopolitan
encourages working women to take at work. A workplace flirtation is a workplace
invitation to think of or do something other than work.
Flirtation can be to the workplace what a virus is to a computer: both screw up the
intended program. It leads to less than honest feedback for fear of undermining a
potential romance. It leads many male executives to hire for reasons that undermine
the company’s goals.
• Workplace porn. Pinups, lewd jokes, and sexual innuendos made in groups
(without flirtatious eye contact directed at a particular person).
Workplace porn—such as lewd, sexist jokes and pinups—is largely a male style
of testing the waters, and also part of what the EEOC has defined as sexual
harassment. It can cost a man career advancement. Workplace flirtation—more a
female style of indirect initiative-taking (see Cosmopolitan examples)—has been
totally ignored by the EEOC and, therefore, can be done by women, free of risk.
Here’s the twisted result. . . .
Guy wrote to me that he had taken a picture of a woman at work who was sitting
seductively in a miniskirt with her blouse unbuttoned enough to expose her bra (and
some breast). He pinned the picture up on a file cabinet. The woman’s face was
turned away so she wasn’t immediately recognizable.
Guy’s boss immediately called him in to his office and ordered him to “remove
the pornography from the file cabinet.” When Guy explained, tongue-in-cheek, that it
was “just a real-life picture of our work environment,” the boss caught the joke and
laughed, but still ordered him to remove the picture. The woman, however, whose
picture was the “pornography,” was not asked to dress in a less pornographic
manner. The workplace reality created by some females is, when photographed, the
workplace pornography protested by other females.
Months later, Guy was called in to the office again. His boss told him he was being
fired from work because of complaints that he was “too interested in men’s issues.”
None of these complaints documented any interference with his otherwise exemplary
work history. And Guy worked in a “male-dominated” profession under a male boss.
Guy’s workplace porn was not expected to get the woman sexually turned on, yet
Guy was fired despite the fact that a purpose of female flirtatious dress is to sexually
activate men like Guy. Workplace porn (the male style that bothers only some
females) is condemned while flirtatious dress (the female style that actively disturbs
the great majority of the males) is protected.
EDUCATOR SEX: THE “OPPRESSOR PROFESSOR” VERSUS THE “PRUDENT
STUDENT”
ITEM. While I was working on Why Men Are the Way They Are at a University
of California library in San Diego, I heard some panting from a nearby office.
Of course, I refrained from looking (!), but it “just so happened” that the
curtain was left slightly open (ah, for spontaneity’s slippage), exposing a
professor and a student who were . . . well . . .
Had I reported them, who should have been punished? (You can check more than
one.)
__ 1. No one—they were two consenting adults.
__ 2. If she was 17, the professor—for statutory rape.
__ 3. If she was 18, the professor—for sexual harassment.
__ 4. Because of their roles, both.
__ 5. The female student should at least be tried for the possibilities of sexual
bribery and student prostitution.
All these are possible approaches to educator sex. But as of now, whether she or I
report the incident, she is helped and he is ruined.
Educator sex does create some of the same problems as workplace sex. But
lawsuits are not the solution. The legal system is adversarial; sex between men and
women can be consensual. The law sees mostly black and white; males and females
see nuance—and they don’t just see: they smell, hear, feel, and change their mind.
Now here’s the deeper dilemma. A professor told me of a female student who was
failing and came to him near semester’s end, all upset and down on herself. They
went to the campus pub to talk. Crying, she confessed to feeling stupid. He took her
hand for a minute as he tried to reassure her she was bright and could “make it.”
At semester’s end, though, she didn’t make it. Shortly after, she sued him for
harassment with the testimony of a student who had seen them in the pub when the
professor was “holding her hand and she didn’t appear too happy about it”! First
thing next semester, he was tried and convicted in the campus headlines
Three quarters of Harvard women prefer faculty who “get to know me
personally.”31 Which inevitably leads to a breakdown in objectivity. Are the women
asking professors to give them academic favors while the university protects them
from “sexual favors”?
Part of the contribution of a university is the training to understand problems
beyond the “good guy’Vbad guy” level or, in the case of “Educator Sex,” beyond the
false dichotomy of “oppressor professor’V’prudent student.”
WHAT WOMEN SEE AS “BLAMING THE VICTIM,” MEN SEE AS “TAKING
RESPONSIBILITY”
If a man touches a cocktail waitress on the rear, he can expect a lawsuit—even
though she’s making tips from getting him drunk. But had fans touched Elvis Presley
on the rear while he was walking down the street at night in his stage outfit and Elvis
had sued the fans, he would have been told to take responsibility for provoking it
(because of what he was wearing). Some might even have accused him of “using” his
position to “lure” young girls. When a female genetic celebrity uses her position, we
protect her; when a male celebrity uses his, we protect her. The sex that is
responsible is reversed, but the sex we blame is the same.
We apply a similar double standard to educator sex. When a police officer stops a
driver, the driver feels vulnerable. When a professor tests a student, the student feels
vulnerable. But if the driver flashes a hundred-dollar bill, she or he can get charged
with bribery. When a female student flashes a “come hither” look to a professor, is
that sexual bribery? If she then turns around and sues the professor for responding to
her “come hither” look, is that sexual entrapment?
Sexual flirtation and come hither looks are the equivalent of flashing hundreddollar bills to a police officer. Perhaps even a woman “charming her way” into
permission to turn in an exam late (the “charm” being a hint of sex) is as much a
form of sexual bribery as is a “prolonged” look from the professor a form of sexual
harassment. If both the police officer and the driver are held responsible for a
monetary exchange, shouldn’t both the professor and student be held responsible for
a mutual sexual exchange? Otherwise sexual harassment legislation is a male-only
chastity belt. With women holding the key.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT’S POTENTIAL FOR ABUSE
One woman’s accusation of sexual harassment can stop the government in its tracks
(a la Anita Hill), can ruin a corporation (my friend’s research firm), or ruin a man’s
career (Senator Brock Adams). Women can use sexual harassment against the
government, corporations, or men. But the government and corporations can also use
it against men. A government that can label sexual language it considers incorrect as
sexual harassment has more potential for abuse than a government that can label
political language it considers incorrect as a threat to national security. And a
corporation that can do the same has the potential to turn every American male
employee into “the new ‘yes-man.’ ”
ITEM. Gordon Hamel was a respected employee with a virtually impeccable
record. When he saw his company doing something dishonest, he became a
whistle-blower. The company felt powerless to retaliate until it remembered
it could charge him with sexual harassment. Since sexual harassment could
be defined as something as minimal as a leer or a dirty joke—anything that
created a “hostile atmosphere” for a woman—the company could virtually
ruin him. Gordon Hamel lost his home defending himself and acknowledges
that if he had known what would happen, he would never have been honest.
32
Two of the most famous cases of sexual harassment in the early 1990s were those
made by Dr. Frances Conley against Stanford University and by Anita Hill against
Clarence Thomas. No one knows where the truth starts and ends. But we do know the
American people were left with an image of an all-male Senate committee judging a
woman and an all-male medical community harassing a doctor. We were left with
images of Dianas versus Goliaths.
When Frances Conley announced her resignation from the medical school, she
said she did so because she was tired of enduring twenty-five years of “gender
insensitivity.” She immediately made the prime-time news and the front covers of
People, The New York Times, Time, Newsweek, and Glamour. For months, not a
single article offered the position of her accused male colleagues. The media made
almost no effort to interview them. And the men, fearful of a shouting match,
volunteered little.
By the time a single major news account of Fran Conley’s resignation included the
following information, impressions had been made, bronzed, and framed. Here are
the perspectives we didn’t hear.
Frances Conley’s colleagues report that it was “standard Fran” for her to joke
about the evils of male testosterone and to threaten to castrate the men—to “cut off”
their “left one.”33 That she would refer to her male patients as “Mr. This” and “Mr.
That.” When she instructed a male resident to start surgery on a man, she’d yell,
“Roto-Rooter—your standard plumbing job.” She would tell male residents she was
supervising they had gained weight; if they dared protest, she’d respond, “Well,
maybe your fat was redistributed between your ears.”34
Frances said the men were constantly propositioning her. She later admitted the
last proposition was ten years ago. A neurosurgery nurse who worked directly with
Fran in the O.R. for fourteen years and reviewed Fran’s complaints, commented,
“None of this happened. None of it. And I like Fran. She’s been a friend, believe me.
But I think she’s gone off the deep end.”35
What appeared to be Fran’s motivation? Fran’s colleagues, mother, and sister all
reported that Fran had wanted to be chair of the neurosurgery department and was
furious when two outside consultants found Gerald Silverberg to be the strongest
candidate.
36
 From that point on, she had been threatening to quit.
The day before Fran’s resignation became effective—after all the publicity about
her being terrorized—Fran called the dean of the medical school. She had changed
her mind. She’d stay.37 What could be more amazing? The department that had been
nationally humiliated invited her back.
The broader problem? When an army of reporters and feminists listens only to
female perspectives while the frozen tongues of the silent sex sit in deep freeze, the
anger toward men hardens. This anger sets the stage for Anita Hill. . . .
The Other Side of Anita Hill
Anita Hill was presented as a politically conservative female testifying against a
politically conservative Clarence Thomas to an all-male committee that just didn’t
“get it.” There seemed to be little motivation other than courage. This picture was
not balanced by the fact that Anita Hill had been rejected for the position of chief
attorney-adviser at the EEOC.
38 Or that many of her colleagues at EEOC considered
her the least capable of the many advisers on Clarence Thomas’s staff.
39 Phyllis
Berry, a colleague of Anita Hill’s, wrote, “I found her to be untrustworthy, selfish,
and extremely bitter following a colleague’s appointment to head the Office of Legal
Counsel at EEOC.”40 From the EEOC, Anita Hill went to teaching at Oral Roberts
University and the University of Oklahoma, generally considered a fourth-rate law
school.
At Oral Roberts University, students reported some bizarre experiences with Anita
Hill. Lawrence Shiles, now a lawyer, filed a sworn affidavit with the Senate Judiciary
Committee explaining that when he was a student of Anita Hill’s, “I found ten to
twelve short, black pubic hairs in the pages of my returned assignment. I glanced
over at Jeff Londoff’s assignment and saw similar pubic hairs in his work.”41 Mark
Stewart, another student, also said he had pubic hairs in his assignment. Rather than
file a sexual harassment suit, the guys did what guys do—they turned it into a
standing joke, one which many students have confirmed.
At the University of Oklahoma, Anita was known for saying that nothing was
lower in evolution than a white male and that “women are always taken advantage
of.”42 Male students tried to write in flowery cursive to fool her into thinking the
paper was from a woman. One colleague explained, “Her flirtatiousness, her
provocative manner of dress, was not sweet or sexy, it’s sort of angry, almost a
weapon.”43
What about Anita Hill’s history prior to the EEOC? She worked at the law firm of
Wald, Harkrader, and Ross. She was caught falsifying time cards used in billing
hours to clients
44
; her overall performance level was so low that John Burke, a
partner, gave her notice.
45 She immediately leveled an accusation of sexual
harassment there which the office staff felt was also designed to distract from her
poor performance.
46
Few Americans were aware that Anita Hill did have a supervisor at the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission who had a collection of pornographic
material and spoke about it explicitly, but it wasn’t Justice Thomas.
47 Or of the four
witnesses who testified in support of Anita Hill, the only one to say her harasser was
Justice Thomas referred to a time period before Anita Hill had even gone to work for
Justice Thomas.
Again, I do not know where the truth starts and ends. I know only that what
became part of the public consciousness was the image of a conservative woman
with no motivation, not of a more complex woman with, perhaps, more complex
motivations. To make judgments about men as sexual harassers without knowing that
the women making the accusations were possibly bitter about promotions they were
denied is like making judgments about women as mothers without knowing that the
men making the accusations were probably bitter about custody they had been
denied. When the media makes women innocent victims and men evil perpetrators
before it investigates, it censors women’s shadow side and men’s light side and
creates the very hatred it later condemns.
SOME SOLUTIONS?
If a woman feels sexually harassed, encourage her to tell the man directly. How do I
know this will work? Well, when two feminists compiled the sexual harassment
stories of 100 women, every single man who was told by a woman directly that
she felt his behavior was harassing her stopped immediately.48 All of the men
apologized, some brought in flowers. When women do not understand men’s
vulnerability, they miss the degree to which men want to please women, not anger
women. Thus the authors who compiled these hundred stories never noticed how
each of the men who was informed immediately stopped!
Second, give both sexes an understanding of the other sex’s best intent. How, for
example, both sexes are doing what we are doing because that was functional for
millions of years (men: pursue, persist; women: attract, resist), but how it is no
longer functional in an age of equality.
Third, socialize both sexes to share responsibility for taking sexual initiatives.
Without shared responsibility, sexual harassment legislation will be just another
hoop through which men at work must jump to prove themselves worthy of loving
women at work.
Fourth, the adult feminist—as opposed to the adolescent feminist—will encourage
women to share the expectation of risking the first kiss on the lips, the first caress on
the genitals. Only the adolescent feminist fails to place as much emphasis on
resocializing women to take direct initiatives and resorts instead to encouraging
women to sue the men who do it badly and marry the men who do it right (if they are
the right men initiating it at the right moment). The adult feminist is willing to
exchange the power of indirect initiative taking for the responsibility of direct
initiative taking. She is willing to exchange victim power for adulthood.
Fifth, instead of articulating sexual harassment via the perspectives of the
women’s movement, raise the level of discussion to sexual contact via the
perspective of a gender transition movement.
All forms of sexual contact at work and at school are best dealt with by the
institution’s improving communication rather than the government’s mandating
legislation. The potential damage to the institution gives the institution an incentive
to correct it. This is not a perfect solution. It is only more perfect than having
government legislation of sexual nuance with its potential for annihilating anyone we
dislike via a false accusation.
CONCLUSION
Sexual harassment is a perfect metaphor for some of the most important challenges
of the twenty-first century: the challenge to our genetic heritage of protecting
women; the challenge to the stereotype of innocent woman/guilty man; the challenge
to keep our workplace flexible and fluid rather than petrified and paralyzed; the
challenge to respond to sexual nuance more with communication and less with
legislation—understanding that communication at least responds to nuance with
nuance, while legislation responds to nuance with rigidity. When we respond to the
nuance of the male-female dance with the rigidity of Stage I regulations, we are
going backward, not forward.
If we desire to protect people from being hurt, we also have to make laws against
love. And against marriage. And automobiles. And gossip. If we desire to protect
men from hurt, we would have to outlaw women’s sexual rejection of men. Most of
us, though, would rather live in a country in which we are free to make our mistakes
rather than in one in which we are subject to litigation for each mistake we make.
Early feminists sensed this: they were strong opponents of protective legislation.
They knew that as long as the princess was protected from the pea, women would be
deprived of equality. The modern-day woman’s “pea under the mattress” is the rough
spots in the workplace. When today’s feminists are proponents of protective
legislation, they oppose equality.
Sexual harassment legislation is sexist because it makes only the man responsible
for the male role in the sexual dance. It protects the woman who is sexual without
protecting coworkers from a woman who would use her sexuality for unearned
advancement; nor does it protect the company from this woman. Ultimately, it
ignores women’s role and therefore ignores women. Except as victim.
CHAPTER 14
The Politics of Rape
All men are rapists and that’s all they are.
—MARILYN FRENCH, author of The Women’s Room1
Men who are unjustly accused of rape can sometimes gain from the
experience.
—Vassar College Assistant Dean of Students
2
Imagine your son dating a woman from Vassar who feels that a man could gain from
being falsely accused of rape. When he comes home for the holidays and tells you he
might be spending next semester in prison—where he will be considered “fresh
meat” by the prisoners—do you tell him that “men who are unjustly accused of rape
can sometimes gain from the experience”? Do you feel good about paying taxpayer
dollars to support colleges that are that callous toward your son because he was born
male?
On the other hand, imagine your daughter. You know that date rape is a legitimate
issue. You want your daughter to experience dating in a way that contributes to love,
not hate. You also sense that if your daughter is raped by a man she is dating, her
ability to trust will also be raped. So the big question is: How do we make dating the
most positive experience possible for both our daughters and our sons? Do we do that
by not interfering? By criminalization (e.g., putting all men in jail who pursue a
woman after she says “no”)? By resocialization? And if it’s by resocialization, does
that mean teaching children what we learned or what they should learn? And exactly
what should they learn?
I believe the best road to rape prevention involves not just revamping the male
role, but re-imagining the roles of both genders. We need to make a transition from
Stage I dating to Stage II dating—together. We can start by clearing up some false
assumptions that have led to our current focus only on the male role.
IS RAPE AN OUTGROWTH OF MALE POWER?
Myth. Rape is a manifestation of male political and economic power.
Fact. Any given black man is three times as likely to be reported a rapist as a
white man.4
Do blacks suddenly have more political and economic power? Maybe rape does
not derive from power, but rather from powerlessness. More on that below.
IS RAPE AN OUTGROWTH OF MALE VIOLENCE?
Myth. Rape has nothing to do with sexual attraction—it is just an act of
violence.
5
 This is “proven” by the fact that women of every age are raped.
Fact. Being at the age of greatest sexual attraction makes the chances of
being raped at least 8,400 percent greater than being over age 50.6
When a woman is between the ages 16 and 19, her chances of being raped are 84 in
20,000; when she is between 50 and 64, her chances are less than one in 20,000.7
Sexual attraction, then, does have something to do with who is raped.
If rape were just an act of violence, then it should not be distinguished from
any other violent crime. Other violent crimes are not distinguished by the body
parts involved. And if they were, the vulnerability of the testicles would make
“assault to the testicles” an especially violent crime; and the importance of the head
would make “assault to the head” a crime deserving of extreme punishment. Unless
feminists are saying that a woman’s vagina is more important than a woman’s
head, rape must be acknowledged as something more than violence toward a
body part in order to give it its special treatment.
What are we really doing when we ignore the role of sexual attraction? We are
ignoring our responsibility as a culture for reinforcing men’s addiction to female
sexual beauty and then depriving men of what we’ve helped addict them to. We will
not be willing to stop reinforcing men’s addiction to beautiful women until we are
willing to stop the benefits that beautiful women receive when men’s addiction gets
men to perform for women, pay for women, and pursue women.
IS DATE RAPE A CRIME OR A MISUNDERSTANDING?
PREVAILING PERSPECTIVE. Date rape is a crime, not a misunderstanding.
ANOTHER PERSPECTIVE. Anyone who works with both sexes knows it is possible
for a man to feel he’s just made love and for a woman to feel she’s been
raped. It’s also possible for a woman to feel she’s made love in the evening
when she’s high, and feel raped in the morning when she’s sober—without
the man being a rapist. Or for a woman to feel she’s been made love to one
evening if the man said, “I love you,” but feel raped the next evening if he
hasn’t called back. But again, that doesn’t mean the man raped her.
It is also possible for a woman to go back to a man’s room, tell him she
doesn’t want to have intercourse, mean it, start kissing, have intercourse, and
then wish she hadn’t in the morning. How? Kissing is like eating potato chips.
Before we know it, we’ve gone further than we said we would.
The woman who says “I just want to talk” when she goes to the room but is
then responsive to a shoulder rub, a caressed hand, and a first kiss has not
verbally said, “I’ve changed my mind,” but she has said it nonverbally.
Therefore her last words were “no” to anything physical. If he is asked to take
responsibility because her last words were “no,” we are then making him
more responsible for her than she is for herself. To make him into a criminal
for not taking responsibility for her is to make him into a criminal for not
being her parent. Which is not equality, but woman-as-child.
All of this together leaves some men uncertain whether “read my lips”
means reading what her lips are saying or reading what her lips are doing.
The problem with every judgment of sexual behavior is that it is made
by people who aren’t being stimulated as they are making the judgment.
A jury that sees a woman in a sterile courtroom, asks her what she wanted,
and then assumes that anything else she did was the responsibility of the man
is insulting not only the woman but the power of sex. A man being sued after
a woman has more sex than intended is like Lay’s being sued after someone
has more potato chips than intended. In brief, date rape can be a crime, a
misunderstanding, or buyer’s remorse.
ISN’T IT THE MALE ROLE THAT NEEDS CHANGING BECAUSE IT IS MEN
WHO RAPE?
PREVAILING PERSPECTIVE. The problem in dating is the male role because it is
men who rape, not women.
MY PERSPECTIVE. The problem is both sexes’ roles: Both sexes’ roles lead to
both sexes’ problems—the problem for women of date rape; and problems for
men such as date “robbery,” unequal date rejection, unequal date
responsibility, and sexual shame.
Date Rape
Here is how the male-female roles combine with thousands of years of sexual
selection to lead to the problem of date rape for women.
The social role:
8
Reinforces boys’ addiction to sex with girls even as it warns girls against sex
with boys. It tells everyone sex is dirty and dangerous (herpes, AIDS) and then .
. .
It tells boys, “You take responsibility to get all this ‘dirty’ stuff,” which leads to
boys being mistrusted and rejected.
Rather than take rejections personally, a young man learns to turn a woman into
a sex object—it hurts him less to be rejected by an object.
Being objectified makes her feel alienated and being rejected makes him feel
hurt, angry, and powerless. When rejection and sexual identity go hand in hand,
we sow the seeds of violence—especially among boys who have no source of
power. His violence and objectifying reinforce the starting assumptions: Sex is
dirty and dangerous, and men can’t be trusted.
All this leads to the Male Sexual Catch-22: A man is sexually rejected until he
proves himself worthy of trust by “not going after sex,” but sexually ignored until he
“goes after sex.”
Note that this is a two-sex process, not a one-sex process. If we want to stop date
rape by men, we have to also stop “date passivity” by women. Thus far, women
retain the old option to be passive and take indirect initiatives, yet gain the new
option to take direct initiatives. Women, though, are not expected to initiate. Nor are
they told there is something wrong with them if they don’t. So women gain new
options without new expectations. Men retain old expectations without new options.
Except the option of prison if they do their old role badly.
While the label “date rape” has helped women articulate the most traumatic aspect
of dating from women’s perspective, men have no labels to help them articulate the
most traumatic aspects of dating from their perspective. Now, of course, the most
traumatic aspect is the possibility of being accused of date rape by a woman to whom
he thought he was making love.
On an everyday level, boys experience vulnerabilities in dating to which most of
us are blind. Attitudes like, “all guys care about is sex,” blind us to boys’
vulnerabilities to relationship rejection. A study of 1,000 young men and women
found that when a relationship is not going well, boys’ mental health is “more
negatively affected” than girls’.1
Why? While the impact of relationship rejection is powerful for both sexes, when
a relationship breaks up, a girl talks with her girlfriends and they concur he is a jerk.
Boys put all their emotional eggs in the basket of girls. Most boys emotionally open
up to no one. Boys often, though, get wind of the gossip that he is the jerk. His
response? Repressing his feelings—a set up for depression. Which isn’t easily
detected because he may hide it by drinking, drugs, video game addiction, anger—all
of which sidetrack those around him to focus on the symptoms…
Our blindness to our sons’ vulnerabilities is magnified by a subtle accumulation of
messages our sons receive about sex, paying, rejection and responsibility that
together lead to many boys feeling shame and, surprisingly, less-than-equal with a
girl to whom he feels a sexual attraction. While “date rape” gives words to one of our
daughters’ most potent fears, perhaps “date robbery,” “date rejection,” “date shame,”
and “date responsibility” give words to some of our sons’ unarticulated fears.
Date Robbery: Compensation for Male Inequality to
Female Genetic Celebrity Power
In 2014, as a boy learns the social customs beyond “hanging out” and “hooking up,”
he absorbs a myriad of messages that appear contradictory. On the one hand, there’s
the theory: equality. On the other hand, there’s his reality: inequality. Or “unequal
pay for equal love.” That is, the girl has the option to pay, but he feels the
expectation to pay. And the more attracted he is to a girl, the more he feels that
expectation.
How does a boy pick up on his expectation to pay? Kurt got his first cue when he
was 15 and his parents took the family to an expensive restaurant to celebrate his
older sister’s high school graduation. He was surprised to see some of his sister’s
friends there in couple mode—including a few of the most attractive girls in the
junior and senior class. And they also included one sophomore girl—Hannah—that
he would have “died” to be with. Kurt watched Hannah and the guy carefully. He
noted how Hannah disappeared to the rest room when the check came; by the time
she returned, it was paid.
Kurt “got it”: to reduce his chance of being thought of as cheap, pick up the tab.
On an unconscious level, seeing these most attractive women in the town’s most
expensive restaurant sent him the message that the more attractive the woman, the
more he had to pay.
Put more psychologically, Kurt was unconsciously learning that the more
attractive the girl he asked out, the more he had to compensate for his inequality to
her. To Kurt, Hannah’s beauty—largely genetic—offered her celebrity status. To
him, she was a “genetic celebrity.” As he contemplated approaching her, he felt more
like a groupie.
This gender pay gap also creates powerful fears for the woman: for example, if
guys typically pick up the tab for the most attractive women, then when a guy
doesn’t pick up the tab, she fears it’s because he doesn’t find her that attractive. She
unconsciously worries that she isn’t one of the genetic celebrities.
While from the graduation dinner on, Kurt “got” his expectation to pay, he now
started watching for cues as to just what he was expected to pay for. He concluded it
would help if he paid for all “Four D’s”: Drinks; Dinners; Driving; and the Date
(e.g., tickets, flowers, ski lift, hotel). He smiled a bit sardonically the day he
recognized that if he was successful at paying for the first four D’s, he might earn the
“privilege” of being the only one expected to pay for a Fifth “D”: a Diamond.
(Again, the girl had the option to buy him a diamond, but not the expectation.)
What Kurt was experiencing might be called a sort of “robbery-by-social-custom.”
Or “date robbery.”
Kurt got a taste of why no one thinks of it this way during a class discussion about
whether or not there was equal pay for equal work. He was about to raise his hand
and ask why discussions of equality never mention boys’ unequal expectation to pay
for drinks, dinners, dates, diamonds and so on. He thought of half-facetiously asking,
“what about ‘equal pay for equal love’?” But he quickly withdrew his hand when he
flashed on another reality: he would seem like a whiner. He’d already surmised that
girls are more attracted to alpha males than whining males. There were a couple of
girls in the class with whom he wanted to keep his options open; so he kept his
mouth shut.
Date Rejection and Date Shame: “Sex is Dirty: You
Initiate the Dirt”
Boys’ fears of both sexual rejection and shame add to their vulnerability. These are
triggered by the message “sex is dirty; you initiate the dirt.” Let’s start by looking at
how he hears the first half of that message: “sex is dirty.”
“Sex is Dirty”
In this modern age, with sex everywhere, do we still think of sex as “dirty”? Try this
litmus test.
Imagine you have an eleven year-old daughter and a thirteen year-old son. As you
walk past your living room, you notice that they are watching CSI, or perhaps
another murder mystery, on TV. Rank your reaction on a scale of one to ten, with one
being “minimal reaction—just noticed and registered” and ten being “totally
appalled.”
After you’ve picked your number, imagine again your children now watching on
TV a man touching his fully-visible penis, getting it ready to put into a naked
woman’s fully-exposed vagina. Using the same scale of one to ten, (one being “just
noticed”; ten being “totally appalled”) rank your reaction to your eleven year-old
daughter and thirteen year-old son watching the penis/vagina scene.
If your gut response was to rank the sex more negatively than the murder mystery,
you’re in agreement with virtually every parent in America—and most of the world.
Might your son, though, be unconsciously hearing that “sex is more appalling than
murder”? Might this leave him with the feeling that “sex is dirty”?
When our jargon for having sex, or “f**king,” is such a swear word and epithet
(“f__k you”), that both are too dirty to even be written out; and when our jargon for
calling a female or male a despicable person is to call him or her a “dick,” a guy gets
the sex-is-dirty message. (In the first edition of The Myth of Male Power, in 1993,
we only called a male a “dick” perhaps twice as often as we called a woman a “cunt.”
Now it’s perhaps twenty times as often.)
* See below for details.
At school, the portrayal of sex is not only as dirty (warts, Chlamydia), but also as
dangerous (AIDS, herpes). It was not so long ago that President Clinton’s
administration fired Jocelyn Elders for suggesting that masturbation might be, er,
natural—even healthy. As for President Clinton himself, his entire legacy threatened
to come falling down as fast as Humpty Dumpty with the stories of his tryst with
Monica Lewinsky.
Most boys hear two quasi-solutions to the “sex is dirty” message: abstain; or
protect a woman from your penis with a latex condom. These messages are, of
course, appropriate. But there is no balance. The Joy of Sex—once a supportive
player in the sexual revolution—is now neither a part of any school curriculum nor
any family’s conversations.
If sex is still dirty, hasn’t sexual equality at least erased the historic expectation on
our sons: “boys, initiate the dirt”?
“Boys, Initiate the Dirt”: The Stepping Stone to Sexual
Shame
When a boy is in his early teens, he is typically less mature than his female
classmates. Yet this less-mature boy—who generally knows little about sex, and
virtually nothing about girls—is the one expected to risk sexual rejection with a
more-mature girl. Now there’s enough to make him hide behind his computer!
Aren’t girls the ones who often initiate these days? In the past half-century, just as
we’ve increasingly given our daughters the option to pay, we’ve also given them the
option of taking sexual initiatives. In contrast, our sons still feel the expectation of
taking sexual initiatives—that is, the expectation of risking sexual rejection.
We’ve been fortunate to read a lot on the conflicting pressures on girls to both be
sexual and not be sexual; to be in fashion; to be beautiful; to be thin… When I
married Liz, one of her daughter’s fears of being too heavy was all-encompassing
enough that she suffered from anorexia trying to meet a standard that was
unattainable without compromising her health. We needed to hospitalize her to
catalyze a turn-around. But at least her problem was identifiable and credible enough
to have benefitted from funding for research and special hospital programs.
Fortunately, girls express their feelings, so we provide books and resources to help
our daughters navigate their minefield. Boys’ acting out via drinking and speeding,
bragging and competing, distracts us from their pain. Kyle is an example of the first
flush in many boys’ process…
Kyle was raised in a traditional, Christian family, and was attending Hope College
in Michigan when he first noticed Susan in their Freshman year. Both had learned to
wait until marriage for sex, but in reality both had two sexual partners during their
last couple of years in high school. (Susan initially admitted to only one; the other
one she had been sexual with “too quickly” and the “relationship” quickly
evaporated.)
When Kyle spotted Susan at a party, a number of guys were hitting on her, and he
knew if he didn’t approach Susan, she would never be in his life.
As he looked at Susan, the way she moved and laughed seemed so self-assured.
But the more he felt she had to offer, the more powerless he felt. He overheard one
guy boasting to her that he was pre-med; unfortunately, the guy also had the cool and
looks of a Brad Pitt. Kyle told me, “It’s not that I don’t feel I also have a lot to offer,
but how can I prove myself worthy of her attention without appearing like a boastful
jerk?”
Kyle knew that approaching Susan was just his first risk of rejection—that with a
traditional woman like Susan there could be 100+ risks of rejection between eye
contact and intercourse. The more desire he felt, the more shame he felt for feeling
sexual energy for Susan without even knowing her. He feared that if Susan knew
what he was feeling, she’d recoil. He felt the possibility for love and the certainty of
shame coursing through him like the uncooked batter of a marble cake.
But wait. If Kyle really feels guilty, why is he fantasizing buying her a drink—or
two, or three? Well, Kyle sensed that the shorter the period between eye contact
and intercourse, the shorter the period of potential rejection. He’s learned that
three drinks reduces that period of rejection. But what it takes to shorten the period
of rejection just increased his feelings of shame.
Kyle’s mom couldn’t understand anything to do with shortening the period of time
between eye contact and intercourse. As she put it, “Kyle gets calls from girls all the
time—they’re just throwing themselves at him…willing to ‘give it away.’ Girls these
days have no self respect; they’re disgusting…cheap sluts.”
Kyle’s perspective is different from his mom’s (shocking!). “The girls who call
are not the ones I’m interested in. The ones I’m interested in are being called by
other guys—I have to compete to get them.”
Here’s the rub. Note that the message Kyle’s mom is sending is still, “sex is dirty,
and girls who initiate it are cheap.”
So Kyle has two choices. Choice one: accept sex with the “cheap” girl for
immediate gratification. This choice leaves him feeling shame about the “cheap”
sex, and guilty about being responsive to a girl he feels he may soon reject. Or choice
two: go after the girls he really wants. This leaves him feeling he still needs to
initiate.
Thus Kyle still gets the message, “sex is dirty; boys, initiate the dirt.”
Commitment: Exchanging His Primary Fantasy for his
Primary Need
Did Kyle finally get up the nerve to seize an opportunity to talk with Susan? Yes.
And he got up the nerve to ask her on a date. Which turned into two. By the end of
the second date, Susan realized Kyle had “potential.”
Susan sensed, correctly, that although Kyle was attentive and caring, he was,
nevertheless, a guy, and—although she would never have worded it this way—his
primary fantasy was sex with a variety of beautiful women. However, Susan was
different from most women in that she could see that Kyle —like the man in high
school with whom she had been serious—had something more than a primary
fantasy; she saw that both guys had a primary need. Their primary need was
intimacy.
With the guy in high school, Susan had seen that he made a commitment only
when he felt that the value of intimacy with her exceeded the value of sex with a
variety of beautiful women. Only then would he trade in his primary fantasy for his
primary need.
However, that insight also created Susan’s dilemma. The guy she had sex with
“too quickly” never got to really appreciate her depth. She feared that if she and Kyle
were sexual too quickly, and Kyle didn’t have time to appreciate all she had to offer;
and feel the benefits of intimacy with someone he cared for and who cared for him,
he might just continue pursuing his primary fantasy of a variety of attractive women.
She felt it was her job to slow things down so he could discover that she could in fact
fulfill his primary need for intimacy.
While Susan intuited this, Kyle and her second date had been great, and after a few
drinks, and as she got into the heat of kissing Kyle, her resolve weakened.
Date Responsibility
Susan found herself saying “no” with her verbal language and “yes” with her body
language. After pulling back and saying “that’s enough this evening,” she continued
to tongue kiss and caress his body with hers. When she did withdraw from kissing,
she wanted to show her interest, so ran her finger over his lips. After some time and
some wine, they were making out more intensely than before she had said “that’s
enough.”
None of this bothered either of them until they attended some required college
presentations about “date rape.” These presentations featured the mantra, “what is
there about ‘no’ you don’t understand?” It turns out when the cocktail of sex, love,
fear of rejection, drinks and hormones are mixed, there is a lot about the verbal “no”
that gets mixed in with the body language of “yes.”
Just as music is more powerful than lyrics, Kyle felt the power of body language
over verbal language. He wondered quietly (“quietly” because he feared being
rejected should he say it aloud), “Does Susan’s ‘no’ followed by her continuing to
tongue kiss with me, and caress my body with her breasts—actually mean a ‘no,’ or a
‘yes’?” He mused, “even if I were inhuman and able to ignore the tongue kissing and
breast caressing, and pay attention only to her verbal ‘no,’ does that verbal ‘no’ mean
‘no’ until the next date; until I spend more time listening to her, or more time
opening up about myself? Is it a ‘no’ she says to fulfill her parents’ and church’s
moral code and make her and Kyle feel she isn’t too ‘easy’? Is it a ‘no’ until she has
time for more wine to relax her, or more coffee to wake her up? Should I turn the
lights up, or down? Turn the music up or down—or change to her type of music? And
exactly what is her type of music—in this moment, in this mood?
Kyle felt that the date rape seminars focused all the responsibility on him. He was
relieved that Susan agreed, but neither had a solution. The seminars didn’t suggest,
for example, that a woman who said “no” or “that’s enough” also tell the man
that if and when she was ready to go further, that she would take responsibility
to initiate. Not indirectly, but directly. That would have helped. This responsibility
would require no risk on her part, since he had already demonstrated his desire to go
that far.
Kyle didn’t feel that anything he had been hearing acknowledged the mixed
messages that leave him feeling damned if he does and damned if he doesn’t. One
girl wanted him to be a gentleman one moment, but let him know how much she had
loved reading Fifty Shades of Grey. Since he didn’t know much about Fifty Shades of
Grey, he Googled it. He discovered Fifty Shades of Grey was the fastest-selling
paperback book in history— and it celebrates BDSM (Bondage, Discipline, Sadism
and Masochism). The story line features a girl who is a college student and a virgin.
Yes, those mixed messages didn’t quite synch with the seminars challenging “what is
there about ‘no’ that you don’t understand”?
Had Kyle had the courage, he might ask what he’s supposed to make of women
idolizing Rhett Butler, the man who carries the kicking and screaming Scarlett
O’Hara to bed in Gone with the Wind (the other best-selling romance novel of all
time).
Had Kyle survived asking these questions, he might feel safe enough to ask, “if
women want their no’s respected, why aren’t women’s romance novels titled He
Stopped When I Said “No”? Instead, one of the most enduring of women’s romance
novels, Sweet Savage Love, romanticizes a woman rejecting the hand of her gentler
lover who saves her from the rapist, and instead marrying the man who has raped
her.
When Kyle and Susan discussed this with their friends on Christmas break, their
friends reported stories from their universities of guys being disciplined or dismissed
for having sex with girls who were drunk. The girls were not considered responsible
for their sexuality once they had gotten drunk, but the guy was. The girl was not
considered responsible for getting drunk, but the guy was. Kyle puzzled, “where, in
an age of equality, is female responsibility and accountability?” More on that later.
Kyle and Susan discovered that at almost all their friends’ universities, plays such
as Eve Ensler’s Vagina Monologue were staged, but there was no play articulating
the perspective of men on campus. Nor was there any Vagina/Penis Dialogue.
Kyle didn’t envision that the purpose of a real dialogue would be to justify
ignoring women’s “noes.” In fact, a real dialogue would clarify for him that fantasy
is different from reality. But a real dialogue would also create a safe space for the
guys to say that when verbal “noes” conflict with non-verbal “yeses” (tongues still
touching), that the man should not be put in jail for choosing the “yes” over the “no.”
He might just be trying to become what she fantasizes about.
The differences in each sex’s experiences are so enormous emotionally that the
method I have used at universities to facilitate the sexes to have compassion for each
other are participatory: men’s beauty contests and role reversal dates. I explain that
every woman is in a beauty contest every day of her life, and invite every man to
“participate in the beauty contest of every day life that the woman experiences.” The
women become judges. After an hour of being judged—with every man but one
becoming a ‘loser’—the guys are able to emotionally feel how it feels to be selected
or rejected based on one’s beauty alone. (Of course, I ask them to demonstrate talent
and answer a ‘moral virtue’ question created by the female judges!)
After the men’s beauty contest, I facilitate the women asking the men out and
discovering which of the men’s “noes” mean “no” forever, which mean “no” for the
rest of the date, which for a few minutes, and which just mean slow down.
Conversely, the men get to feel what it’s like to have their “noes” ignored. (The
hardest job, of course, is getting the men to say “no” to begin with. But I do have my
ways!)
In brief, date rape seminars that do not ask women to share equally in the risks of
rejection, or to be accountable and responsible once they have said ‘no,’ are not
seminars about female empowerment, but about female infantilization. In many
leading universities there is no longer a battle of the sexes; there is a war in which
only one side is showing up. Men put their heads in the sand, and hope the bullets
will miss.
WHAT’S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN STRANGER RAPE, ACQUAINTANCE RAPE,
AND DATE RAPE?
We often hear, “Rape is rape, right?” No. A stranger forcing himself on a woman at
knife point is different from a man and woman having sex while drunk and having
regrets in the morning. What is different? When a woman agrees to a date, she does
not make a choice to be sexual, but she does make a choice to explore sexual
possibilities. The woman makes no such choice with a stranger or an acquaintance.
In this respect, date rape is really quite different from acquaintance rape and the
terms should not be used interchangeably, as they often are.
Why have all these complications arisen in the last decade or so? Let’s look. . . .
THE POLITICS OF MAKING DATE RAPE AN EPIDEMIC AND MAKING ONLY
MEN RESPONSIBLE
“Almost half of all women are raped or victims of attempted rape at least
once in their lives.
11
. . . Under conditions of male dominance, if sex is
normally something men do to women, viewing “yes” as a sign of consent is
misguided.”12
—CATHARINE MACKINNON, NBC’S only choice to analyze the entire Clarence
Thomas hearings as Tom Brokaw moderated
The country’s leading feminist legal expert on date rape, Catharine MacKinnon,
says that a woman’s “yes” cannot be considered genuine. Why not? Because she is
forced to say “yes” in order to survive.
13
If a woman can be considered raped even if
she says “yes,” it is understandable how MacKinnon concluded that half of all
women are subject to rape or attempted rape in their lifetime.
The truth is that both sexes participate in unwanted sexual activity. A feminist
who was brave enough to ask these broad-based questions of both sexes astonished
herself to discover that 94 percent of the men (as well as 98 percent of the women)
said they had had unwanted sexual activity by the time they were in college.
18 But
even more surprising was her finding, reported in the Journal of Sex Research, that
63 percent of the men and 46 percent of the women said they had experienced
unwanted intercourse.
19 By feminist definitions of rape as unwanted sex, virtually
everyone has been raped. And that’s how rape begins to look like an epidemic. It’s
also how rape gets trivialized.
A woman friend of mine read this and said, “I have difficulty thinking of concrete
examples of why a man might not want to have sex with a woman.” Why not? A
college man sometimes fears intercourse when he feels a woman will read into it
more of a commitment than he wants. But he has it anyway because he was the one
pressing for it before she made it clear it meant a commitment to her, and in the heat
of passion he doesn’t know how to say “no” despite the strings that are attached. In
fact, it is exactly that scenario—with the man not calling the next day for fear of
further misleading her and the woman feeling rejected because he didn’t call after
sex—that leads to the woman feeling “raped,” and sometimes even reporting it as
rape.
Men, like women, often don’t want to have sex for the first time when they are
drunk or exhausted but sometimes do it because they fear rejecting the other one.
Men, like women, feel torn between passions of the moment and the desire, the
following morning, to have an excuse for not being home when their loved one called
for the fourth time at 3 A.M.
Laws against date rape with broad definitions are like fifty-five-mile-per-hour
speed limits—by making everyone a violator, they trivialize those who are real
violators. But at least the anyone-who-drives-is-a-violator laws for speed limits are
applicable to both sexes. Any-man-who-dates-can-be-a-rapist laws are applicable to
only one sex. They are sexist laws. Laws with broad definitions of rape are like
laws making fifty-five-mile-per-hour speed limits for men and no speed limits
for women.
Every exaggerated claim of the increase in rapes magnifies every woman’s fears
as she walks down the street at night. And it magnifies her distrust of men. In brief,
exaggerated claims hurt women. Exaggerated claims of rape rates might be good for
politics, but they are bad for women who want to love men. To exploit women for the
sake of politics is not my definition of liberation.
None of this, of course, empathizes with The Male Date Rape Catch-22: We are
still expecting men to be the sexual salespersons but now defining them as rapists
when they do it so well that there’s “buyer’s remorse.”
CAN A MAN BE LEGALLY ACCUSED OF RAPE IF HE HAS SEX WITH A WOMAN
WHO SAYS “YES”?
ITEM. Wisconsin, 1990. Mark Peterson is found guilty of sexually assaulting a
woman who, doctors say, has forty-six personalities.
24 She claimed that one
of her personalities, a girl the age of 6, informed her afterward that she had
been having sex. She then accused Mark Peterson of having sexually
assaulted her. Six of the woman’s different personalities were summoned to
the witness stand; four were individually sworn in. She acknowledged that the
personality that had sex—the “fun-loving” personality—did not object.
To add insult to injury, Mark made the national press as a criminal. He will always
be known in his community as a man convicted of rape. His criminal record will
surface in any investigation, requiring him to explain himself. Meanwhile, the
woman’s name did not make the papers. Men in Wisconsin don’t know whether the
woman they are about to have sex with might be she. Or one like her.
It is one thing to expect men to find out which “no” means “no”; now we’re
expecting men to know which “yes” means “yes.” No, we’re not just expecting him
to know—we’re convicting him as a criminal if he doesn’t know.
This story of a woman with the multiple personalities whose “yes” could mean
“no” could be an old Indian legend told by an Indian elder to boys coming of age as a
metaphor to warn boys of their helplessness before the mixed messages of the
female. But instead, it is a 1990s legal case in a state considered legally progressive.
Instead it is a present-day metaphor for the degree to which the legal system is
willing to protect women and prosecute men. If a woman swears on the Bible in a
court of law that she said one thing, then swears she said something else, and we
convict him because he didn’t know more about what she meant than she did, isn’t
this the perfect metaphor for telling men that women have only rights, that men have
only responsibilities?
Is the multiple personality case a metaphor for a new reality? Yes. Across the
country, campuses now considered “progressive”—from Berkeley to Harvard and
Swarthmore—already allow a woman who is drunk to claim the next morning that
she was raped even if she said “yes” the evening before!
25 Put simply, your son can
be with a woman who has a few drinks, has sex with him all she wants and, in the
morning, claims your son raped her because the evening before, she was under the
influence of alcohol and it was a different personality that said “yes.”
Now MacKinnon, the National Clearinghouse on Marital and Date Rape, and other
feminists plan to extend this beyond the campus—to criminal law.
26
Is this possible
legally? Yes. Many states already have laws saying a person cannot be considered to
have consented to something if they are “under the influence”—if they have
diminished mental capacity.
Once a woman can claim her “yes” didn’t really mean “yes” because she was
“under the influence,” this opens the floodgates. We have already seen how Sheryl
Lynn Massip’s “baby blues” became the legal excuse for her crushing her son’s head
under her car. So it opens the floodgates for a woman declaring she felt raped
because she was under the influence of a traumatic divorce, a child dying, or just
extreme stress. Even a man’s hint of a long-term relationship the night before can be
said to have put her “under the influence.” (“When he didn’t call the next morning I
knew then he was lying—I would never have gone to bed with him if I didn’t think
he wanted a commitment; I was under the influence of him saying he loved me last
night. He lied—he raped me.”)
In an era of equality, we are making her not responsible because she is drunk and
making him responsible even though he is also drunk. It is ironic that feminism is
pioneering this new inequality.
Sexually, of course, the sexes aren’t equal. It is exactly a woman’s greater sexual
power that often makes a man so fearful of being rejected by her that he buys himself
drinks to reduce his fear. In essence, her sexual power often leads to him drinking;
his sexual power rarely leads to her drinking. If anything is evidence of her power
over him, it is his being expected to spend his money to buy her drinks without her
reciprocating. In brief, many men feel “under the influence” the moment they see
a beautiful woman.
“Under the influence” legislation—or multiple personality legislation—has
enormous potential for backfiring against women. Women buy perfumes that
promise to put men under the influence. Women laugh at how a man with a hard
penis has a soft brain. We have seen how almost every culture reinforced men’s
addiction to beautiful and young women exactly so a man would make an irrational
decision when he was “under the influence.” It is men—far more than women—
whose mental capacities are diminished when they are “under the influence” of a
beautiful woman.
It is ironic that in an era in which we are increasingly holding people more
responsible if they drink and drive, we are holding women less responsible if they
drink and have sex. Of course, if she drinks and just has sex, that’s her business. But
if she drinks and claims the man raped her, she is injuring a man. Sometimes for life.
And so she is as responsible for drinking and declaring rape as a driver is for
drinking and causing an accident.
27
The difference between a woman saying “yes” and “no” is all important when it
comes to drinking. A man should be held responsible when a woman drinks and still
says “no” with both her verbal language and all her body language. If anything, he
should be held more responsible if she says “no” after drinking.
As long as society tells men to be the salespersons of sex, it is sexist for society to
put only men in jail if they sell well. We don’t put other salespersons in jail for
buying clients drinks and successfully transforming a “no” into a “maybe” into a
“yes.” If the client makes a choice to drink too much and the “yes” turns out to be a
bad decision, it is the client who gets fired, not the salesperson. We expect adults to
take responsibility.
IS A FALSELY ACCUSED MAN A RAPED MAN?
When a woman says she is raped, it is important to listen, support her, believe her,
and help her make a transition back to a life of maximum trust. Every human being,
when hurting, needs listening and love more than anything else—including having
their problem solved.
When a man says he has been falsely accused of rape, he is also telling us he
has been raped. He is being accused of being one of life’s most despicable persons.
Even if the accusation is made by an adolescent girl who acknowledges she’s lying
before there’s a trial, a man’s life can be ruined. As with Grover Gale.
A 13-year-old North Carolina girl accused Grover Gale II of raping her four
times.
28 By the time Grover spent thirty-six days in jail, he had lost his construction
job, fallen into debt, couldn’t pay his rent for his family at home, and was on the
verge of divorce. Then the girl, whose name still didn’t make the papers, admitted
she made the whole thing up, saying she was just trying to get her 17-year-old
boyfriend’s attention.29
But when Grover returned from jail, his own son was afraid to hug him. Wherever
he went in town, people pointed to him and called him names like “child molester”
and “rapist.” At the mall, someone spit on him. Although in debt, the family felt
forced to move. They moved out of state to a small town where no one knew him.
Two years later, the charges still plague him. He’s still $15,000 in debt because of
bail fees, trial costs, and back rent he’s never been able to catch up on.
Grover doesn’t know whether to sue or forget. When he tries to forget, the anger
builds up inside. Sometimes he storms out of his apartment, jumps into his car, and
tears down a country road, heading for nowhere. He pulls over and kicks the car until
he has calmed down. He says, “I’ve been lost ever since.” His wife can’t speak about
the accusations—or hear him speak about them—without crying.30
Grover has lost his life and his wife. He has been raped. Yet he cannot afford
counseling and the state won’t pay for him to be counseled. The psychologists
themselves fear a liability suit: “If you treat him as a nonrapist and he later rapes,
you can be sued for not treating him as a rapist—as a psychologist you supposedly
should have known.”31
Once accused, no trial can erase the shadow that follows a man wherever he goes.
Dr. William Kennedy Smith is still rarely referred to as “doctor.” When he was
accused of date rape in 1991, his residency in internal medicine at the University of
New Mexico Hospital was put on hold. Understandable. But after he was found not
guilty, the university could not decide whether or not it should rescind the offer.
32
The shadow followed him after the trial. In 2014, despite a career focused on
rehabilitating people disabled by landmines, the second sentence of his Wikipedia
bio describes Kennedy-Smith as “famous for a well-publicized 1991 rape trial in
which he was acquitted.”
But is Grover Gale an exception? Aren’t false accusations of rape rare?
AREN’T FALSE ACCUSATIONS OF RAPE RARE?
When The Washington Post undertook to investigate false allegations of rape, they
discovered that very few counties and cities would open their files. Those that do
usually categorize false reports—in which the woman admits she lied—as
“unfounded” (not false), the same as reports in which there is no evidence, or not
enough to warrant a trial. When The Washington Post got some counties in the
Washington area to open their files, two of the largest counties, Prince George in
Maryland and Fairfax in Virginia, had recorded 30 and 40 percent false or
“unfounded,” respectively.36
(In contrast, false claims of burglaries, robberies, and
auto thefts range between 1 and 5 percent.
37
)
Aren’t these findings in conflict with the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports which the
media has popularized as saying that only 9 percent of rape accusations are false or
unfounded?38 No. The FBI knows the number of women who reported they were
raped, but not whether the rapist was found guilty or innocent. In 47 percent of the
cases, the alleged rapist has not even been identified or found, or if he has been
found, there was insufficient evidence to arrest him.
39 The remaining 53 percent
were arrested, but the FBI doesn’t receive data as to whether they were eventually
found guilty or innocent.
40
In brief, as far as the FBI knows, the percentage of false
accusations overall could be anywhere from zero to 100 percent.
While every man who is falsely accused is, in essence, emotionally raped, a false
accusation often also creates an economic rape. In 1993, when a woman lied about
being raped in Nordstrom’s, Nordstrom’s had changed their security system in
seventy-two stores in ten states prior to laboratory tests uncovering evidence in
direct contradiction to the woman’s story (which led to the woman acknowledging
she lied).
41 The reputation of the victim (Nordstrom’s) was damaged for two weeks
in the national media while the name of the victimizer was kept confidential. The
district attorney’s office refused to prosecute the woman. No one compensated
Nordstrom’s. Nor does anyone compensate everyone who shops at Nordstrom’s who
is indirectly paying for that false accusation.
The only things we know for sure, then, are that false accusations are not a rarity,
that they are themselves a form of rape, and that they are a political hot potato. It
will doubtless take a female politician of enormous integrity to confront the issue.
But the exact percentage of false accusations is of secondary importance. Of primary
importance is that the judge and jury realize that either sex could be the victim; that
in the case of date rape, there could be, in fact, a misunderstanding; that a woman
can feel intimidated about making a genuine accusation; and that a man’s life can be
ruined (losing job, wife, and children) even if he is found not guilty; that both parties
must therefore receive due process (as opposed to having rape shield laws protecting
the female more than the male).
WHY WOULD A WOMAN MAKE A FALSE ACCUSATION OF RAPE?
When I first heard of date rape allegations and the possibility of false accusations,
my personal response was, “Lots of guys don’t know when to take ‘no’ for an
answer, and besides, what would motivate a woman to make a false accusation if
there wasn’t at least some truth to it?” But when the governor of New York was
fooled by Tawana Brawley’s convincing claim of gang rape (which turned out to be a
hoax) and the governor of Illinois refused Gary Dotson a retrial years after DNA
tests virtually proved him innocent, I felt I had to open my mind. Which led to my
wondering what motivated false accusations.
The Washington Post investigation found a wide range of motivations.
42 Anger
toward former boyfriends was common. Kathryn Tucci’s former boyfriend spent
thirteen months in jail before Kathryn acknowledged she lied. (Kathryn’s
punishment was community service.) Perhaps most common was the need of young
girls to give excuses to their parents for arriving home late, staying out all night, or
being pregnant.
One woman accused her newspaper delivery man of raping her at gunpoint
because she needed an excuse to be late to work. This was her second false report in
a year. The first time no charges were brought against her so she thought there would
be no consequences the second time. The second time there were consequences: she
received counseling.43
When the U.S. Air Force investigated 556 cases of alleged rape, and found a high
percentage of false allegations,
33
they wondered what could motivate a woman to
make a false allegation. The Air Force responded by conducting the only systematic
study of motivations by directly asking the women who had acknowledged a false
allegation:
Motivations Given by the Women Who Acknowledged They Had Made False
Accusations of Rape
44
Reason Percent
Spite or revenge 20
To compensate for feelings of guilt or shame 20
Thought she might be pregnant 13
To conceal an affair 12
To test husband’s love 9
Mental/emotional disorder 9
To avoid personal responsibility 4
Failure to pay, or extortion 4
Thought she might have caught VD 3
Other 6
TOTAL 100
Dr. Charles McDowell, the Supervisory Special Agent of the U.S. Air Force’s
Office of Special Investigations, who conducted the study, found that most false
accusations are “instrumental”—they serve a purpose. If the purpose isn’t avoiding
guilt or getting revenge, it might be to allow her to tell her parents, “I did not
purposely go out and get pregnant—I was raped”; or tell her husband, “I did not have
an affair; it was not my fault. . . . I was raped.”45
When society lays judgments on women who have sex before it thinks they should,
it sets women up to make false accusations to avoid those judgments. One of the
cases from the Air Force study illustrates this:
A 22-year-old enlistee attended a party and while there had intercourse
with her companion. She admitted to being intoxicated at the time and
subsequently began to feel ashamed because others at the party knew what
she had done, so she decided to claim that she had been raped.46
In the past, the woman would have had to take responsibility for being sexual “too
quickly.” Now the date rape accusation gives her a way out. She can transfer the
burden of guilt and shame to the man. What the society needs to confront is whether
it is really necessary to create the guilt and therefore to have to find someone to
blame.
There is, though, a time to accept blame—when we break a commitment. When
accusing a man of date rape holds so much power that the entire U.S. Navy is
intimidated into not investigating whether the woman is using that accusation to
avoid blame for a broken commitment, then we are creating an incentive for false
accusations to be used by the least responsible women.
Kermit Cain, a friend of mine who had been chosen Sailor of the Year in 1980,
found his career a victim of just such a motivation when he and a female service
member returned to his place after a date and, Kermit explains . . .
I told her I was going upstairs to my room. She followed me and as soon as
the door closed, she took off most of her clothes and got up onto my bed. The
next morning we went back to her place.
Weeks later, I was ordered into my Department Head’s office where I was
informed I was going to prison, no explanation given as to the charges, only
that “anything else you do will only add time to your sentence.” After that the
command’s Internal Affairs officer began questioning every female that I’d
come in contact with, stating that I was a rapist and implying they’d be
helping to protect women if they gave a statement against me. In two cases,
they were able to get further false statements against me by making the
women think they were doing the right thing.
No lawyer would take my case. So my dad and I conducted our own
research for three years and found that the girl had gone AWOL to avoid a
drug test, having already failed a previous test and knowing that a second
conviction would give her a Bad Conduct Discharge. When she returned
home and her parents asked her why she had left the base, she said she’d been
raped. The mother called the congressman who called the Office of
Legislative Affairs who called the Commanding Officer who called the
Captain. . . .
I discovered part of this when one of the girl’s three roommates, seeing
what had happened to me (I had lost 50 pounds and was on the verge of
suicide), took pity on me and told me that she had overheard my accuser
planning the whole scenario with her roommate—who was also her lover—as
an excuse to be off base at the time of the drug test. She reported she heard
them laughing and joking about it.
By the time I completed my research, my evidence was so overwhelming
that I was able to get an attorney. When we went to the Naval Investigative
Service, we found they already had enough statements to prove my innocence
—but they would not give them directly to my attorney; we had to discover
them on our own. Only after this process was I eventually cleared of all
charges and reinstated. But obviously my career as it otherwise would have
been was ruined. I don’t know that I would be alive today had I not met Susan
[the woman he now lives with], or if my accuser’s roommate had not
overheard the planning, or if my dad had not helped me when I most needed
it.
47
Kermit’s experience allowed me to see how one or two women could set into
motion the Machinery of Male Protectors who were so fearful of not protecting a
woman that they steamrolled over the most basic rights of humans, and in so doing
trapped themselves into covering up even more of the woman’s lies for fear of
looking like fools. Male chauvinism is about protecting women. Male chauvinism
and feminism have this in common.
Protecting women from assuming responsibility is not limited to conservatives in
the armed services. At universities from Berkeley to Harvard to Swarthmore, a
woman can now have sex while drunk on the drinks the men paid for at night and
claim in the morning she was raped because she was drunk and therefore she
couldn’t really consent.
48 The man’s social expectation to pay for the drinks is now
seen as evidence he was “plying” the woman with drinks and “luring” the woman to
bed. Now, especially on liberal campuses, this is viewed as evidence of man as
oppressor and woman as innocent.
One would think that the universities with the best and brightest women would
pioneer the effort to socialize women to ask men out, take initiatives, pay for men’s
drinks . . . in preparation for running their own businesses (and their own lives).
Instead, they are simultaneously treating these women as children who cannot take
responsibility while socializing men to take all the responsibility. These universities
then blame businesses for discriminating when these women are less successful in
business.
THE SOCIAL INCENTIVES FOR FALSE ACCUSATIONS
We are now making false accusations of rape more than a method by which women
can avoid guilt, avoid blame for broken responsibilities, and exact revenge. We are
also creating positive, proactive incentives for false accusations. As when women
who accuse men of rape are turned into feminist heroines even before there is a trial
(as with Tawana Brawley and the accusers of Tyson and Smith).
Three less visible social incentives are now adding even more to the temptation
for false accusations: (1) monetary incentives; (2) abortion laws; and (3) TV.
Monetary Incentives
ITEM. Eleven women from the Miss Black America Pageant all claimed Mike
Tyson touched them on their rears. So the founder of the pageant filed a $607
million lawsuit against Mike Tyson. Several of the contestants eventually
admitted they had lied in the hope of getting publicity and cashing in on the
award money.49
Think about it. If each woman had the potential for being awarded $20 to $30
million, aren’t we really bribing women to make false accusations? And the Miss
Black America Pageant itself got more publicity than it had received in its history.
The lawsuit made tabloid headlines; the dropping of the lawsuit was buried in the
back pages.
When we fail to give as much attention to an accusation being false as to the
original accusation, the accused is left with an image problem. When this image
problem was added to Tyson’s already tarnished image, Tyson was doubtless more
likely to be found guilty when one of the Miss Black America contestants (Desiree
Washington) accused him of date rape than he would have if tabloid headlines had
recently been saying “Black Beauties Bribed by Big Bucks.”
We often hear that women are hesitant about bringing up sexual harassment suits
and date rape charges because they won’t be believed, their personal lives are
invaded, their identities known, etc. This is true. For most women. But it is not true
for some women. And from the man’s perspective, it takes only a few women to
make dating feel like a minefield—not only of rejection but of life-ruining lawsuits.
When dating is a minefield for men, both sexes suffer the loneliness.
Abortion Laws
ITEM. In order to get an abortion, Norma McCorvey, the “Jane Roe” of Roe v.
Wade, claimed she was raped. Fourteen years later, she acknowledged she had
lied.50
If a teenage girl cannot get an abortion unless she says she was raped, she will feel
pressure to claim she was raped. The next question is: “Who was the rapist?” Next,
there’s a lineup of men. Which often pits the future of an unwed teenage girl against
“some boy out there.” Next, the media has convicted him. If the boy tries to defend
himself by suing for libel, he only gives the girl an incentive never to confess that
her accusation is false. If he doesn’t sue for libel, he’s left defenseless. He loses if he
defends himself, and loses if he doesn’t.
Is it possible to allow the woman just to say, “I need an abortion—I was raped,”
without trying to find the rapist? No. This is the same as abortion on demand with
the downside of making the woman a liar and the rape statistics soar.
When abortion is made “illegal except in the case of incest,” a woman will feel
pressure to report a family member—usually her father, stepfather, uncle, or brother
—in order to get an abortion. This does not encourage family unity.
Meanwhile, the falsely accused man loses his job and his reputation—even if the
woman later reveals, as did Jane Roe, that she “had to claim rape” just to get an
abortion. By accusing a man to free a woman, have we really come any further than
when we accused blacks to free whites? What used to make both races paranoid now
makes both sexes paranoid. When it happens to blacks, we call it racism; when it
happens to men, we call it women’s liberation.
Now here’s the rub: Every false report makes police and judges doubt women who
genuinely have been raped.
TV
ITEM. Florida. A 9-year-old girl said her mom’s boyfriend, Ivie Cornell
Norris, had raped her. Norris spent 513 days in Pinellas County Jail in Florida
and could have been there for life. Why was he released? When the girl
turned 11, she convinced enough people that she had lied.51
Why did she lie? Her mom and Mr. Norris often argued, and she wanted to get
Norris “out of the way.” How was she so convincing at age 9? She based her
testimony on an episode of the television drama 21 Jump Street that depicted a rape
case.
Similarly, at least one of the false accusations among the air force women was an
exact replica of the television rape drama she had seen earlier in the evening.52
It
was only when the inconsistencies of her story were uncovered that the woman
volunteered she had patterned her story on the TV rape drama. The woman’s
motivation? She wanted to get her husband to pay attention to her.
THE POLITICS OF HIS WORD AGAINST HERS
When the name Gary Dotson is mentioned, most of us think of a man falsely accused
of rape. Few people realize that although Cathleen Crowell Webb was so easily
believed when she accused Gary Dotson, she was not believed when she said Gary
Dotson was innocent. Or that it took five amazing coincidences to get Dotson a new
trial. Without any one of these coincidences, Gary Dotson today would be serving his
twelfth year of a twenty-five to fifty-year sentence.
The first coincidence was that Cathleen Webb found God—and became tormented
by her guilt. Only then did she acknowledge she had made up the story to cover up a
sexual encounter with her boyfriend.
The second coincidence was the development of DNA tests which proved the
semen stains on Webb’s underwear were not Dotson’s, but did match the semen of
Cathy’s boyfriend at the time. Then, although the two circumstances that were
enough to convict Dotson—Cathy’s say-so and “Dotson’s” semen—were reversed,
reversal was not enough to even get Dotson a new trial. Imagine if we had sent a
woman to prison for attempting to murder a man and the man later acknowledged he
had falsely accused the woman. Would the woman be denied a new trial?
The third coincidence was the timely emergence of two extraordinary journalists
who dedicated part of their lives to uncovering the complete facts in Dotson’s case.
The fourth involved the availability and willingness of a famous attorney to defend
an already-convicted rapist.
The fifth coincidence is the most outrageous. When the original trial judge refused
to grant Dotson a new trial, Governor Thompson just happened to be running for
reelection. Because Thompson had the unique credentials of being the chairman of
the Illinois Prisoner Review Board and a former prosecutor, he had the credibility to
conduct an extraordinary public “review” of the case—thereby doing an end run
around the judge’s refusal to grant a retrial.
The governor’s public “trial” became a virtual TV soap opera in Chicago. It was
only as the public felt for Cathy’s and Gary’s pain and the public sentiment shifted
that the governor felt he could take political action without committing political
suicide. Although Dotson had completed high school and started college while in
prison, Thompson felt he still needed to “be tough” and put Dotson on restrictive
parole.
I knew that if all this had happened to a woman, she would be seen as a victim of
male injustice who had nevertheless overcome the odds and now deserved
recognition as a hero. I knew the networks would compete to make TV movies out of
her plight, paying her hundreds of thousands of dollars for the story. Although
Dotson’s case is the most celebrated of its kind and has all the elements of a real-life
soap opera, John Hoover, the man who owns the rights to Cathleen’s story, has found
such in-house resistance to its production by feminist producers that he cannot get a
major studio to bid for it.
53 What most amazed him was how many feminist
producers could not accept—to this day—that a woman could lie about being raped.
What is most revealing is the ease with which a 16-year-old girl was believed
when she claimed rape, but disbelieved when she acknowledged—even at the more
mature age of 23—that she had lied. Cathleen Webb expressed amazement at this
difference in her book Forgive Me.
54
What was Dotson’s attitude toward Cathleen Webb after the twelve-year
nightmare finally ended in his release? Dotson said, “I forgave her a long time ago.
I’ve got no animosity.” (I’m never sure which is greater—men’s ability to forgive, or
men’s ability to repress emotions.)
On CBS’s morning talk show, Phyllis George asked Dotson and Webb to hug.
Suppose Dan Rather had asked a woman to hug her rapist?
Has the discovery of false accusations encouraged judges to make jurors aware
that a guilty verdict must be based on guilt “beyond a reasonable doubt”? No.
California now requires that jurors be explicitly told that a rape conviction can be
based on the accuser’s testimony alone, without corroboration.55
THE DOUBLE STANDARD OF RAPE SHIELD LAWS
Rape shield laws shield a woman’s sexual past from being used against her in court.
They do not shield a man’s sexual past from being used against him in court. When
first suggested by feminists, the laws were assumed to be a flagrant violation of our
constitutional right to due process (because they shielded one party more than the
other in the trial and therefore denied one party a fair trial). They were also assumed
to violate the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment because they
protected men less than women.
However, as people were increasingly convinced that women had no motivation to
lie about rape, the political atmosphere changed. Women who claimed they were
raped were virtually assumed to have already been victimized, and therefore
dragging out her sexual past in court appeared only to be double victimization. As
courts began to buy this assumption, they began to reason that women needed extra
protection in order to have equal protection. By the early 1990s, the Supreme Court
upheld this as the law of the land.56
We have seen, though, that not only are there numerous motivations to lie about
rape, there are a half dozen or so social incentives to lie about rape. Just as
importantly, we have also seen that a false accusation is its own form of rape. Once
we know this, we know that it is a violation of due process and equal protection to
shield a woman’s sexual past during a trial more than a man’s. The purpose of a
trial is to determine whether or not there has been a rape, not to assume who
needs the shielding during the trial. The job of a lawyer is to convince the judge
that the past is relevant; it is not the job of the law to assume the female’s sexual
past cannot be used against her but the male’s can.
Practically speaking, then, when a woman accuses a man of rape, the FBI or police
seek out women from the man’s sexual past, tell them that he’s been accused of rape,
ask them if they too had ever felt raped by him, and if they say, “Well perhaps once
when . . . ,” they are encouraged to testify to “stop this from happening to other
women.” In contrast, as of the most recent Supreme Court decision, he cannot even
present evidence of her having a previous sexual relationship with him unless he first
notifies the court in time for her to prepare her defense.
57
And practically speaking, as the trial is occurring, feminists are brought on TV to
tell us that rape is the only crime for which the victim is disbelieved. This is an
incredible statement because thus far we do not yet know who the victim is. In
criminal law, the person claiming to be the victim is always legally disbelieved and
the evidence always cross-examined until the person being accused is proven guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt. This is what distinguishes freedom from a dictatorship.
When we ignore this constitutional protection of the accused, we have McCarthyism,
fascism, and witch-hunts.
Rape shield laws have been declared constitutional because, in our heart of hearts,
no one wants to be suspicious of a woman who claims she was raped. And
conversely, no one wants to defend a potential rapist unless he’s someone we love.
The rape of a woman places The Most-Evil Male against The Most-Innocent Woman
—in archetypal fashion. None of our initial instincts is to defend The Most-Evil
Male.
THE UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROTECTING THE IDENTITY OF THE ACCUSER
AND EXPLOITING THE IDENTITY OF THE ACCUSED
The day after William Kennedy Smith was accused, he was in every tabloid and on
every TV screen; he came into our supermarkets and our bedrooms—most people
saw more of him than of their families. But the identity of his accuser was kept so
secret that few men would recognize her if they met her in a bar tonight. The
assumption is that the victim needs protection. But that’s assuming she’s the victim
before the trial. If we know that, why have a trial? If a man is falsely accused, it is he
who is victimized. Why are we protecting only her identity if the very purpose of a
trial is to determine who is victimized, not to assume who is victimized?
In no other situation is the accuser’s identity protected. If a man accused Jackie
Kennedy Onassis of trying to murder him, would his identity be protected? To
protect a woman and make millions of dollars of profit exposing the man leaves a
man damaged for life even if he is found not guilty. Is this true? Well, before the
Kennedy Smith trial, how would you have felt if your daughter called you and said
she was dating a Kennedy—William Kennedy Smith? How would you feel now?
DOES THE LAW PROTECT THE MAN WHO IS RAPED BY A WOMAN?
ITEM. A female child-care worker acknowledges having a six-month sexual
relationship with a 12-year-old boy under her care. She receives no prison
term—not a single day. She is allowed to go free on probation, having to pay
only $500 for the boy’s counseling.58
The release of this female statutory rapist caused no uproar. This was in 1992—the
same year that Mike Tyson received a six-year prison sentence.
CAN AN ADULT MAN BE RAPED BY A WOMAN?
We have already seen how when we allow men to define rape as unwanted sex—as
women are allowed to do—that 94 percent of men said they had had unwanted sexual
activity by the time they were in college.
59 But aside from the false accusation, there
are other ways adult men can be raped by women.
Technical Rape
We often say a man can’t be raped by a woman because a man needs an erection to
have intercourse, and “any man who has an erection obviously ‘wants it,’ therefore
that’s not rape.” The female equivalent of having an erection is being vaginally
lubricated, but a man cannot defend against a rape charge by saying, “Yes, Your
Honor, she did say ‘no,’ but she was lubricated, so obviously she wanted it and
therefore it isn’t rape.”
Being erect—or being lubricated—is often a sign that a person is sexually excited.
But not always. A man can have an erection in the middle of the night but be too
exhausted to want sex. Should we allow sex with a baby because he has an erection?
Birth Control Rape
Perhaps the most frequent way men are raped by adult women might be called “birth
control rape.” If a man is considered a date rapist by a woman who consents at night
but feels raped in the morning, then a man can feel raped by a woman who says she
is on birth control at night and says she feels pregnant the next week. And if she says,
“I’m going to have the child, like it or not,” this rape of him imprisons him for a
lifetime. The big difference is that the rape of him is sanctioned by law. To pay for
the child, he is forced to take a job he likes less, often leading to greater stress and
earlier death. A decision by her that involves him also involves his body. If it
involves his body, it is also his business. If it violates his body without consent, it is
rape.
WHEN MEN RAPE MEN, THERE’S STILL A VICTIM, BUT . . .
Most rapes of men occur in prison. But even outside of prison, about 9 percent of
reported rapes are against men (probably mostly by men, but no one knows for
sure).
60 Even rape outside of prison, then, is about as significant an issue for men as
AIDS is for women—about 10 percent of the people dying of AIDS are women.61
 Do
we hear more about men being raped or about women getting AIDS?
The real area of neglect, though, is the rape of men in prison. In part because of
the trauma he experiences, and in part because a man raped in prison by another man
is more likely to rape a woman when he gets out of prison.62 The connection is
depicted graphically in the film American Me (based on a true story). If we care
about women being raped, then, we must know what happens to men in prison.
From the moment they are put in jail to await trial, innocent men, considered
“fresh meat” by other inmates, are subject to rape. We tend to say to ourselves,
“Well, it’s men doing it to other men and, after all, they are in prison.” But it doesn’t
make the man who is a rape victim feel better because he is raped by another man; or
feel sexually secure after years of being labeled “gay” or “queer” by the men who
raped him. Many of these men become “punks”—prison lingo for a sexual slave who
is rented to other prisoners by the first person who raped him in exchange for drugs
or other goods; many are gang-raped; and many are raped by a convict’s fist or a
broom handle being thrust into his anus until his anus is ripped apart.
63
It appears that as many males might be raped in jails and prisons each year as
females who are raped outside of prison.64 We have not cared enough to study male
rape in prison the way we have female rape outside prison, so we can project only
from the most recent prison study of male rape—a 1982 study of a California prison.
If the 14 percent projection is close to accurate, approximately one million males are
raped each year in jails and prisons.
65
In contrast, approximately 120,000 women are
subjected to rape or attempted rape outside of prison each year.
66
If female prisoners were being raped with such frequency by female inmates,
67
 we
would quickly cite it as a violation of the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution
forbidding “cruel and unusual punishment” and of the Thirteenth Amendment
forbidding slavery (“punks”). We would demand a separate cell for each inmate,
strict punishment for the perpetrators, the hiring of more prison guards, and the
firing of prison guards who turned their backs on a raped female. Instead in many
states, we spend twice as much on each woman in prison as on each man.68 As more
and more women are being sent to prison, we see more and more TV specials on the
plight of women in prison. We do not yet understand that when we neglect men, we
rape women.
SPOUSAL RAPE
ITEM. A husband and wife in Australia were making love (or so he thought)
and she asked him to stop. The following morning she called the police and
reported him as a rapist, claiming it took him thirty seconds to stop. He
claims he stopped right away. He received four years in prison.69
Australian men responded by a typical burying of feelings (jokes about “the thirtysecond rapist”), while Australian women’s magazines continued their articles
criticizing men for their fear of commitment.
ITEM. In the United States, William Hetherington puts it this way in a flyer
appealing for a retrial:
70
MY NAME IS WILLIAM HETHERINGTON. I am a man falsely
accused, convicted, and IMPRISONED FOR 15 TO 30 YEARS for spousal
rape. All I ask is a chance to be fairly heard in court. . . .
I WAS FALSELY ACCUSED AND CONVICTED OF RAPING MY
WIFE after having normal marital relations. Neither force nor coercion was
used or ever proved. Nor did personal injury occur. Her accusation was all
that was needed to convict me and send me to prison.
MOTIVATION FOR THE RAPE ACCUSATION was to gain an
advantage in a pending divorce action and to gain custody of our three
children. They had been in my care for the previous three months as my wife
had deserted our family.
This was the fourth time my wife had made this allegation. All other cases
were dropped.
I COULD NOT HIRE A LAWYER OR INVESTIGATOR of my choice
because my wife obtained an order in the divorce case freezing my assets.
The criminal court judge refused to appoint a criminal defense attorney for
me, stating I had assets even if I could not use them. I never even had an
appeal because I must be found indigent to get a transcript.*
* A transcript is needed to prove a mishandling of the trial and is thus a prerequisite for the appeal.
MY LIFE IS A NIGHTMARE. I have served 4 years in jail for the
“crime” of having marital relations with my wife of 16 years and afterward
accused of rape.
I ask for the right to legal counsel.
I ask for access to my assets to pay for legal fees.
I ask for regular visitation with my children.
What the flyer did not mention was:
Hetherington’s wife made all four of the rape charges during times the couple
was fighting over child custody.71
The political dynamics: Hetherington’s wife wanted to drop the case, but the
prosecutor was running for reelection and the ACLU and feminist groups were
pressing for conviction.72
Because Hetherington had no prior convictions, state guidelines recommended a
sentence of no more than ten years. The judge gave Hetherington fifteen to
thirty.73
What has allowed spousal rape to become such an issue almost overnight after
thousands of years of marriage? Spousal rape accusations are rife in countries in
which divorce is rife—countries like Australia and Canada. Spousal rape legislation
gives the woman a nuclear bomb. Most husbands realize that their careers could be
ruined merely by having the accusation made public and their employer being afraid
of headlines saying, “Pleasantville Teacher Accused of Rape.”
As we have seen, both sexes have sex when they don’t want to—even on the first
date. But in a relationship this is especially true: Both sexes engage in “mercy sex.”
And that’s the difference between having a relationship and not having a relationship
—all good relationships require “giving in,” especially when our partner feels
strongly. The Ms. survey can call it a rape; a relationships counselor will call it a
relationship.
Spousal rape legislation is blackmail waiting to happen. If a man feels he needs to
file for divorce, his wife can say, “If you do, I’ll accuse you of spousal rape.”
Spousal rape legislation is worse than government-as-substitute-husband; it’s
government in the bedroom.
What, though, can be done? Should the law have any role?
TOWARD A SOLUTION
Criminalization
Can the Law Prevent Date Rape?
The law can prevent some date rapes. If a man can be put in jail for exerting
emotional pressure, men will exert less of it; if a woman who is “under the
influence” can yell rape the following morning, fewer men will buy women drinks,
so there will be less sex, so there will be less unwanted sex. And a strict law will also
prevent millions of men from asking women on dates to begin with for fear that a
romantic evening might become a ruined life. Which will also prevent date rape:
there can be no date rape if there is no date.
The law can prevent most anything—the question is, at what cost?
To go from Stage I’s “male pursue/female resist” to the feminist “male
pursue/female sue” is not a progression but a regression. Big Sister will leave
America as impoverished emotionally as Big Brother left Soviet citizens
impoverished economically.
A law can give us security—but the hope of a date is love. Love requires risks. As
does the life in which we hope to share that love. A law that prevents risks prevents
love.
If we choose to retain laws against date rape, the punishment must be made
suitable to the crime, creating degrees for rape as we have for murder. If intercourse
with a woman who made a choice to date, made a choice to drink, and made a choice
to have oral sex (which both Tyson and Kennedy Smith claimed) is put in the same
category as sex at knife point, we both trivialize rape and criminalize only the male
portion of the male-female role.
And if we choose to retain laws against date rape, then a false accusation of rape
must subject the accuser to the same imprisonment a convicted rapist would
receive. In China false accusations of any crime are rare—if the accusation proves
false, the accuser receives the punishment.
Finally, if we retain laws against date rape, then we must use DNA tests and liedetector tests whenever possible; they must be monitored by a neutral party and
given a second time when in doubt. Lie-detector tests are not perfect, but it usually
takes special training to fool them—training few college students and date rape
litigants have had. To eliminate them as one admissible piece of evidence is to
eliminate the single biggest protection men have against their own lives being raped.
Ultimately, though, criminalization reflects the failure of prevention. So let’s look
at prevention.
Resocialization
The solution to all this is not criminalization but resocialization. The law cannot
compete with nuance. Body language is more powerful than verbal language; and
eyes that say “yes” speak louder than words that say “no.” If the law tries to legislate
our “yeses” and “noes” it will produce “the straitjacket generation”—a generation
afraid to flirt, fearful of finding its love notes in a court suit. Date rape legislation
will force suitors and courting to give way to courts and suing.
The empowerment of women lies not in the protection of females from date rape,
but in resocializing both sexes to share date initiative taking and date paying so that
both date rape and date fraud are minimized. We cannot end date rape by calling men
“wimps” when they don’t initiate quickly enough, “rapists” when they do it too
quickly, and “jerks” when they do it badly. If we increase the performance pressure
only for men, we will reinforce men’s need to objectify women—which will lead to
more rape. Men will be our rapists as long as men are our initiators. Increasing
only men’s responsibility does not create female equality, it perpetuates female
entitlement.
Laws on date rape create a climate of date hate. Only communication will lead
to love. So how do we replace criminalization with resocialization and legislation
with communication? By teaching a new “relationship language.”
FROM RAPE LANGUAGE TO RELATIONSHIP LANGUAGE: STAGE I TO STAGE II
Just as schools introduce students to Stage II technology by teaching computer
language, schools must now introduce Stage II communication by teaching
relationship language—teaching males and females to take responsibility for their
verbal and nonverbal cues (including dress and makeup), what they attract, and how
to change these cues to attract a better relationship. Let’s look at how this might have
prevented the date rape portrayed in the film Thelma and Louise.
Thelma wants to connect with a guy. So Stage II Relationship Language Training
would have her make a decision about the type of guy she wants and the type of
experience she wants to have with him. We find out in the film that while she
definitely doesn’t want to have her “noes” ignored, she is definitely open to having
intercourse. So if she wants a reasonably sensitive but exciting lover, she might start
by trying to find him at a supermarket squeezing cantaloupes rather than at a bar
squeezing women.
Nevertheless, even in a bar, relationship language training would teach Thelma to
look around for a man who was listening to a woman, not ignoring women’s “noes.”
And if she didn’t find such a man, to leave the bar (or stay, but just drink).
If she spotted such a man, Stage II Relationship Language Training resocializes
Thelma to approach the man, start a conversation, and use her body language in such
a way as to let him know she wasn’t a game player or teaser. How? For example, by
buying him a drink and asking him to dance. This communicates to him that she
makes decisions. If he can’t handle it, she weeds him out—why get involved with a
man who can’t handle a secure woman?
Contrast this to what Thelma actually did. She got drunk and approached no one.
Instead she ultimately danced, kissed, and necked with the one man whom she and
Louise had rejected about seven times—including Louise blowing smoke in his face
and telling him to get lost. She selected from the worst possible environment the
worst possible man—the only man who had proven he couldn’t and wouldn’t
take “no” for an answer. Then, when she joins him in a dark parking lot and he
persists after she says “no” to intercourse, we viewers are left with the image that
men—as a group—are insensitive rapists. Rather than showing Thelma and Louise
use relationship language training to control their own lives, they are portrayed as
feminist heroines for their willingness to murder and commit suicide. To me this is
both antimale and antifemale. To me it is more empowering to give women the tools
to control their own lives rather than applaud them for killing men and committing
suicide.
The most important part of Stage II Relationship Language Training is the training
to take initiatives and therefore have “original choice power” rather than “veto
power”—the more typical female power. But if a woman is still vetoing, she will at
least learn to understand the subliminal messages different vetoes send. For example,
when a man asks a woman for a drink and she says “no,” then he risks rejection a
second time and she says “no” again, but the third time she says “yes,” we have the
beginning of their relationship language: the message she sends is that he must
risk rejection three times before her “no” becomes a “yes.” If this language
remains consistent between them, why should it change just prior to intercourse?
Relationship language training must also teach men to understand that (1) women
who take initiatives are much less likely to be victims and blamers than women who
do not initiate, (2) women who initiate are willing to take responsibility and risk
rejection, and (3) these women are therefore the most likely to empathize with men
since they share the male experience.
Boys must also be taught their investment in change. Which is considerable: Most
guys would love a woman to ask him out, caress his body, and pick up the check.
Reinforcing men’s addiction to women’s bodies and then depriving men of what they
are addicted to only makes men feel less than equal to women. (Could that be why
feminists are not suggesting a role reversal?)
Boys must learn that constantly risking rejection forces them to cut off their
feelings. Parents must support programs to resocialize our daughters to share that
responsibility with our sons. Which means parents must resocialize themselves so
their children have good role models.
If we want to reduce rape, our laws need to require high school and college courses
in gender transition and understanding the other sex. Genderwise, the human race is
in its adolescence. It is in an awkward transition between Stage I and Stage II. And
as in the normal male-female adolescence, the females have matured and the males
still have pimples.
Resocialization requires teacher training to train the more mature female students
to ask out the boys via in-class role playing and follow-up discussions. And to train
the boys to appreciate what the less attractive girls have to offer, thus reducing boys’
addiction to beauty and increasing boys’ interest in girls’ substance. In brief, we
would train teachers to do role-reversal exercises so that even if the old roles remain,
at least both sexes have learned to walk a mile in the other sex’s moccasins.
If we give driving violators the option of retaking driver training, we can give
first-time dating violators the option of taking courses on relationship training—
courses they never had. When we resocialize women to share responsibility to risk
the entire gamut of 150 risks of rejection (from eye contact to intercourse) as often
as men do, we will be minimizing the male anger and powerlessness that lead to date
rape and the female anger and powerlessness that lead to false accusations; they are
the flip sides of the same coin.
Stage II relationship language training must teach both sexes to say “yes” to sex
and both sexes to say “no.” (Men have less permission to say “no” than women do:
we don’t question a woman’s femininity when she doesn’t want to be sexual; we do
“wonder” about a man when he doesn’t want to be sexual. We don’t make her a
sexual deviant; we do make him a sexual deviant.) Men will learn the importance of
“no” to the degree that women learn to ask men who might not be interested in them.
There are no easy answers, but the answers we do develop cannot emerge from
feminism-in-isolation but from both sexes helping each other reweave the tapestry
that has been passed from one generation to the next over the centuries for purposes
that were functional then but dysfunctional now.
CHAPTER 15
From Husband Sam to Uncle Sam: Government as
Substitute Husband
TRUE OR FALSE? Employers are prohibited from practicing sex discrimination
in hiring and promoting employees.
1
ANSWER: False. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1987 that in job areas
dominated by men, less qualified women could be hired.2
It did not allow less
qualified men to be hired in areas dominated by women (e.g., elementary
school teacher, nurse, secretary, cocktail waiting, restaurant host, office
receptionist, flight attendant). The law also requires sex discrimination in
hiring by requiring quotas, requiring vigorous recruitment of women, and
requiring all institutions that receive government aid to do a certain
percentage of their business with female-owned (or minority-owned)
businesses.
When an employer hires a woman today, he or she might be required to
finance her pregnancy (the Federal Pregnancy Discrimination Act
3
), feel
pressured to finance maternity leaves and get into the child-care business
(incurring new real estate costs, higher insurance premiums, and the costs of
hiring teachers and administrators for her children).
The Government as Substitute Husband did for women what labor unions still
have not accomplished for men. And men pay dues for labor unions; the taxpayer
pays the dues for feminism. Feminism and government soon became taxpayersupported women’s unions.
THE COMPETITION TO SAVE THE WOMAN
Hundreds of federal programs subsidize “female-only clubs”: clubs such as the
“Women, Infants, and Children Club” (called the WIC program) but no “Men,
Infants, and Children Club.” Federal and state money subsidizes more than 15,000
women’s studies courses versus 91 men’s studies courses.
4 Almost every state
government uses taxpayer money to form Women’s Divisions with no parallel Men’s
Divisions.
5
Feminist ideology, initially opposed to male-only clubs in the areas of male
dominance, soon supported female-only clubs in areas of female dominance. Money
to men was seen as taking money away from women. So while the Office of Family
Planning initially provided family planning services for both sexes, by 1982, it
provided money only for female clients.
6 This attitude pushed men out of the family.
While male-only clubs in areas of male dominance were being declared illegal,
female-only clubs in areas of female dominance were being subsidized.
In Canada, government support for women-only interests (as defined by feminists)
is even more extreme: Canada’s Department of Education helps fund the Canadian
equivalent of the National Organization for Women
7 and every Canadian province
has a Women’s Directorate (Ontario’s has a staff of fifty-one and a budget of $8
million per year).
8
All this creates a huge taxpayer subsidy to look at virtually every aspect of life
from the perspective of women as defined by feminism. Feminist ideology was soon
called women’s studies and the women’s studies graduates called their ideology
education. As thousands of women’s jobs became dependent on a feminist
perspective, feminism bureaucratized. Like communism, feminism went from being
revolutionary to dictating politically correct ideology. And, like communism, this
political correctness was supported most strongly in the universities.
ARE THE POLITICAL PARTIES KEEPING WOMEN DEPENDENT IN EXCHANGE
FOR VOTES?
The political parties have become like two parents in a custody battle, each vying for
their daughter’s love by promising to do the most for her.
How destructive to women is this? We have restricted humans from giving “free”
food to bears and dolphins because we know that such feeding would make them
dependent and lead to their extinction. But when it comes to our own species, we
have difficulty seeing the connection between short-term kindness and long-term
cruelty: we give women money to have more children, making them more dependent
with each child and discouraging them from developing the tools to fend for
themselves. The real discrimination against women, then, is “free feeding.”
Ironically, when political parties or parents compete for females’ love by
competing to give to it, the result is not gratitude but entitlement. And the result
should not be gratitude, because the political party, like the needy parent, becomes
unconsciously dependent on keeping the female dependent. Which turns the
female into “the other”—the person given to, not the equal participant. In the
process, it fails to do what is every parent’s and every political party’s job—to raise
an adult, not maintain a child.
But here’s the rub. When the entitled child has the majority of the votes, the issue
is no longer whether we have a patriarchy or a matriarchy—we get a victimarchy.
And the female-as-child genuinely feels like a victim because she never learns how
to obtain for herself everything she learns to expect. Well, she learns how to obtain it
for herself by saying “it’s a woman’s right”—but she doesn’t feel the mastery that
comes with a lifetime of doing it for herself. And even when a quota includes her in
the decision-making process, she still feels angry at the “male-dominated
government” because she feels both the condescension of being given “equality” and
the contradiction of being given equality. She is still “the other.” So, with the
majority of the votes, she is both controlling the system and angry at the system.
While both parties are needy of the female vote, the Democratic party cannot live
without it. So the Democratic party, in particular, keeps its child a child because it
fears losing her. And the female in transition who wants the option of independence
without losing the option of government as substitute protector keeps voting to keep
its protector protecting.
In the meantime, many men’s alienation from the Democratic party makes that
party even more female dependent. As one voter put it:
My family and I are voters of the “traditional Democratic constituency” who have
just become Republicans.
The Democratic party . . . has consistently:
—favored discrimination against men in employment, university admissions,
divorce, and child custody.
—supported absurd laws (such as those on “marital rape” and “sexual
harassment”) which allow the conviction of innocent men on the sole basis
of uncorroborated . . . accusations by women. . . .
The Democratic party seems intent on reducing American men to second-class
citizens.
9
—ERIC D. SHERMAN
HOW THE LAW ALLOWS EVEN POOR WOMEN TO BE THREE-OPTION WOMEN
We have seen how the income of a middle-class man provides a mother with three
options (full-time work; full-time children; combination of both). But if the man is
poor, it doesn’t. So the government provides the woman with more than what a poor
man provides—enough so that she “marries” the government rather than the poor
man: the government becomes a substitute husband. The man who is poor becomes
disposable.
The problem is not that women and children are fed, but that men are excluded
from the lives of women and children. The lack of an MIC program (for Men,
Infants, and Children) makes WIC a federally financed females-only club. (And
every state supplements the federal money with state money.)
At least programs with names such as Women, Infants, and Children make the
sexism apparent; names like Aid to Families with Dependent Children hide the
sexism. Yet to receive AFDC—or numerous other awards to “families”—men must
meet much more stringent standards than women. For example, the AFDC’s
“hundred hour rule”
10 allows a mother to work one hundred hours a month and still
receive her aid money. But a father who works a hundred hours a month receives no
aid money.11 Even if a father is starting a new business and is losing money, he still
gets no aid. In contrast, if a mother is doing the same, she gets all her aid. This
obviously violates the Fourteenth Amendment’s provision for all citizens to receive
equal protection of the law. Yet no one challenges it.
Paying only the woman is the law’s way of keeping a man who is without money
“in his place”—out on the streets—until he becomes a wallet. If he fails, he remains
on the streets; if he succeeds, he gets to compete with other men for a woman’s love
—and with AFDC and WIC. Of course, he must earn not only what AFDC and WIC
pay her, but enough to also support himself.
We often hear that “the amount a woman receives on AFDC is hardly enough to
support a family.” True. No one government program provides the woman with more
options than a lower-income male would provide. AFDC provides more than 10
million women with only $10 billion per year.
12 That alone does not provide enough
for a family. But that doesn’t include food stamps, Medicaid, subsidized housing,
school lunch programs, WIC, or any undeclared under-the-table income.
The effect? A new nuclear family: woman, government, and child. The woman
legally retains her three options until the child is 6. Then she can have another child
and keep these options another six years. For the woman, there is no end. For the dad,
there is no beginning.
In the black community especially, this reinforces the stereotype of the black man
as one who has sex, deserts his responsibilities, and “returns only for more sex.”
Many black men leave their family because they are financially responsible—
not because they are emotionally irresponsible. For many black men, leaving their
source of love is painful. It is a sacrifice. Why have we chosen to view it only as
irresponsibility? Many whites and many black females forget that a black man also
yearns for stability and love.
In the meantime, a father’s absence in the family is the single biggest predictor of
a child’s deterioration. Why? A father’s absence appears to damage what might be
called the child’s “social immune system.” When the child’s social immune system
is damaged, it is more vulnerable to drug abuse, delinquency, teen pregnancy, etc.
Thus when a government subsidy deprives the child of its dad and destroys the
child’s social immune system, the government is really subsidizing child abuse.
Which means we are subsidizing child abuse.
Why do we tolerate this? Our instinct to protect women from immediate harm is
stronger than our instinct to provide long-term protection to any given child. This
derived from our Stage I survival heritage (if a woman survived, she could always
have another child). Our laws evolved from that heritage, but Stage II survival
depends on laws which allow children to have dads—and allow dads to have
children. Why? The next generations’ children will need that sense of stability and
internal security to solve the world’s problems with love rather than war.
DON’T FEMINISTS SUPPORT GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS BECAUSE THEY
PROTECT CHILDREN . . . NOT WOMEN?
ITEM. The child was over three. The judge assessed that good baby-sitters
were available, poverty was hurting the child, and the child would benefit if
the mother worked.13
 The judge ruled the mother should work.
The feminist response to the judge’s decision was that the mother’s “right to
choose” was being violated, not that the judge had wrongly assessed the best
interests of the child. The mother’s choice was considered primary; the best interests
of the child secondary. Yet one rationale for a woman’s “right to choose” in abortion
cases has always been the importance of “a child having a decent life.”
Since most tax money is paid by men, her “right to choose” is the choice to
obligate mostly men to pay for her choice. When he adds this to his obligation to
support his own wife and children, he is often forced to take a job he likes less
because it pays more—which produces the stress that leads to his earlier death.
In essence, a woman’s choice can kill a man. If it were only her body, it would be
only her business, but his earlier death means his body is also at stake. And the
child’s life is at stake if it lives in poverty.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE ENTITLED CHILD
When political parties are dependent on keeping woman-as-child, we encourage
women to develop the psychology of the entitled child: an ever-sharper eye for
seeing only the discrimination against her, not the discrimination for her. For
example, feminists claimed that Social Security was discriminating against women
because the average woman receives slightly less per month than the average man.14
They neglected to mention that the average man pays in more per month.
They also neglected to mention the real discrimination: Men as a group pay twice
what women pay into Social Security
15 but women receive more than 150 percent of
what men receive in total retirement benefits from Social Security.16
 Men as a group
also receive less than women in any given year. But no men’s movement suggests
that, as a result, men should be charged only about 33 percent of what women are
charged for Social Security (because as a group they pay twice as much in and
receive a third less).
By looking at everything from only the woman’s perspective, here’s what
happened to pension plans and insurance premiums:
ITEM. Pension plans used to use mortality tables to rationalize paying women
less money per month—otherwise women collected much more money given
a retirement about twice as long as men’s. The lower monthly payments were
labeled discrimination against women and declared unconstitutional
17
; the
higher lifetime payments to women were not labeled discrimination.
ITEM. Insurance companies use the same mortality tables to charge men
higher monthly premiums than women because men die sooner and thus
make fewer payments during their lifetime. Men’s higher monthly payments
have not been called discrimination against men; nor have they been declared
unconstitutional. Men’s lower lifetime reimbursements also have not been
declared discrimination or unconstitutional.
18
In brief, when women pay more, it is declared unnconstitutional; when men pay
more, it is unnoticed. Sexual politics became constitutional politics.
REAL MEN DON’T SUE . . . THEY SUCCEED
Feminism introduced women not only to succeeding in the workplace but to suing
the workplace—and in almost the same breath. Men who succeeded rarely learned
this one-two punch. When Thomas Watson, Sr., was fired from National Cash
Register in 1914, he started a little company of his own. He called it IBM. When
Henry Ford II fired Lee Iacocca from his job as president of Ford Motor Company,
Ford told Iacocca, “I just don’t like you.”19 Some feminists might have sued. Iacocca
succeeded.
People who succeed rarely treat those who fire them as personal enemies. George
Steinbrenner fired Billy Martin as manager of the New York Yankees even after
Martin had won the pennant. Then he hired him back; then he fired him again; then
he hired him back again, then fired him again—despite Martin’s having won two
pennants and a world championship in seven seasons. Had Martin turned
Steinbrenner into an enemy rather than viewing him as playing a role, he would
never have been able to be rehired.
This, of course, is not the attitude of all men, or only of men. It is the attitude of
people who succeed—an attitude that says, “I am responsible for becoming a person
who can bring a company profits.” Successful employees make it in the company’s
self-interest to take care of them. They make it their responsibility to take care of the
company so the company will take care of them (so they can take care of their
families). They become “company nurturers” (in order to be family nurturers).
People who succeed do not expect every company to reward fairly; they screen for
companies which will recognize their contribution. And if they aren’t being
recognized, they change employers, they don’t sue employers.
People who succeed monetarily and spiritually don’t think of men as being the sex
that has the power as much as being the sex most willing to pay the price of power.
They know there are few privileges without responsibilities and, if a responsibility
doesn’t give them some leverage for a privilege, they avoid it; they don’t take it on
and then gripe about it.
By giving women training to sue a company for a “hostile environment” if
someone tells a dirty joke, we are training women to run to the Government as
Substitute Husband (or Father). This gets companies to fear women, but not to
respect women. The best preparation we can give women to succeed in the workplace
is the preparation to overcome barriers rather than to sue: successful people don’t
sue, they succeed.
PART IV
WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?
Conclusion
The wound that unifies all men is the wound of their disposability. Their
disposability as soldiers, workers, dads. The wound of believing that they are lovable
if they kill and die so others might be saved and survive.
Stage II technology has reversed what humans need to do to survive. Stage II
societies created the technology for our species to survive without killing but
also created the technology to end our species if we do kill. We have responded by
changing only what women do to survive. While we have used birth control,
population growth, and technology to free women from female biology as female
destiny, we have also used birth control and technology to create female biology as
male destiny: she can choose to abort or to sue for support.
The freedom of women from biology as destiny has not freed men from male
biology as male destiny. We have not demanded that both sexes equally share the
hazardous jobs and the risks of dying. We are still socializing men to be our killers,
and therefore unlovable . . . and therefore disposable.
Changing millions of years of genetic heritage will play many tricks on both
sexes. Women will think that being divorced means they are independent even as
they seek dependence on the government as substitute husband; men will think that
they are helping to make women equal even as they are passing laws to protect
women from a dirty joke rather than passing laws to protect themselves from dying
on a construction site.
Ideally there should not be a men’s movement but a gender transition movement;
only the power of the women’s movement necessitates the temporary corrective of a
men’s movement. And this creates a special challenge for men: There are few
political movements filled with healthy people, yet few healthy changes have
occurred without political movements.
Whether or not a men’s movement makes a genuine contribution will depend on
its ability to communicate that all the world’s evils are not men’s responsibility: The
origin of war was not men, it was survival. That men have never been their own
commanders; the commander of men is the command to protect. That had men not
protected, no one would be here asking for more rights. But that in the future, we
cannot socialize a sex to be more willing to kill for us without producing a sex able
to kill us; that we cannot socialize a sex to be more willing to die without producing
a sex in denial—in denial of its self-esteem and its feelings. (We reinforce low male
self-esteem by telling men they are the oppressors who cause war and therefore they
deserve to be the only sex sent to war.)
With nuclear technology, the survival of the species is finally compatible with
men demanding the socialization to love and be lovable. But men will not demand
this until men see how the influences that make them disposable surround them in
every direction from the outside and have infiltrated every cell of their insides—and
how, by calling that disposability “power,” they have accepted bribes to blind
themselves to their powerlessness.
THE CLEAREST SIGN OF POWERLESSNESS
Subjection of a group of people to violence based on their membership in that group
is a clear indicator of that group’s powerlessness, be it Christians to lions or the
underclass to war.
In the United States, we subject men to violence via law (the draft), via religion
and custom (circumcision), via socialization and incentive (telling men who are best
at bashing their heads against eleven other men that they have “scholarship
potential”), via approval of beautiful women (cheerleaders cheering for men who
play “Smash Face”), via parental approval and love (the parents who attend the
Thanksgiving games at which their sons are battering each other), via taxpayer
money (high school wrestling and football, ROTC, and the military), and via our
entertainment dollar (boxing, football, ice hockey, rodeos, car racing, westerns, war
movies . . .). But North Americans do refrain from subjecting men to violence via
bullfights—we feel it’s cruel to the bull. After we subject only our sons to this
violence (before the age of consent), we blame them for growing into the more
violent sex.
But here’s the rub. When other groups are subjected to violence, we acknowledge
their powerlessness. What are the implications of calling men powerful when we
subject men to violence? When we acknowledge a group’s powerlessness, we
acknowledge our obligation to help that group. With men, we blame the victim. We
blame men because we have camouflaged men’s victimization by teaching men
to also be the victimizer. Men’s victimizer status camouflages men’s victim
status.
With women, then, we often hear that the 50 percent of the population that is
female lives in fear of the other 50 percent that is male because, for example, “We
never know which man will be the rapist.” We forget that men are statistically in
much greater jeopardy of homicide and violence and, therefore, the 50 percent of the
population that is male also fears most men because men are equally ignorant of
which men will commit that violence.
Our understanding of only women’s fears leads to public monies for female-only
shelters and female-only psychological support. The higher taxes means that mostly
white males take jobs they like less to earn more and die sooner to keep women alive
longer.
The practical result is not only that women live longer, but that white women live
the longest, black women second, white men third, black men fourth. In the
industrialized world, men are the new “niggers”; black men are “niggers’ niggers.”
This result helps us see a different relationship between the civil rights movement
and the women’s movement. . . .
THE FALSE PARALLEL BETWEEN THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT AND THE
WOMEN’S MOVEMENT
One of the underlying mistakes of the past quarter century was taking the gains of
the civil rights movement and passing them on to women as if women had served as
men’s slaves and were now entitled to those rights just as blacks had served as
whites’ slaves and were now entitled to those rights. This both encouraged an
ideology of female-as-victim and blinded us to how the underlying issue between
men and women was not the dominance of one sex over the other, but the
subservience of both sexes to the real master—the survival needs of the next
generation.
In race relationships, one race’s gain was often another’s loss. In male-female
relationships, when either sex wins, both sexes lose. When an individual woman
benefits from affirmative action for a promotion, the wife and children of the man
she defeats lose the benefits of that promotion. Which is why one sex having
privileged opportunity is an inferior solution to equal opportunity.
The old belief that men have the power and women are powerless leads
predictably to a battle between the sexes. How? The perception of women as
powerless makes us fear limiting the expansion of women’s power. Fear of limiting
the power of the sex with the greater spending power, the greater beauty power,
the greater sexual power, the greater net worth among wealthier heads of
households, and the greater options in marriage, children, work, and life creates
the corruptness of absolute power which will ultimately lead to a much bloodier
battle between the sexes.
In contrast, the new Stage I-II framework leads to understanding between the
sexes—to understanding how just as the number of children a mother raised was a
sign of the amount of obligation a woman undertook (not the amount of power she
had), so the number of dollars a father raised was a sign of the amount of obligation
he undertook to feed those children. It leads us to understanding how each sex had
more rights and more power in the area in which it had more responsibilities; how
each sex dominated in the area in which it was most likely to die; how each sex paid
the other for performing its role; how both sexes paid a price for the price they were
paid.
The Stage I-II framework, by not denying either sex’s power or burdens, frees us
to move from a battle between the sexes to love between the sexes; from a women’s
movement to a gender transition movement.
How do we make that transition?
THE STAGE II JOURNEY
We start by questioning even the best of what was functional in Stage I. For example,
the hero’s journey described so eloquently by Joseph Campbell was, nevertheless, a
Stage I journey. And its rituals were Stage I rituals. Both the journey and the
rituals were the Stage I man’s boot camp for male disposability. The label “hero”
was the bribe of appreciation given by the protected to get the protector to risk his
life. Appreciation kept the slave a slave. Thus, as we saw, the very word hero derived
from the words servant, slave, and protector.
In Stage I, we needed rituals of structure to prepare for the rigid roles that were
necessary for survival; in Stage II, we need rituals of choice to prepare for changing
roles that are now necessary for survival. In Stage I, it was dysfunctional for men to
be in touch with their feelings; in Stage II, it is dysfunctional for men to not be in
touch with their feelings. In Stage I, we claimed that men or women who made their
own needs secondary to role expectations had high self-esteem; in Stage II, selfesteem involves knowing how to negotiate a balance between the needs of others and
the needs of self. In Stage I, Superman detected the external earthquake and
prevented it from destroying the life of the woman he loved; the Stage II superman
detects the earthquake inside himself and uses his findings to communicate with the
woman (or man) he loves. In Stage I, sacrificing for survival was both a means and
an end; in Stage II, sacrificing for survival is a means to a different end—the end
that Joseph Campbell called “following one’s bliss.”
Men have the next layer of work to do because, as we have seen, the process of
succeeding enough so a woman had time to make her Stage II journey was exactly
the process that kept men Stage I men. His income gave her the luxury to
contemplate what she didn’t like about herself and him. But he felt in a Catch-22: he
feared that if he lost the success that freed her, she’d leave him; yet he also feared
that if he stayed focused on being successful, she’d leave him.
The implication? Unless both sexes take the Stage II journey simultaneously, we
will tend to produce Stage II individuals (usually women), but not Stage II
relationships. We will suffer another lonely “me” generation. A Stage II woman and
man, then, must first discover who they want to be, and then negotiate a transition
with their family.
A Stage II journey cannot toss out survival skills with the bath water. Instead it
gives both sexes survival skills and self-actualization skills. Is the current men’s
movement the beginning of men developing both sets of skills, as women have
already begun to do?
IS THE MYTHOPOETIC MEN’S MOVEMENT MAKING A POSITIVE
CONTRIBUTION?
The men’s movement that has caught the public eye (the mythopoetic movement led
by Robert Bly) has helped men enter the Stage II journey by discovering what men
never gave themselves permission to have in Stage I: vulnerability, intimacy, selfdetermination and, therefore, real power. Beginning this exploration with drumming
is appropriate because it helps men to emote. Beginning it in the woods is useful
because men need to begin by looking within (not blaming) and in isolation from
females, children, parents, work—all those to whose expectations men conformed
before giving themselves permission to ask whom they really wanted to become and
how they wanted to get there.
Men’s gatherings are an important conduit into Stage II because Stage I men
never learned to share their fears with those who share their fears. Which is why
men at these gatherings have developed rituals using a Talking Stick—a stick
wrapped in a vine similar to the caduceus, the ancient medical symbol—to
symbolize healing. Why? Talking about feelings is healing; and feeling heard heals
even more.
The Talking Stick symbolizes men’s intuitive sense that for a man to ask women
and children to listen to his doubts about being their wallets is like Apple expecting
its employees to listen lovingly while it decides that its top executives and engineers
have been working too hard and they need to meditate. Men are learning that putting
all their emotional eggs in the basket of women and children helps neither women
nor men.
Many women worry that when men get away for weekends by themselves, the men
will gather together and blame women. Not to worry. Men were socialized to save
women, not blame women. All-male sports did not teach a losing team to blame the
other—or even to try to get the other team to change. To men, self-improvement and
strength do not imply blaming men or women, but especially not blaming women.
The Stage II journey begins for men by appreciating the Stage I hero’s journey—
how its structure, discipline, and ritual helped the man overcome obstacles, protect
women, and sustain survival. Calling the weekends Wild Man and Warrior are part
of that acknowledgment.
Why is the acknowledgment necessary? Perhaps it isn’t, but humans tend to start
the process of change by acknowledging themselves—thus blacks asserted black
pride and black is beautiful; women declared “I am woman, I am strong”; men are
saying “I am man, I am okay.” After a quarter of a century of male bashing, that’s
not a bad start.
Why has the male sacrifice been more structured, disciplined, and ritualized?
Since a social role is more optional than a biological role, male socialization had to
be especially strong to transform a self-centered male infant into a self-sacrificing
male adult who would die so others could live. Stage II male socialization therefore
requires an especially strong confrontation of men’s propensity to protect women—it
requires confronting the four incentives to protect women that are used in Stage I
societies to get men to call it “glory” to die. The four incentives men must confront
are:
1. The social reinforcement to men’s addiction to female beauty and sex
2. Deprivation of the beautiful woman and sex with her until the man guarantees
economic security in return
3. Status, praise, and other “bribes” in exchange for protecting women, especially
if he risks his life or dies doing it, and
4. The combination of ritual and religion (e.g., circumcision) that desensitizes men
to pain, and music and religion (e.g., “The Battle Hymn of the Republic”) to
stimulate men to endure pain
How do we prepare the next generation to negotiate these changes? The top
priority is modeling these changes ourselves. But a second priority is working with
the school system. . . .
RESOCIALIZING THE STAGE II CHILD
The Male Teacher
The Stage II elementary school needs to have more male teachers than female
teachers in districts in which the preschool children are exposed more to mothers
than fathers.
The male teachers need to be men who understand the value of risk taking, even if
the child fails or gets hurt and humiliated once in a while; who understands the value
of a child being held on his lap and is willing to stand up for that value to a
community overanxious to call him a molester; who can take a drug dealer and help
him or her understand how to translate the entrepreneurial skills of drug dealing into
the entrepreneurial skills needed to run a business; who understands that we protect
our children more in life by not overprotecting them in school; who understands that
when we protect our children in school we are usually just protecting ourselves from
accusations by one or two parents which we fear will threaten our job.
The Journey of the Stage II Adolescent
At all ages, the Stage II journey involves rituals of options.
Imagine a Stage II video game for adolescents called “The First Date.” Sometimes
an identical choice (“Kiss Her”) creates one outcome (passion), sometimes another
(rejection). The game allows both sexes to experiment with new roles before they try
them out in the real world.
A Stage II school balances messages of sexual caution with messages of sexual
joy. It doesn’t turn sex into discussions of only safe sex, AIDS, herpes, rubbers,
sexual abuse, date rape, stranger rape, harassment, power, and violence and then tell
the boy to take all the initiatives. Discussion of sex in school has become like buying
a cheap hamburger: “Where’s the joy?”
Courtship rituals might include an adolescent boy being his girlfriend’s servant
one weekend and being served by his girlfriend the next; cooking for her the first
Saturday of each month, having her cook for him the third; taking her to a restaurant
for a candlelit dinner, being taken by her. . . . When they are older, they might choose
more traditional roles, but at least it will be out of choice, not out of fear of peer
disapproval or not knowing how to cook.
A Stage II school not only requires team sports for both sexes but uses the period
after the game to understand the learning experiences of the game (“How does my
unwillingness to pass the ball off relate to my larger life?”). Alternative sports like
flag football and rotation baseball (each player at a different position each inning)
are part of the school curriculum. This does not mean that football, even in its onesex, smash-face form, cannot be financed privately; it does imply not financing it
publicly. Male child abuse might be fun to watch, but taxpayers should not be
required to pay for it.
Stage I sports was designed to build defenses against the outside world, so “our
team good, their team bad” was understandable. Stage II sports is designed to
prepare us for trade with the outside world—for a global economy in which we are
all part of the same team. Stage II sports help us to rejoice in someone else’s special
competence rather than be jealous of it.
The Stage II school system will help the student understand why individual
sports and team sports lead to different life journeys. If Jane focuses exclusively
on gymnastics, she learns little about how to negotiate with her peers. And if Dick
focuses only on team sports, he has not necessarily prepared himself to be a good
self-starter or a good creative thinker—skills needed to start one’s own business, be
a writer, artist, or an intellectual who thinks for her- or himself (rather than worrying
about being politically correct).
The Stage II male-female journey involves both sexes learning from the male
heritage of risk taking and the female heritage of caution; from the male heritage of
learning not to limit oneself for fear of a broken bone and the female heritage of not
having to prove oneself by breaking one’s bones.
The Journey of the Stage II Family
Because Stage II individuals can live without each other, their union is one of choice,
not survival. Choice is a more fragile unifier than the need to survive. Yet most
everyone wants both choice and stability. So Stage II rituals must celebrate both
choice and continuity. For example, as a child moves out of the house, the family
might conduct a remarriage ritual to recognize its new family form, celebrating both
the change and the continuity.
These changes require changes in consciousness, which implies activism and
politics.
WILL THE MEN’S MOVEMENT BECOME POLITICAL AND ACTIVIST?
The men’s movement is a misnomer. It is neither political like the civil
rights movement nor activist like the women’s movement.
—TIME, JULY 8, 19911
Within the next ten years, Time magazine will doubtless eat those words. Why?
First, political structures are formed and forming. Second, the political agendas are
concrete. Third, men’s emotional and economic pain is significant enough to
motivate change.
First, the political structures. The National Congress for Men and Children and the
National Coalition of Free Men have for years been consciously focusing on issues
like fathers having access to their children after divorce and joint custody. The media
often portrays these men as focusing on “father’s rights,” but these dads could just as
easily be portrayed as focusing on loving children. The pain among these men
emanates from dealing with the law when they want to be dealing with love.
The mythopoetic men’s movement is just on the verge of developing political
consciousness. Its political consciousness is evolving more unconsciously, from the
men’s personal discoveries. During the men’s weekends, many men explore what
might be called “the two Fs”—fathering and feelings. But as men discover they have
been deprived of their fathers, they start asking if they are also being deprived of
being fathers. And as men start seeing that other men have shared their personal
experience, they slowly discover that the personal is political. This leads to fathers
discovering their first right.
A father’s first right—fathering (sharing child care while his wife does her
financial share)—requires renegotiating. Renegotiating requires men to speak up.
That’s where the search for the second F—feelings—comes in.
Until now, men invested all of their emotional eggs in the basket of the women
they loved. So they feared speaking up for fear of losing their only source of
emotional support. As men’s weekends provide an alternate source of emotional
support, men gain the courage to say what they feel without fear of emotional
isolation. Although some women find this new male courage threatening, others find
it appealing. Many couples find it breathes life into a relationship dying of boredom.
But do men really want a change—do they want more time with their children?
We have seen that almost 90 percent of men say that full-time involvement with their
children would be their preference for between six months and a year if they knew
they wouldn’t be hurting their family economically and they knew their wife
approved.
What are the implications of men becoming more fully invested in their children?
Fathers and children who feel more loved and loving. And this has political
implications: fathers will protest when judges assume a child is its mother’s first, its
father’s second. Politically, fathers will seek to remove judges who award more than
60 percent of contested custody cases to either sex.
Once a man allows himself to love a child deeply, he wants the right to love
equally. He realizes that when a woman and he have created a pregnancy, the
issue is not the rights of the female versus the fetus, but the rights of the female,
the fetus, and the father. He realizes that a woman who says, “It’s my body, it’s my
business,” and then chooses to have a child that she makes him pay for forces him to
take a job he might like less just because it pays more; forces him to stress himself
out and die early—and forces him to use his body for eighteen years. If it’s his body
being used for eighteen years, and his body dying sooner, shouldn’t it be his
business, too? Isn’t two decades of a man’s life worth nine months of a woman’s?
The issues of fathering and feelings are emerging from one portion of the political
structure. But nothing affects men’s powerlessness more than the issues of
disposability. Here is a concrete agenda for dealing with male disposability.
The Ten “Glass Cellars” of Male Disposability
Just as women identified the “glass ceilings” which they believed prevented equality
of opportunity, ten “glass cellars” might be thought of as creating men’s inequality
of disposability. Instead of addressing these issues with the help of an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), men need to be developing an Equal
Life Opportunity Commission (ELOC). Men’s issues are issues of life and death. The
concrete agenda of an ELOC? For starters, to eradicate these ten glass cellars:
Suicide. If a man is ten times as likely to commit suicide after the death of a
spouse,
2
then the ELOC has a mission to develop special outreach programs
when a man’s spouse dies. On a deeper level, if boys commit suicide 25,000
percent more as their sex roles become apparent,
3 maybe we should be
changing the male role before it becomes apparent.
Prisoners. If an ELOC stops the rapes of men and boys in prison, fewer men
will rape when out of prison. If imprisoned mothers are softened by contact
with their children, wouldn’t imprisoned fathers be?
Homelessness. An ELOC would discover what leads to men becoming about
85 percent of our street homeless,
4 and develop intervention programs
before male hopelessness becomes male homelessness.
Death Professions. Socialization for the death professions starts at an early
age. An ELOC can provide grants to train mentor teachers to resocialize
boys to not have to pay for girls at an early age in preparation for taking
hazardous jobs that earn more at a later age.
Disease. The ELOC’s mandate would include research and early detection
education to prevent men from dying earlier of all fifteen of the major
diseases and causes of accidents.
Assassinations and Hostage-taking. An Equal Life Amendment implies
foreign policy considerations. How should the United States respond to
Saddam Hussein’s releasing only women and children? Or to our taxpayer
money financing the assassination of foreign leaders? Would we have
allowed our government to make repeated attempts to kill Castro were
Castro a woman?
Executions. We give women the death penalty but in the final analysis, we
execute only men. If we executed only women, would there be a protest?
Draft. An Equal Life Amendment would acknowledge male-only draft
registration as slave registration. An Office of Equal Male Life might
organize a class-action suit on behalf of men who were drafted and are now
psychologically handicapped. It would pressure the government to end the
cover-up concerning MIAs and POWs—all members of the disposable sex.
Combat. An ELOC would be certain that both sexes were about equally
subjected to direct combat obligations and that failure to be so exposed
would result in decreased benefits.
Early Deaths. An ELOC’s mandate would also include discovering
nondisease factors that lead to men’s early death—the pressure to perform,
pay, and pursue, the loneliness, risks of rejection, lack of support.
We can think of every boy as being assessed at birth a 10 percent male
disposability tax—symbolizing his 10 percent shorter life expectancy. Were men to
create the equivalent of an Equal Rights Amendment to symbolically confront their
disposability, it might be called an Equal Life Amendment. In reality, it would be
nothing more than an Equal Rights and Responsibilities Amendment, since if men
and women had equal rights and responsibilities, they would approach a much more
equal life expectancy. *
* If we adhere to the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, then the constitutional equivalent
of an Equal Rights Amendment already exists: inequality of rights protects the sexes unequally and is
therefore unconstitutional. Although the ERA does have symbolic value, if it is to symbolize genuine equality,
it needs to be an Equal Rights and Responsibilities Amendment.
THE EQUAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES AMENDMENT
An Equal Rights and Responsibilities Amendment (ERRA) would outlaw male-only
responsibility for draft registration; it would prevent men in the armed services from
being required to enter combat (if needed) unless women were also required to enter
combat (if needed); it would permit community property only in conjunction with
community responsibility; it would give incentives to schools to educate females to
be equally responsible for taking sexual initiatives and risking sexual rejection rather
than lecturing only males on how not to do it wrong; it would replace discussions of
sexual harassment in the workplace with discussions of how both sexes make sexual
contact in the workplace.
An ERRA would allow affirmative action programs for recruitment and training of
the underrepresented sex in a given profession, but not for the hiring of less qualified
members of that sex; it would deprive congressional districts of AFDC funding if
judges assigned the children to women more than 60 percent of the time in cases of
contested custody; it would deprive universities of public monies as long as there
were significantly more women’s studies courses than men’s studies courses; it
would deprive TV stations of federal licensing if the FCC found a consistent pattern
of male-bashing or consistent attention to women’s issues and neglect of men’s
issues. The ERRA would mean a new era—an era of shared rights and shared
responsibilities, meaning shared perspectives rather than opposite sexes.
But are men (and ideally women) motivated to make this happen?
WHAT EXACTLY DOES IT TAKE TO MAKE A MOVEMENT?
Major movements have two core stimuli: (1) emotional rejection; and (2) economic
hurt. When a large number of people feel emotionally rejected and economically
hurt at the same moment in history, a revolution is in the making.
For example, when blacks were told to “sit in the back of the bus,” they
experienced emotional rejection; when they also faced job discrimination, they
experienced economic hurt. When it happened to large numbers, it created political
possibilities. We then had the bases for the civil rights movement.
Similarly, when millions of women simultaneously experienced divorce
(emotional rejection) and job discrimination (economic hurt), we had the political,
emotional, and economic bases on which to build the women’s movement.
Like women, men experience emotional rejection if they divorce; but unlike
women, men are much more likely to be involuntarily deprived of their children,
thus experiencing a double dose of emotional rejection. Many men feel unloved and
unneeded by anyone after divorce, which is why men commit suicide more than
women after they divorce. When, on top of this, men are told to pay money for what
they’re deprived of (children and wife), they simultaneously experience economic
hurt.
Fathers today are often being taxed for their children without equal
representation in their children’s lives. They are experiencing their version of
“Taxation Without Representation.” It is the simultaneous experience of this by
millions of fathers that creates the men’s movement’s political base; it is their
emotional rejection that creates its emotional base; their economic hurt that creates
its economic base. Which is why the next stage of the men’s movement will be both
political and activist.
If we ignore these men’s activists or dismiss them as crazy, angry, or bitter, we
miss the life experience of millions of other fathers who are either too afraid to
speak up or so busy producing money to support their “ex” and their children that
they don’t have time to speak up. If we force these activists to become strident to be
heard in the process of achieving equity, many of these men will be wasted, their
children damaged, and upcoming generations will be provided with another distorted
version of love. If, on the other hand, we hear men, we can minimize gender war and
maximize gender love.
If this seems scary, don’t worry; it won’t happen overnight. We’re not talking
about just a priority shift but an evolutionary shift.
THE MEN’S MOVEMENT AS EVOLUTIONARY SHIFT
The men’s movement will be the longest of all movements because it is not
proposing merely to integrate blacks or Hispanics into a system that already exists, it
is proposing an evolutionary shift in the system itself—an end to “‘woman the
protected” and “man the protector.” This division is rooted in our biology; it exists
among animals.
The men’s movement will be the most incremental of movements because it is
hard to confront the feelings we’ve learned to repress and hard to confront the
women we’ve learned to protect. And it is especially hard to risk alienating our only
source of love.
What will be the men’s movement’s greatest day-to-day challenge? Getting men
to ask for help for themselves. Movements make gains by asking for help for
themselves. Men were always able to ask for help on behalf of others—for a
congregation, their wives, children, or a cause—but not for themselves. Why not?
For thousands of years, complaining was functional for women—it attracted a
protector; complaining was dysfunctional for men—it attracted nobody. Women
avoided men who complained and selected for men who were responsive to women’s
pleas for help. So asking for help for themselves will be the biggest challenge and
the catalyst to any evolutionary shift.
Part of the women’s movement has already initiated that evolutionary shift—the
part that says, “I, woman, must take responsibility for what occurs in my life”; that
says, “Don’t kill your husband if he’s abusing you, walk away”; the part that
encourages women, “Pick up his dinner check as often as he picks up yours”; the part
that says, “Don’t ‘marry up,’ depend on yourself”; the part that empowers women to
the point of being willing to consider a loving man “eligible” even if he expects her
to financially support him while he nurtures her. This part of the women’s movement
is the Division of Adult Feminism.
Another part of the women’s movement reinforces age-old patterns—the part that
wants combat rights but not combat obligations; that speaks of the “glass ceiling,”
but not the “glass cellar”; that wants government protection for battered women but
denies even the existence of battered men; the part that neglects to encourage women
to feel as comfortable “marrying down” and financially supporting a man to be the
dad as “marrying up” and having a man support her to be the mom. This part only
reinforces women’s genetic heritage—find a hero, marry him, depend on him; or
divorce him and get the government to play substitute husband. It reinforces women
discovering a variety of ways to be victim in order to find a variety of ways to be
saved. This part of the women’s movement is the Division of Adolescent Feminism.
For women, complaining and asking to be saved was a necessary part of their
Stage I role of protecting children. For men, asking for help is useful only in Stage
II. Complaining and asking for help, then, are not evolutionary shifts for
women; complaining and asking for help are evolutionary shifts for men.
Men will learn to ask for help when we help men understand it is the inability to
ask for help that is weakness. Men must gather a new strength—the strength to fight
the only world war in which the fodder is feelings, be strong enough to find these
feelings and courageous enough to risk the loss of superficial love to create deeper
love.
If a men’s movement really does create an evolutionary shift, though, it must go
beyond being gifted of the mouth and retarded of the ear. We must help both sexes
tune each other in as we would the Discovery Channel rather than tune each other out
as we would in a “Battle of the Sexes”; to respect that our socialization is as difficult
to remove as is syrup from a pancake, and that sometimes the best way we can show
our caring is not by solving someone’s problem but by acknowledging and sharing.
OUR STAGE II CHALLENGE
The challenge of The Myth of Male Power, then, is to care enough about men to
spend as much of the next quarter century helping men become Stage II men as we
did the last quarter century helping women become Stage II women; to move toward
equality of obligation for the death professions and combat roles, not just the “pickand-choose liberation” of female opportunity when desired; to cease expecting men
to earn more money than a woman before they are “eligible” and then calling the
expectation “power,” “patriarchy,” “dominance,” or “sexism” rather than “pressure”
and “obligation”; to develop affirmative action-type outreach programs for men until
men and women have the same life expectancy; to give men special outlets and
special incentives to express their feelings and perspectives until men commit
suicide no more frequently than women; to confront our monetary incentives to keep
men disposable rather than pay, for example, what it would cost to have a house built
half by female construction workers; to monitor media sexism that defines
relationship issues disproportionately from the female perspective in books,
magazines, newspapers, talk shows, and sit-coms; to care as much about battered
husbands as battered wives; to acknowledge the working dad as much as we
acknowledge the working mom; to give fathers as much right to their children as we
do mothers; to not stop merely with caring as much about saving males as saving
whales, but to stop only when we care as much about saving males as saving
females; to go beyond woman as sex objects and men as success objects to both
sexes as objects of love.
Notes
2014 Personal Introduction
i. Child Trends, 2012. Drawn from U.S. Census
data.http://www.childtrends.org/index.cfm. Cited in Jason De Parle and Sabrina
Vavernise, “For Women Under 30, Most Births Occur Outside Marriage, The
New York Times, Feb. 17, 2012,” http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/18/us/forwomen-under-30-most-births-occur-outside-marriage.html?
nl=todaysheadlines&emc=tha2 Back to page
ii. J. Waldfogel, T. Craigie, & J. Brooks-Gunn. (2010). “Fragile families and child
wellbeing.” The Future of Children, 20, 87-112. Back to page
iii. Warren Farrell, Why Men Earn More. New York: Amacom 2005. Back to page
iv. Warren Farrell, “Father and Child Reunion.” Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam: New
York, 2001. Chs. 1, 2. Back to page
v. Robin Simon and Anne Barrett, “Non-Marital Romantic Relationships and
Mental Health in Early Adulthood: Does the Association Differ for Women and
Men?” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, June, 2010. The study is of 1,000
unmarried young adults between 18 and 23.
Introduction
1. Phrase credited to attorney Ronald K. Henry. Back to page
CHAPTER 1
Is Male Power Really a Myth? A First Glance
1. Lawrence Diggs, Transitions, Nov./Dec. 1990, p. 10. Back to page
2. The Battle of the Somme was in 1916. British casualties were 420,000; French
were 195,000; German were 650,000. See John Laffin, Brassey’s Battles: 3,500
Years of Conflict, Campaigns, and Wars from A-Z (London: A. Wheaton & Co.,
1986), p. 399. Back to page
3. 1920 statistics from the National Center for Health Statistics, Monthly Vital
Statistics Report, vol. 38, no. 5, supplement, September 26, 1989, p. 4. In 1920,
the life expectancy for men was 53.6 years; for women, 54.6 years. Back to
page
4. Ibid., vol. 39, no. 13, August 28,1991, p. 17. In 1990, women’s average length of
life was 78.8 years; men’s, 72.0. Back to page
5. Ibid., vol. 38, no. 5, op. cit. Back to page
6. Ibid. The exact life span difference is 6.9 years between men and women. The
life span for white females is 78.9; for black females, 73.6; for white males,
72.2; and for black males, 65.2. Back to page
7. U.S. Bureau of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health
Statistics (hereinafter USBH&HS/NCHS), Vital Statistics of the United States
(Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1991), vol. 2, part A, “Mortality,” p. 51, tables 1–9,
“Death Rates for 72 Selected Causes by 5-Year Age Groups, Race, and Sex:
U.S., 1988.” The exact rates are:
Suicide Rates by Age and Sex per 100,000 Population
Age Male Female
5–9 0.1 0.0
10–14 2.1 0.8
15–19 18.0 4.4
20–24 25.8 4.1
Back to page
8. The 25,000 percent figure is derived by comparing the 0.1 suicides per 100,000
boys under the age of nine to the 25.8 suicides per 100,000 boys between ages
20–24 in the table in the endnote above, from ibid. Back to page
9. Latest data available as of 1992. From USBH&HS/NCHS, Vital Statistics of the
United States, vol. 2, “Mortality,” part A, 1987.
10. Among those over the age of 65, 2.7 women per 1,000 and 6.2 men per 1,000 are
victims of crimes of violence. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of Justice
Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Victimization in the United
States, 1988, National Crime Survey Report NCJ-122024, December 1990, p.
18, table 5. Back to page
11. Ibid., 1987, publication NCJ-115524, June, 1989, p. 16, table 3, “Personal
Crimes, 1987.” Back to page
12. Ibid. Back to page
13. “7 Deadly Days,” Time, July 17, 1989, p. 31. Back to page
14. 2000 U.S. Census results for Householders:
(http://www.census.gov/prod/2003pubs/p70-88.pdf) Back to page
15. The wealthiest women’s net worth averages $1.17 million; the wealthiest men’s
averages $1.11 million. Based on the latest data available from the Internal
Revenue Service as of 1990. See the Los Angeles Times, August 23, 1990. Back
to page
16. Jacque Lynn Foltyn, “Feminine Beauty in American Culture” (Ph.D. diss.,
University of California at San Diego, 1987). Foltyn measured floor space of
departments offering male versus female items in shopping malls and
boutiques, on the assumption that if women’s departments were not creating
enough profit per square foot, they would be forced to give way to men’s or
general departments. Foltyn found seven times as much floor space was devoted
to female personal items as to male personal items. She also found the more
valuable floor space was devoted to women’s items (e.g., perfume counters
immediately as we enter a department store). Back to page
17. See Diane Crispell, “The Brave New World,” American Demographic, January
1992, p. 38. The article concludes that women dominate consumer spending in
personal items, cleaning supplies and housewares, and food. In the category of
furniture/cars, it is close to even—men have only a technical dominance. Back
to page
18. A. C. Nielsen ratings, 1984. Back to page
19. Official Law & Order: Special Victims Unit episode plot summaries on
www.imdb.com for seasons 1-13 (1999-2012) (for example,
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0203259/episodes?season=1 for season 1).
Unofficial, more in-depth summaries are on Wikipedia (for example, at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_%26_Order:_Special_Victims_Unit_(season_
1) ; other seasons’ links can be followed from there. The 121 women and 17
men figure eliminates women and men who were both perpetrators and
victims. Back to page
20. This is based on my own informal discussions with waiters in restaurants
around the country in cities where I speak. Back to page
21. Also, 86 percent of engineering graduates are men; 83 percent of art history
graduates are women. Unpublished information, U.S. Department of Education,
Office of Educational Research and Improvement, National Center for
Education Statistics, “IPEDS Completions Study,” 1989, 1990. Interview on
June 1, 1992, with Norman Brandt of the U.S. Office of Education. Back to
page
22. The starting salary for a female engineer exceeds that for a man by $571 per
year. See the Engineering Manpower Commission’s Women in Engineering
(Washington, D.C.: American Association of Engineering Society [AAES]),
EMC Bulletin no. 99, December 1989, table 5. Back to page
23. Sonni Efron, “Honey, I Shrunk the Nest Egg,” Los Angeles Times, June 20,
1992, front page. Back to page
24. In an interview on February 11, 1992, John Oddison of the government’s United
States Fire Administration reported that 99 percent of volunteer municipal
firefighters are men. Of all municipal firefighters, 964,000 are volunteers and
240,000 are career. Back to page
25. F. Thomas Juster and Frank P. Stafford, “The Allocation of Time: Empirical
Findings, Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement,” Journal of
Economic Literature, vol. 29, June 1991, p. 477. Her average hours both inside
and outside the home add up to fifty-six; his, to sixty-one. Back to page
26. Martha Hill, Patterns of Time Use in Time, Goods, and Well-Being (Ann Arbor:
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, 1985), ed. F. Thomas
Juster and Frank P. Stafford. See also Joseph H. Pleck, Working Wives/Working
Husbands (Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1985), p. 41, table 2.3. Back to
page
27. Carol J. Castaneda, San Diego Union, May 21, 1988. Back to page
28. Frederic Hayward, “The Male’s Unpaid Role: Bodyguard and Protector,” as
reprinted in Francis Baumli, Ph.D., Men Freeing Men (Jersey City, N.J.: New
Atlantis Press, 1985), p. 238. Back to page
29. Naomi Weisstein, “Women as Nigger,” Psychology Today, vol. 3, no. 5,
October, 1969, p. 20. This article is considered a classic of feminist literature.
See, for example, Wendy Martin, The American Sisterhood: Writings of the
Feminist Movement from Colonial Times to the Present (New York: Harper &
Row, 1972), pp. 292–98. Back to page
30. Credit to Lawrence Diggs for some of these ideas related to symbols of
deference, contained in his audiotape called “Introduction to Men’s Issues”
(P.O. Box 41, Roslyn, SD 57261). Back to page
31. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Digest
of Education Statistics 1991, p. 167, table 161, “Total Enrollment in Institutions
of Higher Education” shows that women are 54 percent of those enrolled in
college; p. 234, table 228, “Earned Degrees Conferred by Institutions of Higher
Education,” shows that women are 55 percent of those receiving bachelors’
degrees from college. Back to page
32. Women who are heads of households have a net worth 141 percent greater than
that of men who are heads of households. This is the latest data available from
the Bureau of the Census as of 1992. See U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstracts of the US, 1989, op. cit. Back to
page
33. A. C. Nielsen ratings, 1984. Back to page
34. Interview, February 18, 1985, with John Markert, independent researcher and
contributor to Romantic Times and author of “Marketing Love,” dissertation in
progress. Back to page
35. Forbes reports that the average romance novel buyer spent $1,200 in 1991. The
average romance costs about $5 in 1991, leading to the purchase of
approximately 240 books a year, or 20 books per month. For women who also
read their friends’ books, the number of books they read is more than 20 per
month; for women who do not do this but buy some hardcovers, the figure is
less than 20 per month. See Dana Wechsler Linden and Matt Rees, “I’m hungry.
But not for food,” Forbes, July 6, 1992, pp. 70–75. Back to page
CHAPTER 2
Stage I to Stage II: How Successful Men Freed Women (But Forgot to Free
Themselves)
1. Joseph Stein, Fiddler on the Roof (New York: Crown, 1964), based on stories by
Sholom Aleichem. Musical score by Jerry Bock; lyrics by Sheldon
Harnick. Back to page
2. Herbert Hildebrandt, Edwin Miller, and Dee Edington, “The Newly Promoted
Executive” (monograph, University of Michigan, Graduate School of Business
Administration, Ann Arbor, 1987). Back to page
3. The Equal Pay Act of 1963 is part of U.S. Code, Title XXIX. Also, Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbids discrimination in employment on the basis
of sex. Back to page
4. See Jessie Bernard, The Future of Marriage (New York: World Publishing,
1972), table 20, “Some Selected Socio-Economic Variables Among NeverMarried White Men and Women 45–54 Years of Age.” Bernard cites the U.S.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1960: Marital Status, tables 4,
5, and 6. Back to page
5. In 1920, life expectancy for women was 54.6 years. In 1990, it was 78.8 years.
This is an increase of 44.3 percent. In 1920, the life expectancy for men was
53.6 years. In 1990, the life expectancy for men was 72.0 years. This is an
increase of 34.3 percent. The 1920 statistics are from the National Center for
Health Statistics, Monthly Vital Statistics Report, vol. 38, no. 5, supplement,
September 26,1989, p. 4. The 1990 statistics are from the National Center for
Health Statistics, Monthly Vital Statistics Report, vol. 39, no. 13, August 28,
1991, p. 17. Back to page
6. This view is frequently aired by feminist historians like Bonnie S. Anderson and
Judith P. Zinsser in their A History of Their Own (New York: Perennial Library,
1989), p. 413, by feminist politicians like Congresswoman Patricia Schroeder,
and by feminist leaders like Gloria Steinem. Back to page
7. Paul Brodeur, Zapping of America (New York: W. W. Norton, 1977), p.
177. Back to page
8. Sixty-four percent of working women leave the workforce for six months or
longer to take care of the family; 1.5 percent of men do. U.S. Department of
Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, ser. P–23, no.
136, “Life-time Work Experience and Its Effect on Earnings,” 1984, p. 6, table
A, “Work Interruption History, by Race, Spanish Origin and Selected
Characteristics: Males,” and p. 7, table B, “Work Interruption History, by Race,
Spanish Origin and Selected Characteristics: Females.” As of 1992, these are
the latest available data on workplace leave. Interview with Jack McNeil,
Bureau of the Census, July 22, 1992. Back to page
9. I polled a meeting of the American Subcontractors Association in San Diego on
May 1, 1992. Back to page
10. See table 7.3 of Martha Hill, Patterns of Time Use in Time, Goods, and WellBeing (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for Social Research, 1985),
ed. by F. Thomas Juster and Frank P. Stafford. The University of Michigan’s
Survey Research Center data incorporated the second job into the “hours
worked” statistics and found a more than nine-hour difference. (The Bureau of
Labor Statistics data do not incorporate the second job data and come up with a
just-over-four-hour difference for the first job.) Unmarried men also work nine
hours more in the workplace than unmarried women, but this sample grouped
full-time, part-time, and nonworkers together. Interview with Martha Hill, May
13, 1991.
11. I have completed the research on these variables, and they are being prepared
for my next book, on women’s versus men’s desire for equality.
12. F. Thomas Juster and Frank P. Stafford, “The Allocation of Time: Empirical
Findings, Behavioral Models, and Problems Measurement,” Journal of
Economic Literature, vol. 29, no. 2, June 1991, p. 477. Back to page
13. Ibid. Back to page
14. The study was by Lenore J. Weitzman, The Divorce Revolution (New York: The
Free Press, 1985). Weitzman looked only at the first year after divorce—when
women earned less and men earned more—rather than at the second year after
divorce and beyond during which the average woman’s income is equal to or
greater than her income at the time of divorce. See Greg J. Duncan and Saul D.
Hoffman, “Economic Consequences of Marital Instability,” figure 14.3 and
table 14. A.8 in Horizontal Equity, Uncertainty, and Economic Well-Being
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985), ed. by Martin David and Timothy
Smeeding. See also Susan Faludi, Backlash: The Undeclared War Against
American Woman (New York: Crown, 1991), pp. 19–25, 26. Back to page
15. While this practice was common around the world, it is depicted beautifully in
the Irish film Playboys (1992). Back to page
CHAPTER 3
Are “Power,” “Patriarchy,” “Dominance,” and “Sexism” Actually Code Words
for Male Disposability?
1. Lisa Tuttle, Encyclopedia of Feminism (New York: Facts on File Publications,
1986), p. 242. Back to page
2. See Edith Hamilton, Mythology (New York: Little, Brown, 1940), p. 290. These
myths grew out of rituals in which males were sacrificed to the moon goddess;
see Robert Graves, The Greek Myths, vol. 1 (New York: George Braziller,
1959), p. 285. Back to page
3. The sons were Cleobis and Biton. Back to page
4. Hera was married to Zeus, the king of the gods. See Thomas Bullfinch,
Bullfinch’s Mythology (New York: Avenal Books, 1978), p. 6; and Edith
Hamilton, op. cit., p. 28. Back to page
5. Related by Robert Bly during a breakfast discussion on February 16, 1992, in
Minneapolis. Back to page
6. The root of the word “hero” is ser-ow. In Greek, the connotation was
“protector.” The Latin root word for “protector” is servare. From the same root
word family comes the word servire, meaning “slave,” from which we get our
word “serve.” See Julius Pokorny, Indogermanisches Etymologisches
Worterbuch (Bern: Francke, 1959); or, for slightly easier reading, The American
Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (New York: American Heritage
Publishing Co. and Houghton Mifflin, 1969), p. 1538. Back to page
7. Encyclopaedia Britannica, Macropaedia, vol. 18, 15th ed. (Chicago:
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1980), p. 650. Back to page
8. Marjorie Rowling, Everyday Life in Medieval Times (New York: Dorsett Press,
1968), p. 186. Back to page
9. Daniel Ediger, The Well of Sacrifice (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1971), p.
22. Back to page
10. Joseph R. Conlin, The American Past (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich,
1984), p. 367. Back to page
11. Gold was $20 per ounce in 1860 and approximately $360 per ounce
today. Back to page
12. Albert Burton Moore, Ph.D., Conscription and Conflict in the Confederacy
(New York: Hillary House Publishers, 1963). Back to page
13. The minimum estimate of the number wounded is 471,427, for a minimum total
casualty figure of 1,094,453. See E. B. Long, The Civil War: Day by Day (New
York: Doubleday, 1971), pp. 710–11. Back to page
14. Moore, op. cit., p. 32. Back to page
15. Ken Burns, The Civil War (Alexandria, Va.: PBS Video, 1990), a video
recording produced by Florentine Films. The series aired on PBS in 1990 and
1991. Back to page
16. Gloria Steinem’s best-selling Revolution from Within (New York: Little, Brown,
1991) claims that low self-esteem is much more a woman’s problem than a
man’s. Back to page
17. Two such examples in English are Klaus Theweleit, Male Fantasies
(Minneapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), vol. 1; and Barbara
Ehrenreich, “Iranscam: The Real Meaning of Oliver North,” Ms., May
1987. Back to page
18. This is an eastern Cherokee parable. The chief can also be thought of as the
center of the pond, worshiped because it provided shelter and a podium for food.
Credit to Dr. Glenn Solomon of the University of Oklahoma for telling me of its
origin. Back to page
19. Study conducted for the National Institute of Mental Health by Dr. Mary P.
Koss, University of Arizona. Cited in Gerald Eskenazi, “When Athletic
Aggression Turns into Sexual Assault,” The New York Times, June 3, 1990, p.
30. Back to page
20. Colin Turnbull, Mountain People (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1972), p.
105. Back to page
21. Conlin, op. cit., pp. 244–45. Back to page
22. Joseph Campbell, The Power of Myth (New York: Doubleday, 1988), p.
8. Back to page
23. Rosemary Romberg, Circumcision: The Painful Dilemma (South Hadley, Mass.:
Bergin & Garvey Publishers, 1985), p. 43. Back to page
24. Will Durant, The Story of Civilization III: Caesar and Christ (New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1939), pp. 385–86. Back to page
25. Ibid., p. 381. Back to page
26. Ibid., p. 388. Back to page
27. See David D. Gilmore, Manhood in the Making (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1990), p. 206 (Tahitians) and pp. 209–10 (Semai). Concerning the
Minoans on Crete, their peaceful period came during that period in which they
were both isolated from attack and politically unified (around 2000 B.C.). In a
small geographical area, political unification is necessary for peace, otherwise
there is fear of attack from neighboring tribes. “Isolation from attack” can also
occur from being able to run fast enough to escape it. For example, forest
nomads such as the Akuriyo, discovered in the late 1960s in southeastern
Surinam, and the Heta, discovered in the 1950s in southern Brazil, were
peaceful. Information concerning the Minoans and the forest nomads comes
from an interview on November 10, 1992, with Robert Carneiro, curator of
anthropology, American Museum of Natural History. Back to page
28. Riane Eisler, The Chalice and the Blade (Cambridge, Mass.: Harper & Row,
1987), p. xvi. Back to page
29. The Roman king was Prasutagus, whose widow sent the men to their deaths
during the first-century Roman invasion of Iceni. See Antonia Fraser,
Boadicea’s Chariot: The Warrior Queens (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson,
1988). For many additional examples, see Jean Bethke Elshtain, Women and
War (New York: Basic Books, 1987). Back to page
30. If creating and protecting children were so important, why did some societies
like the Spartans give children no rights (e.g., leaving the weak on a lonely
mountain to perish from exposure) while other societies, such as the Jews,
focused almost all their laws and traditions around respect for the child? The
Spartans believed that strength required selecting the strong by weeding out the
weak, whereas the Jews saw in children “the Messiahs of mankind,” the
“perennial regenerative force,” and an opportunity to make good the mistakes of
the past because “in the child, God continually gives mankind a chance to make
good its mistakes.” Cited in The Pentateuch and Haftorahs, 2d ed. (London:
Soncino Press, 1979), ed. by Dr. J. H. Hertz, C.H., Late Chief Rabbi of the
British Empire, p. 54. Back to page
31. J. T. Hooker, The Ancient Spartans (London: J. M. Dent, 1980), p. 137; and L. F.
Fitzhardinge, The Spartans (London: Thames & Hudson, 1980), p. 9 and p. 162.
Sparta had “a constitution, a military organization, and a set of social
institutions enforced by a system of education which controlled every male
from seven to sixty” (Fitzhardinge, p. 9). The rigid system is called “the agoge”
(Fitzhardinge, p. 162). Back to page
32. The altar was the altar of Artemis Orthia. See Plutarch Lycurgus 18 as cited in
Arnold Hugh Martin Jones (L.L.D., D.D.), Sparta (Oxford: Blackwell & Mott,
1967), p. 35. Back to page
33. James D. DeMeo, Ph.D., “The Geography of Female Genital Mutilations (part 3:
Desertification and the Origins of Armoring: The Saharasian Connection),”
Journal of Orgonomy, vol. 24, no. 2, 1990, pp. 233–39. Back to page
34. Anne G. Ward, et al., The Quest for Theseus (New York: Praeger, 1970), pp. 7–
9. Back to page
35. Bullfinch, op. cit., pp. 152–53. Back to page
36. Campbell, Joseph, and Bill Moyers, The Power of Myth (New York: Doubleday,
1988). Back to page
37. Genesis 30:3, The Holy Bible, New International Version (Grand Rapids, Mich.:
Zondervan Bible Publishers, 1978). Back to page
38. Ibid., Genesis 30:28–29. Back to page
39. First-cousin incest was not a violation of ancient Jewish law, only of modern
law. Back to page
40. The Pentateuch and Haftorahs, op. cit., p. 5. “This is the first precept (mitzvah)
given to man. The duty of building a home and rearing a family figures in the
rabbinic Codes as the first of 613 Mitzvoth (Commandments) of the
Torah.” Back to page
41. Ibid. Back to page
42. Credit to Lionel Tiger for the thought about genes being nature’s marketing
tool. Back to page
43. Genesis 19:31, Holy Bible, op. cit. Back to page
44. Ibid., Genesis 19:33. Back to page
45. The name Moab “is explained as though it were the equivalent of me-ab, ‘from
father.’ ” See The Pentateuch and Haftorahs, op. cit., p. 69. Back to page
46. Rosalind Miles, The Women’s History of the World (New York: Perennial
Library, 1990), p. 94. Back to page
47. Helen E. Fisher, “The Four-Year Itch: Do Divorce Patterns Reflect Our
Evolutionary Heritage?” Natural History, October 1987, p. 22. Back to page
48. See Joan Haslip, Catherine the Great: A Biography (New York: Putnam, 1977);
and Michael Grant, Cleopatra (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1972). Back to
page
49. David Howarth, Tahiti (New York: Viking Press, 1983), pp. 32–33. Back to
page
50. Ibid. Back to page
51. Ian Campbell, Lost Paradise (London: Century Hutchinson, 1987), p. 36. Back
to page
52. “Preserve the Mystery . . . Make Love the Old-Fashioned Way. Make Him Earn
It,” Cosmopolitan, September 1984, front cover. Back to page
53. I document this sequence in chapter 8 (“Why Did the Sexual Revolution Come
and Go So Quickly?”) of Why Men Are the Way They Are (New York: Berkley,
1988). Back to page
54. Concerning the man going to prison for the woman’s crime, see Calvin Bradley
v. the State, 156, Mississippi, 1824, in R. J. Walker, Reports of Case Adjudged
in the Supreme Court of Mississippi (St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing, 1910), p.
73, section 157. Concerning the man going to prison for the family’s debt, see
Nicole Hahn Rafter, Partial Justice: Women in State Prisons, 1800–1935
(Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1985), p. 10. In 1830, only ninety-seven
women were imprisoned for all crimes put together in the seven most populous
states of the United States. Back to page
55. Bernard Bailyn, Voyagers to the West: A Passage in the Peopling of America on
the Eve of the Revolution (New York: Knopf, 1986), p. 177. The study was based
on the most common group of indentured servants—the English. Back to page
56. Rowling, op. cit., p. 33. Back to page
57. Tuttle, op. cit., p. 242. Back to page
58. Karen L. Michaelson and contributors, Childbirth in America: Anthropological
Perspectives (South Hadley, Mass.: Bergin & Garvey Publishers, 1988), p.
2. Back to page
59. Encyclopedia Americana (Danbury, Conn.: Grolier, 1989), vol. 24, p.
146. Back to page
60. Sally Smith Booth, The Witches of Early America (New York: Hastings House,
1975), pp. 87–107. Back to page
61. Ibid. Back to page
62. Philip W. Sergeant, Witches and Warlocks (London: Hutchinson & Co., 1974),
p. 12. Back to page
63. Arno Karlen, Sexuality and Homosexuality (NY: W. W. Norton, 1971), p.
128. Back to page
64. Oxford English Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 2d ed., pp. 663–
64. Back to page
65. Karlen, op. cit., p. 128. Back to page
66. See A. L. Rowse, Homosexuals in History (New York: Dorset Press,
1983). Back to page
67. The Concise Columbia Dictionary of Quotations (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1987), p. 113. Back to page
68. See “bheu-” (root word of “husband”)—from Pokorny, op. cit., p. 126. Cited in
The American Heritage Dictionary, op. cit., p. 643 (word definition) and p. 1509
(root definition). Back to page
69. “Husband” derives from ON “bondi,” meaning “the male of the pair of lower
animals; a male kept for breeding” or “one who tills and cultivates the soil.” See
The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (London: Oxford
University Press, 1971), p. 1352. Back to page
70. Jim Kohl, unpublished manuscript “Human Sexuality: Past, Present, and
Future.” Back to page
71. This understanding is compatible with the modifications of Darwinian theory
developed by selection theorists. See discussions of Theodosius Dobzhansky,
Ernst Mayr, G. G. Simpson, and G. L. Stebbins in Jacques Ruffle, The
Population Alternative (New York: Pantheon, 1986). Back to page
CHAPTER 4
The Death Professions: “My Body, Not My Choice”
1. I think the source here is yours truly. (In the late 1960s, when I began speaking
in this area, I used to say this. Although I’ve checked a dozen books of
quotations and I believe I created this, I wouldn’t bet my life on it!) Back to
page
2. Les Krantz, editor, The Jobs Related Almanac (New York: Ballantine Books,
1989). Back to page
3. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (hereinafter USBLS),
Employment and Earnings, 1988 Annual Averages, January 1989, p. 187, table
22, “Employed Civilians by Detailed Occupation, Sex, Race, and Hispanic
Origin.” Back to page
4. The Vietnam comparison comes from the eight plus years of the Vietnam War
divided into the 58,000 deaths, or 7,250 men killed each year, versus 6,600
deaths of men each year in the workplace. Source: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH), 1989 data (latest available as of 1992). Back to page
5. This figure relates to deaths from job-related injuries, not dying of a disease
that may or may not be related to work. Source: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, NIOSH (Morgantown, West Va.), on-line database titled
“Basic Information on Workplace Safety and Health in the U.S.,” latest
information available as of July 1992. Back to page
6. The fatality rate for U.S. workers is .105 per 1,000,000 “man-hours” worked.
The equivalent Japanese rate is .030. See 1988 Yearbook of Labour Statistics,
International Labour Office, Geneva, Switzerland. Back to page
7. NIOSH estimates the annual U.S. workplace fatality rate at between 7,000 and
11,000 lives lost. The National Safe Workplace Institute estimates that if the
U.S. had the same job fatality rate as Japan, it would have lost only 2,565 lives
rather than an estimated 9,000. Since 94 percent are men, 6,049 men and 386
women unnecessarily lose their lives each year. The National Safe Workplace
Institute data are from Basic Information on Workplace Safety and Health in the
U.S., 1992 (Chicago: National Safe Workplace Institute, 1992), p. 6, table 1–8,
“Lives Saved if the U.S. had the Same Occupational Fatality Rate as Other
Industrialized Nations.” Back to page
8. The number of job safety inspectors, both state and federal, is 2,000, according
to the Occupation Safety and Hazards Administration (OSHA); the number of
fish and wildlife inspectors, both state and federal, is 12,000, according to the
Wildlife Management Institute in Washington, D.C. See Basic Information,
ibid., p. 17, tables 3–5.
On the federal level, OSHA has only 1,100 inspectors for 6 million work
places. See A. V. Westin, executive producer, “Working in America: Hazardous
Duty,” ABC News, airdate April 20, 1989. (Transcript #Burn 6 from Journal
Graphics, 267 Broadway, New York, NY 10007.)
Back to page
9. See Westin, Ibid. Back to page
10. Ibid. Back to page
11. USBLS, Employment and Earnings: January 1991, p. 185, table 22. Within each
of the hazardous occupations the safer, nonproduction jobs have higher
percentages of women. The media will sometimes report a higher percentage of
women in any given industry, but their figures often include secretaries and
executives, which would account for the difference. Back to page
12. In coal mining, for example, there are 11.6 percent women in the safer,
nonproduction jobs (secretaries, executives), but only 2.8 percent women in the
less safe, production jobs (like mining itself). See the Coal Chronicle, “Coal
Miner Statistics,” vol. 2, no. 9, January 1992, p. 22. Back to page
13. The data on the garbage collectors is from H. G. Reza, “Hidden Dangers Are a
Daily Part of Job for Trash Collectors,” Los Angeles Times, April 3,
1989. Back to page
14. Ibid. Back to page
15. USBLS, Employment and Earnings, p. 187, table 22, “Employed Civilians by
Detailed Occupation, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin.” Back to page
16. Ann Landers, Los Angeles Times, May 5, 1989. Back to page
17. See Bob Sipchen, “Hazardous Duty,” Los Angeles Times, March 7, 1989. Back
to page
18. Ibid. Back to page
19. May 1987 to May 1988. For the disability, movement, and 40 percent figures,
see the Associated Press description of the OSHA suit against John Morrell and
Co. as reported in the San Diego Union, November 24, 1988. See also U.S.
Department of Health, NIOSH, “Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance
(HETA) Report #88–180,” Evaluation of John Morrell and Co., South Dakota
(Ohio: NIOSH, April 1989). Back to page
20. An interview with Dan Haybes of NIOSH revealed that almost 90 percent of the
highest-risk jobs were held by men. In recent studies focusing more on the
hazards to women, as in NIOSH’s 1991 study of Shop Right Supermarkets
(where there were a higher percentage of women), none of the jobs was ranked
“high risk.” Back to page
21. In 1991, 14,000 agricultural workers were killed on the job, a rate of 44 per
100,000. Unpublished data, made available in interview with Alan Hoskin,
Department of Statistics, National Safety Council, June 26, 1992. Back to page
22. Jill A. Swanson, M.D., et al., “Accidental Farm Injuries in Children,” American
Journal of Diseases of Children, December 1987, vol. 141, p. 1277. Back to
page
23. USBLS, Employment and Earnings, 1988 Annual Averages, op. cit. (Derived
from percentages of heavy and light truckers.) Back to page
24. Maria Cone and Chuck Cook, “Deadly Smoke: A Special Report,” Orange
County Register, December 1983. Back to page
25. National Bureau of Health Statistics, “Mortality and Incidence Studies of
Firefighters in Los Angeles, Toronto, and Boston,” 1983. See also ibid.
Interestingly, despite the seriousness of the problem, there has not been a more
recent study done (as of 1992). Back to page
26. International Association of Fire Fighters, 1987 Death and Injury Survey
(Washington, D.C.: IAFF, 1987). Back to page
27. International Association of Fire Fighters, 1990 Death and Injury Survey
(Washington, D.C.: IAFF, 1990), p. 8. Back to page
28. Ibid., p. 7. Back to page
29. In an interview on February 11,1992, John Oddison of the United States Fire
Administration, a governmental agency, reported 964,000 volunteer municipal
firemen; 240,000 career firemen. Back to page
30. My friend is Steve Collins, Ph.D., a geologist who also is to be credited for all
the examples of the uses of coal and petroleum in everyday life. Back to page
31. Interview on June 30, 1992, with Con Dougherty, public information officer,
Drug Enforcement Administration, Washington, D.C. Since 1921, thirty-nine
agents have been killed—all men. The injury data are available only up to 1989.
The distribution of injuries between 1985 and 1989 between women and men in
the past five years is as follows:
Year Men Women
1985 145 1
1986 184 0
1987 425 8
1988 414 14
1989 193 7
Back to page
32. Paul Dean, “A Shadow World of Life and Death,” Los Angeles Times, February
23, 1988. Back to page
33. Ibid. In his article, Paul Dean cites Robert Bryden, training director, DEA
Academy, Quantico, Virginia, who is quoted in Insight magazine, January
1988. Back to page
34. Dean, op. cit. Back to page
35. See Jacqueline Bernard, “A Meeting of the (Women) Miners,” gazette section,
Ms., November 1979, p. 33. See also Ms., June 1981, p. 55. Back to page
36. Jobs Related Almanac, op. cit. Back to page
37. Paul Muni’s 1932 movie I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang sparked some of
these protests. Back to page
38. “All Things Considered,” National Public Radio, November 25, 1991. Back to
page
39. Gordon Terroux, acting area director for OSHA, as quoted in Mike Anton in the
Rocky Mountain News, September 27, 1987. Back to page
40. Bob Baker, “Death on the Job—a Lifework,” Los Angeles Times, April 28, 1990.
The National Safe Workplace Institute is in Chicago. Back to page
41. Baker, op. cit. Only recently has Gerard Scannell, a worker safety advocate,
taken over the OSHA and begun reinforcing guidelines with fines that do not
make it pay to disobey, and instituting changes (such as an Office of
Construction) to monitor the building industry. Back to page
42. Tamar Lewin, “Pregnancy and Work Risks Posing ‘Fuzzy’ Legal Arena,” The
New York Times, August 2, 1988. Back to page
43. T. M. Schnorr, B. A. Grajewski, R. W. Nornung, M. J. Thun, G. M. Egeland, W.
E. Murray, D. L. Conover, and W. E. Halperin, “Video Display Terminals and
the Risk of Spontaneous Abortion,” New England Journal of Medicine, March
14, 1991, pp. 727–33. Back to page
CHAPTER 5
War Hero or War Slave?: The Armed Prostitute
1. See U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract
of United States: 1991,111th ed., p. 348, table 571, “Living Veterans-States and
Other Areas: 1980 to 1988”; and p. 342, table 555, “Summary of Active and
Reserve Military Personnel and Forces: 1989 to 1991.” As of 1991, 27,279,000
American men are veterans. Since the male population of the United States is
92,840,000, more than 29 percent of all men are veterans. There are an
additional 2,130,000 full-time, active-duty military personnel, 88.3 percent of
whom are men (1,880,790 men). Male veterans and active-duty military
personnel total 29,159,790, or 31.4 percent of all American men over 18. Back
to page
2. The Battle of the Somme River was from June 24 to November 18, 1916. On
July 1 alone, Britain suffered 57,450 casualties, including 20,000 dead. Overall,
British casualties were 420,000; French were 195,000; German were 650,000.
See John Laffin, Brassey’s Battles: 3,500 Years of Conflict, Campaigns, and
Wars from A–Z (London: A. Wheaton & Co., 1986), p. 399. Back to page
3. Susan Goldberg and Michael Lewis, “Play Behavior in the Year-Old Infant:
Early Sex Differences,” Child Development, vol. 40, no. 1, March 1969, p.
29. Back to page
4. Statement made in 1986 before the Defense Advisory Committee on Women in
the Services. Quote was confirmed in an interview May 26, 1992, with Kay
Leisz, Weinberger’s executive assistant. Back to page
5. U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on the Judiciary United States Senate,
Nomination of Sandra Day O’Connor, Report no. J-97–51, 97th Cong., 1st sess.,
1982, p. 127–28. Back to page
6. Scott Harris, “In Service Family, a Woman Dies,” Los Angeles Times, March 1,
1991. Comments of Adrienne Lynette Mitchell’s father, after her death in the
Persian Gulf War. Back to page
7. Richard Halloran, “Military Women: Increasingly Indispensable,” The New
York Times, March 13, 1988, p. E-5. Back to page
8. The army and the navy have divided their combat positions into dangerous
versus less dangerous positions, with women eligible only for the less
dangerous positions. For example, in the army, P-l positions are positions
requiring offensive attack, the ones most likely to result in death and injury; P-2
positions place people in a generalized combat zone, not the offensive, and
therefore leave them much less vulnerable.
The air force is by far the safest of the services. Virtually all of the air force
positions are the equivalent of P-2 in terms of vulnerability and therefore
women are allowed in all of the air force combat positions. Information
obtained from interviews on July 14 and 17, 1992, with Maggie Waleland, head
of the Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in the Armed
Forces, and Capt. Jeff Smith, a Fellow of the Presidential Commission,
considered the expert on these matters.
Back to page
9. Michael Gordon, “Woman Leads GIs in Combat in Panama, in a ‘First’ for
Army,” The New York Times, January 4, 1990, front page. Back to page
10. Ibid. Back to page
11. As chair of the House Armed Services Subcommittee on military installations,
Congresswoman Schroeder knew women served in Military Police Units, which
meant that women, as a rule, performed support functions (e.g., directing
traffic). Although vulnerable to being shot, they were kept away from dangerous
areas as much as possible.
The breakdown of men versus women killed is from Harold Heilsnis, Office
of Assistant Secretary of Defense, Public Affairs.
Back to page
12. Interview July 17, 1992, with Janna Simms, public affairs officer, U.S.
Department of Defense, Office of Public Affairs. Back to page
13. “Desert Shield/Desert Storm,” Fact Sheet, Department of Defense, Office of
Public Affairs, December 19, 1991. Of the 536 people killed in the Persian Gulf,
15 were women (4 killed in action, 11 killed in accidents) and 521 were men
(142 killed in action, 379 killed in accidents). Back to page
14. http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/24/us/military-women-glance/ Back to page
15. “Questions and Answers on Women Supporting Desert Shield,” Department of
Defense, Office of Public Affairs, January 30, 1991. Back to page
16. Bob Secter, “The Draft: If There’s a War, There’s a Way,” Los Angeles Times,
January 3, 1991, pp. E-l & E-5. Back to page
17. The estimate is that of the deputy director of the Selective Service System’s
Regional Headquarters in Illinois, U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Ronald
Meilstrup. Back to page
18. Secter, op. cit. Back to page
19. Credit for “If there’s a war, there’s a way” to Bob Secter, op. cit. Back to page
20. Michael Herr, Dispatches (New York: First Vintage International, 1991), p.
134. Back to page
21. Bruce Gilkin, “To Hell and (Almost) Back: A Vietnam Veteran’s Struggle with
Posttraumatic Stress,” Men’s Health, summer 1988, p. 44. Back to page
22. Letters to the Editor, Transitions, May/June 1991, p. 2. The physician explained
in the full letter that he or she needed to withhold his or her name because it was
so politically incorrect to discuss these issues. Back to page
23. Lieutenant Roberta Spillane, USN, “Women in Ships: Can We Survive?”
Proceedings (of the U.S. Naval Institute), July 1987, p. 44. The exact quote
concerning the Acadia is: “One West Coast based tender reported that more than
40 percent of her female nonrated seamen became pregnant during workup for
deployment [emphasis supplied]—and no replacements were authorized.” Back
to page
24. Account based on story by David Fairbank White , “The Men Who Saved the
Stark,” Parade, February 12, 1989. Back to page
25. From a 1978 study, “The Khaki-Collared Women of Company C,” by Michael
Rustad, Wellesley College Center for Women, unpublished. It concerns
problems of sex integration in the U.S. Signal Corps. Cited in Virginia Adams,
“Jane Crow in the Army—Obstacles to Sexual Integration,” Psychology Today,
October 1980. Back to page
26. “Evaluation of Women in the Army” (1977) is a study done by the Army
Administration Center at Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indiana. Army personnel,
following a research design by psychologist James Sampson, sent
questionnaires to 7,751 soldiers and confirmed the prevalence of negative
attitudes. Cited in Psychology Today, op. cit. Back to page
27. From Rustad, op. cit., as cited in Psychology Today, op. cit. Back to page
28. Psychology Today, op. cit. Back to page
29. “Women reported for sick call an average of 6.8 times per female cadet,
compared to the male average of 1.7 times.” Brian Mitchell, Weak Link: The
Feminization of the American Military (Washington, D.C.: Regnery Gateway,
1989), p. 69. Back to page
30. The marine boot camp was in Parris Island, South Carolina. See Melinda Beck,
“Women in the Armed Forces,” Newsweek, February 18, 1980, p. 36. Back to
page
31. Stanley K. Ridgley, “The Mythical Military Woman,” The (Raleigh, N.C.)
News & Observer, July 28, 1991, p. 7-J. Both Stanley Ridgley and his wife
served as U.S. Army officers.
Back to page
32. Ibid. Back to page
33. Military Selective Service Act. See “Privacy Act Statement,” SSS Form 1,
Registration Form, September 1987. Back to page
34. Ibid. Back to page
35. Massachusetts, Illinois, North Carolina, Florida, Tennessee, Louisiana,
Mississippi, and Georgia are among the states to require a man to register for
the draft before he can attend a state school. Cited in Jim Schwartz, College
Press Service, 1986. Back to page
36. The Supreme Court ruled that drafting only men was constitutional as long as
only men were being prepared for combat. But it has never been confronted with
a challenge as to the constitutionality of giving men combat obligations while
women get combat options. Justice William Rehnquist explained for the
majority: “The purpose of registration was to prepare for a draft of combat
troops. Since women are excluded from combat, Congress concluded that they
would not be needed in the event of a draft and, therefore, decided not to
register them.” The case is Rostker v. Goldberg, June 25, 1981, United States
Reports, vol. 453, Henry C. Lind, Reporter of Decisions (Washington, D.C.:
USGPO, 1983).
Statutes prohibit the navy from putting females into direct (as opposed to
indirect [P-21]) combat, while service regulations preclude the army and
Marine Corps from using them in direct capacity.
Back to page
37. Julian Isherwood, Armed Forces Journal, July 1988. Back to page
38. The editors of The Israel Defense Forces Spokesman define CHEN (the Hebrew
acronym for the Women’s Corps of the Israel Defense Forces) to mean
“charm.” See Adams, op. cit. Back to page
39. Marlene Cimons, staff writer, “Women in Combat: Panama Stirs Debate,” Los
Angeles Times, January 11, 1990, front page. Back to page
40. Halloran, op. cit.; and Adams, op. cit., p. 50. Back to page
41. Europa World Year Book (London: Europa Publishers, 1992), vol. 1, p.
1475. Back to page
42. Helen Shapin, Islam: A Country Study (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1990), p.
290. Back to page
43. John Keegan, ed., World Armies (Detroit: Gale Research Co., 1983), 2d ed., p.
308. Back to page
44. Shapin, op. cit. Back to page
45. Shapin, op. cit. Back to page
46. Shapin, op. cit. Back to page
47. Philip Knightley, The First Casualty (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich,
1975), p. 357. Back to page
48. Interview with Iraqi soldier, June 14, 1987. He requested anonymity. Back to
page
49. Story by Artyom Borovik, a journalist for Ogonyok (a popular Russian weekly
magazine), as cited in Bill Keller, “Russia’s Divisive War—Home from
Afghanistan,” The New York Times Magazine, February 14, 1988. Back to page
50. This is based on a classic physics experiment explained to me by Steven
Collins, Ph.D. Back to page
51. Associated Press, “Doctors Assail Project in Which Cats Are Shot,” Los Angeles
Times, August 19, 1989. Back to page
52. Ronald Brownstein, “Americans Back Bush Decision Overwhelmingly,” Los
Angeles Times, January 19, 1991, p. A-l. Back to page
53. Bruce Gilkin, Vietnam veteran, “To Hell and (Almost) Back: A Vietnam
Veteran’s Struggle with Posttraumatic Stress,” Men’s Health, summer 1988, pp.
43–44. Back to page
54. Keller, op. cit. Back to page
55. Lloyd Shearer, “Short End of the Stick,” Parade, June 10, 1990, p. 20. Back to
page
56. As quoted in Admiral Elmo Zumwalt, Jr., and Lieutenant Elmo Zumwalt II,
with John Pekkanen, My Father, My Son (New York: Macmillan, 1986), p. 162.
Reutershan, an ex-helicopter pilot, is founder of Agent Orange Victims
International (1978). When he was 28, he learned he had terminal stomach
cancer. Back to page
57. Joel Osier Brende and Erwin Randolph Parson, Vietnam Veterans: The Road to
Recovery (New York: Plenum Press, 1985), p. 75. Back to page
58. Arthur Egendorf, Charles Kadushin, Robert S. Laufer, Georgie Rothbart, and
Lee Sloan, Legacies of Vietnam: Comparative Readjustment of Veterans and
Their Peers (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1981). Back to page
59. US 96th Cong., 1st sess., House of Representatives Committee on Veterans
Affairs, Presidential Review Memorandum on Vietnam Era Veterans
(Washington, D.C.: House Committee Print no. 38, 1979), released October 10,
1978. The report listed 29,000 veterans in state or federal prisons; 37,500 on
parole; 250,000 under probation supervision; and 87,000 awaiting trial. Back
to page
60. Louis Sahagun, “VA Hospital Assailed on Care for Homeless Vets,” Los
Angeles Times, May 26, 1989. Back to page
61. Brende and Parson, op. cit., p. xvi. Back to page
62. Mike Lafavore, “Soldier’s Heart,” Men’s Health, summer 1988, p. 45. Mike
Lafavore is the executive editor of Men’s Health. Back to page
63. Gilkin, op. cit. Back to page
64. Gilkin, op. cit., p. 45. Back to page
65. Credit to Jim Novak. Back to page
66. The military historian is S. L. A. Marshall. Cited in Jean Elshtain, Women and
War (New York: Harper & Row/Basic Books, 1987). Back to page
67. John Helmer, Bringing the War Home: The American Soldier in Vietnam &
After (New York: The Free Press, 1974), pp. 225–26. Back to page
68. Brende and Paron, op. cit., p. 75. Back to page
69. John E. Helzer, Lee N. Robins, and Larry McEvoy, “Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder in the General Population: Findings of the Epidemiologic Catchment
Area Survey,” New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 317, no. 26, December
24, 1987, p. 1631. Back to page
70. Interview with Mike Dister, February 27, 1990, Bronx, New York, who did this
research. Back to page
71. The statement was made on June 15, 1992, in an interview with NBC
News. Back to page
72. Barbara Crossette, “Gulag Held MIAs, Yeltsin Suggests,” The New York Times,
June 16, 1992, p. A-l. Back to page
73. The report is an Interim Report on the POW/MIA issue by the Republican staff
of the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. The Department of
Defense, POW-MIA Fact Book, July 1991, p. 3, lists 2,273 Americans as
missing in action or unaccounted for. The information in the sentence in the text
is in Karen Tumulty, “Pentagon Official Resigns, Alleges Cover-up on MIAs,”
Los Angeles Times, May 21, 1991, p. A-l. Back to page
74. Martin Hirshfield, Los Angeles Times, June 22, 1991. Back to page
75. See Jill Stewart, “U.S. Families Claim Some Korea POWs May Be Alive,” Los
Angeles Times, July 8, 1990, p. A-19. Back to page
76. Karen Tumulty, “POWs May Still Be Held in Southeast Asia, Ex-Pentagon
Official Says,” Los Angeles Times, May 31, 1991, p. A-8. Back to page
77. Karen Tumulty, “Pentagon Official Resigns, Alleges Cover-up on MIAs,” Los
Angeles Times, May 21, 1991, p. A-l. Back to page
78. Ibid. Back to page
79. Ibid. Back to page
80. Nora Zamichow, “News from All Over,” Ms., August 1986. Back to page
81. Zumwalts, op. cit. Back to page
82. Zumwalts, op. cit., p. 162. Back to page
83. Zumwalts, op. cit., p. 162. Back to page
84. Zumwalts, op. cit. Back to page
85. Laura Palmer, “Vets Lose Not Only Lives, but Immortality as Well,” Los
Angeles Times, November 11, 1990. Back to page
86. The law is 38 USC 316. See U.S. Representative Montgomery (D-Miss.), Bill
Tracking Report HR 556, 102d Cong., 1st sess., “Agent Orange Act of
1991.” Back to page
87. See U.S. Representative Montgomery (D-Miss.), Bill Tracking Report HR 556,
102d Cong., 1st sess., “Agent Orange Act of 1991.” Back to page
88. The National Academy of Sciences was directed to conduct comprehensive
reviews of any evidence that Agent Orange or other toxic chemicals used in
Vietnam caused cancer or other diseases in veterans. Back to page
89. Barbara Ehrenreich, “Iranscam: The Real Meaning of Oliver North,” Ms., May
1987, p. 26. Back to page
90. Zumwalts, op. cit., p. 126–27. Back to page
91. “No Peace for a Veteran,” Labor section, Time, July 3, 1989. Back to page
92. Pierre Blais, “Hot Coals,” Colorado Daily, September 11–13, 1987. Back to
page
93. “Personality type predicts a death from cancer six times better than smoking
does.” Ronald Grossarth-Maticek, a Yugoslav psychologist working in
Heidelberg, as quoted by Joshua Fischman, senior editor, “The Character of
Controversy,” Psychology Today, December 1988, p. 27. Back to page
94. Jonathan Van Meter, “Child of the Movies,” The New York Times Magazine,
January 6, 1991, p. 19. Back to page
95. Keller, op. cit. Back to page
96. Nora Zamichow, “Trading Places,” Los Angeles Times, January 13, 1991, p. Bl. Back to page
97. Ibid. For example, every man featured in the Los Angeles Times article as
“Trading Places” was either an attorney or a career officer who was taking on
the children in addition to his continuing his career. Back to page
98. Ibid. Back to page
99. The quote is from “Hancock,” a poem by Leroy Quintana in Interrogations
(Chevy Chase, Md.: Vietnam Generation, and Burning Cities Press, 1990), p. 95.
Quoted with permission of Leroy Quintana. Back to page
100. NBC News/The Wall Street Journal poll, December 8–11, 1990. Poll of 1,002
voters nationwide. Back to page
101. Ibid. Back to page
102. Gallup Poll, January 31 and February 1, 1980, as published in “Battle and the
Sexes: A Newsweek Poll,” Newsweek, February 18, 1980. Back to page
103. Voter Research and Surveys, New York City, provided the information to Rich
Morrin at The Washington Post, who I interviewed on November 17,
1992. Back to page
104. See Bob Greene, Homecoming: When the Soldiers Return from Vietnam (New
York: Ballantine Books, 1989). Back to page
CHAPTER 6
The Suicide Sex: If Men Have the Power, Why Do They Commit Suicide More?
1. Jack C. Smith, James A. Mercy, and Judith M. Conn, “Marital Status and the
Risk of Suicide,” American Journal of Public Health, vol. 78, no. 1, January
1988, p. 79, figure 3. Back to page
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Health,
Eugene Rogat, et al., A Mortality Study of 1.3 Million Persons by Demographic,
Social & Economic Factors 1979–1985 Follow-up Survey (Washington, D.C.:
USGPO, 1992), p. 335. Back to page
3. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of
the United States: Colonial Times-1970, Bicentennial Edition, Part 2, ser. A24–
25 and H981–982. Women’s suicides increased by 2 per 100,000, from 2 to 4;
men’s increased by 14 per 100,000, from 12 to 26. Back to page
4. Between 1950 and 1980, suicide rates for males 15 to 24 increased more than
three times as much as the rates for females the same age. The male rate
increased 211 percent; the female rate, 65 percent. See Mark L. Rosenberg, Jack
C. Smith, Lucy E. Davidson, and Judith M. Conn, “The Emergence of Youth
Suicide: An Epidemiologic Analysis and Public Health Perspective,” American
Review of Public Health, 1987, vol. 8, p. 424. Back to page
5. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health
Statistics (hereinafter USDH&HS/NCHS), Division of Vital Statistics,
unpublished data for 1970, 1980, and 1988. These are the most recent data
available:
Suicide Rates per 100,000 Population (Age 25–34)
Year Males Females
1970 19.8 8.6
1988 25.0 5.7
Back to page
6. For all races, men commit suicide at the rate of 19.9 per 100,000 population;
women at 4.8 per 100,000 population. Based on the most recent statistics
available (1989) from the USDH&HS/NCHS, Center for Disease Control,
Division of Vital Statistics, Office of Mortality Statistics, Monthly Vital
Statistics Report, vol. 40, no. 8, supplement 2, January 7, 1992. Back to page
7. Prior to the age of 5, boys’ suicide rate is slightly less than girls’. The 25,000
percent figure is derived by comparing the 0.1 to the 25.8 in the following chart
from the USDH&HS/NCHS, Center for Disease Control, Statistical Resources,
Vital Statistics of the United States (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1991), vol. 2,
part A, Mortality, p. 51, tables 1–9, “Death Rates for 72 Selected Causes by 5-
Year Age Groups, Race, and Sex: U.S., 1988.”
Suicide Rates by Age and Sex per 100,000 Population (1988—latest
available as of 1991)
Age Male Female
5–9 0.1 0.0
10–14 2.1 0.8
15–19 18.0 4.4
20–24 25.8 4.1
Back to page
8. Julian Weiss, “Trouble in Paradise,” Psychology Today, August 1984. The Truks
live on approximately 100 tropical islands and atolls in the western Pacific. A
study by anthropologists Geoff White and Donald Rubenstein of the East-West
Center in Hawaii, and their collaborator, historian Francis Hezel, found that 96
out of 126 suicides could be traced to amwunumwun. The Truk males who
commit suicide at twenty-five times the rate of the average American males are
in the 15- to 24-year age range, the same years for which the comparisons to the
Americans are made. Back to page
9. USDH&HS/NCHS, Center for Disease Control, Statistical Resources, Vital
Statistics of the United States (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1987), vol. 2,
Mortality, part A. Back to page
10. Robert Fresco, New York Newsday, October 9, 1982. Back to page
11. USDH&HS/NCHS, Center for Disease Control, op. cit. Back to page
12. Shira Maguen, “Teen Suicide: The Government Coverup and America’s Lost
Children,” The Advocate, September 24, 1991, p. 47. Nationally, gay teenage
boys commit suicide eight to nine times more than straight teenage boys; gay
teenage girls commit suicide two to three times more than straight teenage girls.
And as we have seen, straight teenage boys commit suicide much more
frequently than straight teenage girls. Back to page
13. Joel Brinkley, “Lethal Game of ‘Chicken’ Emerges for Israeli Boys,” The New
York Times, April 3, 1989. Back to page
14. The ad appeared during 1988. It was eventually removed from TV after some,
but not a lot of, protest. Back to page
15. Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1982), and Jean Baker Miller, Toward a New Psychology of Women
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1976), 2d ed., 1986, p. 83. In Psychology Today, Phyllis
Silverman, the codirector of the Child Bereavement Study at Massachusetts
General Hospital, explains that Gilligan’s and Miller’s work demonstrates that
loss is more pervasive for women. Cited in Diane Cole, “Grief’s Lessons: His
and Hers,” Psychology Today, December 1988, p. 60. Back to page
16. Jack C. Smith, James A. Mercy, and Judith M. Conn, op. cit. Back to page
17. Ibid., p. 78. Back to page
18. Pat Kelley, public affairs officer for the Naval Medical Command, Southwest
Region, as cited in Ed Jahn, “Marines Investigate Suicides,” San Diego Union,
December 3, 1988. Back to page
19. Meyer Moldevan, consultant to the Inspector General’s Office at McClellan Air
Force Base, estimates there might be as many as 9,000 suicide attempts among
active-duty personnel, members of their immediate families, and retired
military. Cited in Jahn, ibid. Back to page
20. This assessment is that of Pat Kelley, public affairs officer, Naval Medical
Command, Southwest Region. Cited in Jahn, ibid. Judgments as to causes are
usually based on discussions with friends as to suicide notes or what was getting
the man down. Back to page
21. Pat Kelley, public affairs officer, Naval Medical Command, Southwest Region.
Cited in Jahn, ibid. Back to page
22. Ibid. Back to page
23. Nationwide, men commit suicide at the rate of 19.9 per 100,000. In 1982, uppermidwestern farmers’ rates of suicide went to 58 suicides per 100,000. The 19.9
figure is from the USDH&HS/NCHS, Center for Disease Control, Division of
Vital Statistics, Office of Mortality Statistics, Monthly Vital Statistics Report,
vol. 40, no. 8, supplement 2, January 7, 1992. The 58 per 100,000 figure was
reached in 1982 according to a study released October 14, 1991, by the National
Farm Medicine Center in Wausau, Wisconsin. Back to page
24. USDH&HS/NCHS, Center for Disease Control, Division of Vital Statistics,
Office of Mortality Statistics, Monthly Vital Statistics Report, vol. 38, no. 5,
September 26, 1989, p. 25, table 10, “Deaths from 72 Selected Causes by Race
and Sex: United States, 1987.” Back to page
25. Associated Press, “George Reeves, TV Superman, Commits Suicide at Coast
Home,” The New York Times, June 17, 1959, p. 40. Back to page
26. Tom Williamson, “Male Helplessness,” as reprinted in Francis Baumli, Ph.D.,
Men Freeing Men (Jersey City, N.J.: New Atlantis Press, 1985), pp. 129–
30. Back to page
27. Sentiment exemplified on greeting card by Flying Fish, 6547 West Boulevard,
Inglewood, CA 90302. Back to page
28. USDH&HS/NCHS, Center for Disease Control, Statistical Resources, Vital
Statistics of the United States (Washington, DC: 1987), vol. 2, Mortality, part A.
Here is the breakdown:
Back to page
29. States require insurance companies to pay after the first two years that a client
has had the policy, but not before the first two years (during which only
premiums must be returned to the client). Interview on July 9, 1992, with Tim
Kime, manager, Metropolitan Life Insurance. Back to page
30. Dr. Richard C. Fowler, Dr. Charles L. Rich, Dr. Deborah Young, “San Diego
Suicide Study,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 1986; 43:962–95. See also
related article by Allan Parachini, “Youth, Drugs, Suicide: Statistics Tell a New
Story,” Los Angeles Times, June 1, 1988, part 5. Back to page
31. Marilyn K. Potts, et al., “Gender Differences in Depression Detection: A
Comparison of Clinical Diagnosis and Standardized Assessment,”
Psychological Assessment, vol. 3, no. 4, December 1991, pp. 609–15. Back to
page
32. David C. Clark, Ph.D., and Peter B. Zeldow, Ph.D., “Vicissitudes of Depressed
Mood During Four Years of Medical School,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, vol. 260, no. 17, November 4, 1988, pp. 2521–28. Back to page
33. Murray Straus and Richard Gelles, “Societal Change and Change in Family
Violence from 1975 to 1985 as Revealed by Two National Surveys,” Journal of
Marriage and the Family, vol. 48, 1986. Back to page
34. Maggie Scarf, “The More-Sorrowful Sex,” Psychology Today, April 1979, p.
45. Back to page
35. Janny Scott, “Studies Find Depression Epidemic in Young Adults,” Los Angeles
Times, October 9, 1988. Back to page
36. Ibid. Back to page
37. Dan Kiley, Living Together, Feeling Alone (New York: Prentice Hall,
1989). Back to page
CHAPTER 7
Why Do Women Live Longer?
1. In Bangladesh, 55 percent of men and 50 percent of women live to be 65. In
Harlem, 40 percent of men and 65 percent of women reach 65 years of age. See
Colin McCord, M.D., and Harold P. Freeman, M.D., “Excess Mortality in
Harlem,” New England Journal of Medicine, volume 322, no. 3, January 18,
1990, pp. 173–77. Back to page
2. See the University of California at Berkeley Wellness Letter, vol. 8, issue 1,
October 1991, p. 1. It is published by the University of California at Berkeley in
association with the School of Public Health. The “Fascinating Facts” section
reads: “An estimated 409 out of 1,000 white girls born in 1989 can expect to
reach age 85, but only half as many white boys—224 per 1,000. For nonwhites,
the chances of reaching age 85 are lower: 348 girls and 174 boys per
1,000.” Back to page
3. Forty percent of girls who are born live to 85; 21 percent of boys who are born
live to 85. See ibid. Back to page
4. Almanac of the American People, Tom and Nancy Biracree, Facts on File,
1988. Back to page
5. Ibid.
6. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health
Statistics (hereinafter USDH&HS/NCHS), Centers for Disease Control, Monthly
Vital Statistics Report, vol. 38, no. 5, supplement, September 26, 1989,
“Advance Report of Final Mortality Statistics, 1987,” p. 6, table D, “Ratio of
Age-Adjusted Death Rates for the 15 Leading Causes of Death by Sex and Race:
United States, 1987.” Back to page
7. See U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract
of the United States: 1987, 107th ed., p. 820, table 1439, “Urban Population,
Growth, Birth, and Death Rates and Life Expectancy—Selected Countries”; p.
824, table 1445, “Gross National Product in Current and Constant (1982)
Dollars and Per Capita: 1975 to 1983.” Back to page
8. United Nations Demographic Yearbook, 1967 (New York: United Nations
Publishing Service, 1968), p. 730. As cited in Sheila Ryan Johansson, “Sex and
Death in Victorian England: An Examination of Age-Specific Death Rates,
1840–1910,” in A Widening Sphere: Changing Roles of Victorian Women, ed.
Martha Vicinus (Bloomington, Ind.: University of Indiana Press, 1977), pp. 163
and 166. Back to page
9. Ibid. In the official document, the technical names are used more than I use
them in the text. They are:
1. Diseases of heart
2. Malignant neoplasms (including neoplasms of lymphatic and
hematopoietic tissues
3. Cerebrovascular diseases
4. Accidents and adverse effects
5. Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases and allied conditions
6. Pneumonia and influenza
7. Diabetes mellitus
8. Suicide
9. Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
10. Atherosclerosis
11. Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and nephrosis
12. Homicide and legal intervention
13. Septicemia
14. Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period
15. Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection
Back to page
10. Robert Kennedy, Jr., “The Social Status of the Sexes and Their Relative
Mortality Rates in Ireland,” in Readings in Population, ed. William Petersen
(New York: Macmillan, 1972), pp. 121–35. Back to page
11. Johansson, op. cit., pp. 163 and 166. Back to page
12. See Thomas A. Welton, Esq., “The Effect of Migrations upon Death Rates,”
Journal of the Statistical Society of London, vol. 38, 1875. (For a summary of
the data and their interpretations, see pp. 323–27.) Back to page
13. In 1920, life expectancy for women was 54.6 years. In 1990, it was 78.8 years.
This is an increase of 44.3 percent. In 1920, the life expectancy for men was
53.6 years. In 1990, the life expectancy for men was 72.0 years. This is an
increase of 34.3 percent. 1920 statistics from the USDH&HS/NCHS, Monthly
Vital Statistics Report, vol. 38, op. cit., p. 4. The 1990 statistics are from the
USDH&HS/NCHS, Monthly Vital Statistics Report, vol. 39, no. 13, August 28,
1991, p. 17. Back to page
14. Laurie B. Lande, “First-Time Mothers Return to the Workforce,” Monthly
Labor Review, vol. 113, no. 10, October 1990, pp. 38–39. Back to page
15. Sixty-four percent of working women leave the workforce for six months or
longer to take care of the family; 1.5 percent of men do. U.S. Department of
Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports (Washington,
D.C.: USGPO, 1984), ser. P-23, no. 136, “Life-Time Work Experience and Its
Effect on Earnings,” p. 6, table A, “Work Interruption History, by Race, Spanish
Origin and Selected Characteristics: Males”; p. 7, table B, “Work Interruption
History, by Race, Spanish Origin and Selected Characteristics: Females.” As of
1992, these are the latest available data on workplace leaves of absence.
Interview on July 22, 1992, with Jack McNeil, Bureau of the Census, Housing
and Household Economic Statistics Division. Back to page
16. See Table 7.3 of Martha Hill in Patterns of Time Use in Time, Goods, and WellBeing (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for Social Research, 1985),
ed. F. Thomas Juster and Frank P. Stafford. The University of Michigan’s
Survey Research Center data incorporated the second job into the “hours
worked” statistics and found a more than nine-hour difference. (The Bureau of
Labor Statistics data do not incorporate the second job data and come up with a
just-over-four-hour difference.) Unmarried men also work nine hours more in
the workplace than unmarried women, but this sample grouped full-time, parttime, and non-workers together. Interview with Martha Hill, May 13, 1991.
Men commute four hours per week to women’s two hours per week. See John
Robinson, “Americans on the Road,” American Demographics, September 1989,
p. 10.
Back to page
17. Kenneth Wetcher, Art Barker, and P. Rex McCaughtry, Save the Males: Why
Men Are Mistreated, Misdiagnosed, and Misunderstood (Summit, N.J.: The
Psychiatric Institutes of America Press, 1991). Back to page
18. Ibid. Back to page
19. Edward Dolnick, “Super Women,” In Health, July/August 1991, p. 45. Back to
page
20. Wetcher, Barker, and McCaughtry, op. cit. Back to page
21. USDH&HS/NCHS, Public Health Service, Annual Summary of Births,
Marriages, Divorces, and Deaths: 1990, p. 13, table 4. The male-female ratio is
3.1 to 1. Back to page
22. Ibid. Similarly, while boys and girls under age 15 rarely die from heart attacks,
they nevertheless die at the same rate. But as soon as adolescence is
experienced, boys are twice as likely to die from heart attacks. On this last
point, see the USDH&HS/NCHS, Vital Statistics of the United States
(Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1991), section 1—“General Mortality,” p. 44,
tables 1–10, “Death Rates for 72 Selected Causes, by 10-Year Age Groups,
Race, and Sex: United States, 1987–Con.” Back to page
23. Alan Rozanski, M.D., “Mental Stress and the Induction of Silent Ischmia in
Patients with Coronary Artery Disease,” New England Journal of Medicine, vol.
318, no. 16, April 21, 1988, pp. 1005–12. Back to page
24. USDH&HS/NCHS, Centers for Disease Control, Vital Statistics of the United
States (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1990), part A, section 1—“General
Mortality,” p. 44, tables 1–10, “Death Rates for 72 Selected Causes, by 10-Year
Age Groups, Race, and Sex: United States, 1987–Con.” Back to page
25. Robert Suro, “Hearts and Minds,” The New York Times, December 29,1991,
section 6, p. 18, col. 1. See also Dr. Dean Ornish, M.D., Dr. Dean Ornish’s
Program for Preventing Heart Disease (New York: Random House, 1990).
26. Back to page
26. Unpublished data, USDH&HS/NCHS, Centers for Disease Control, National
Hospital Discharge Survey, “Number of All Listed Diagnosis from Short-Stay
Hospitals, By Age, and Sex: 1987.” Cited by Jill Braden, Survey Branch of the
National Center for Health Statistics via telephone interview March 15, 1990.
Note that after children are grown and men’s money problems are less severe on
average—ages 45 and above—male alcoholism decreases, yet still exceeds
women’s by a ratio of more than 3 to 1.
Back to page
27. Latest HUD estimate (other estimates on homeless men run as high as 2.4
million), as cited in Don Johnson, “The Loneliness of the Male Body,”
American Health, January/February 1989, pp. 63–64. See also Martha Burt and
Barbara Cohen, America’s Homeless: Numbers, Characteristics, and Programs
that Serve Them (Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press, 1985).
28. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstracts of
the United States: 1991, 111th ed., p. 83, table 120, “Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome Deaths.”
Men 69,929 (90.4%)
Women 7,421 (9.6%)
29. From an interview on February 18, 1992, with Jerry Graf, National Park Service,
Department of Veterans Memorials.
30. Interview on January 29, 1992, with Jerry Taylor, Department of Defense.
31. U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Midyear Prisoners
1991, June 30, 1991, p. 6.
32. Marc Lacey, “Solving the Ills of Black Men,” Los Angeles Times, August 1,
1992, p. A-l. Back to page
33. USDH&HS/NCHS, Monthly Vital Statistics Report, vol. 38, op. cit., pp. 1–4.
The life span for white females is 78.9; for black females, 73.6; for white males,
72.2; and for black males, 65.2. Back to page
34. 436,000 black males of all ages are in college; 609,690 young black men (50
percent more) are under the control of the criminal justice system. (White
males, on the other hand, are more than four times as likely to be in college as
in the criminal justice system.) See Marc Mauer, Young Black Men in the
Criminal Justice System (Washington, D.C.: The Sentencing Project, 1990), p.
3. Back to page
35. Interview on September 10, 1990, with Marc Mauer, author of ibid. Back to
page
36. Mauer, op. cit. Back to page
37. The Office of Research on Women’s Health is part of the Department of Health
and Human Services’ National Institutes of Health in Bethesda,
Maryland. Back to page
38. The Office of Minority Health is part of the Department of Health and Human
Services’ National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. Back to page
39. Lynette Lamb, “Is There a Doctor (of Women’s Health) in the House?” Utne
Reader, no. 5, March/April 1992, pp. 26–28. Back to page
40. Marianne J. Legato, M.D., and Carol Colman, The Female Heart: The Truth
About Women and Coronary Artery Disease (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1991), p. xiii. Back to page
41. Interview July 14, 1992, with Vivian W. Pinn, M.D., director of the Office of
Research on Women’s Health, National Institutes of Health. These figures were
being prepared to be sent to Congress in late 1992. Back to page
42. The Index Medicus search was for 1989. It was a subject search, which is
important because it is possible, for example, for an article on prostate cancer
not to have “men” in the title and therefore not come up in a word search of
article titles but nevertheless really be an article on men. The subject search
minimizes that possibility for both sexes. See Steven L. Collins, “Proportion of
Gender-Specific Scientific Research Relevant to Men and Women,”
unpublished manuscript, July 21, 1990, p. 4. Back to page
43. Cancer Facts and Figures: 1991 (Atlanta, Ga.: American Cancer Society, 1991).
The death rate for males of all ages due to prostate cancer is 24.1/ 100,000; for
females of all ages due to breast cancer it is 27.4/100,000, a difference of 13.7
percent. In absolute numbers, prostate cancer killed about 32,000 men in 1991;
and breast cancer killed about 44,500 women. Looked at from this perspective,
breast cancer killed 39 percent more women and received 660 percent more
funding. I did not use the absolute number comparison because what really
counts is how vulnerable any given woman or man is. Back to page
44. 1991 funding for breast cancer was $92 million; for prostate cancer, $14
million. Projected 1992 funding for breast cancer is $132 million; for prostate
cancer, $20 million. Unpublished data, internal documents of the Reports
Analysis and Evaluation Branch of the National Cancer Institute, Financial
Division. From a February 25, 1992, interview with budget analyst William
DiGioia. Back to page
45. In 1986, 27,262 men died of prostate cancer versus 32,000 in 1991, an increase
of 17.4 percent. In 1986, 40,539 women died of breast cancer versus 44,500 in
1991, an increase of 9.8 percent. The source for the 1986 data is USDH&HS/
NCHS, Vital Statistics of the United States (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1989),
tables titled “Mortality for the Five Leading Cancer Sites for Males by Age
Group, United States, 1986” and “Mortality for the Five Leading Cancer Sites
for Females by Age Group, United States, 1986.” The source for the 1991
figures is Cancer Facts and Figures: 1991, op. cit., pp. 8–9. Back to page
46. USDH&HS, Cancer Rates and Risks, April 1985, p. 110. Back to page
47. At some time in their lives, 36 percent of men and 30 percent of women will be
mentally ill. Twenty-two percent of mentally ill women receive treatment, but
only 12 percent of mentally ill men do. See Sam Shapiro, et al., “Utilization of
Health and Mental Health Services,” Archives of General Psychiatry, vol. 41,
October 1984, p. 954, table 2; p. 976, table 5. Back to page
48. As of 1992, the most recent data available are from the USDH&HS/NCHS, Vital
Statistics of the United States (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1991), section 1
—“General Mortality,” p. 44, tables 1–10, “Death Rates for 72 Selected Causes,
by 10-Year Age Groups, Race, and Sex: United States, 1987–Con.” The National
Center for Health Statistics puts all heart attacks in the category of “Major
Cardiovascular Diseases.” They are as follows:
Major Cardiovascular Diseases
Number of Deaths/Year
Ages 25–34 Male 14.4
Female 7.6
Ages 35–14 Male 81.8
Female 24.1
Ages 45–54 Male 227.4
Female 88.0
Ages 55–64 Male 872.9
Female 303.0
Ages 65–74 Male 1,528.1
Female 863.4
Ages 75–84 Male 4,084.2
Female 2,790.1
85 + Male 10,135.4
Female 9,153.0
The other major category of heart problems, “Diseases of the Heart,”
follows the same basic ratios of male-female deaths at various ages.
Back to page
49. Over the age of 85, men die at a rate of 10,135.4 per 100,000 and women at the
rate of 9153.0 per 100,000. See ibid. These are the most recent data available as
of 1992. Back to page
50. See Lawrence E. Lamb, M.D., “Men, Women, and Heart Attacks: Can Aspirin
Prevent Heart Attacks in Women?” The Health Letter, vol. 39, no. 1, January
1992, p. 2. Dr. Lamb, medical columnist for North America Syndicate, Inc., is a
former professor of medicine at Baylor College of Medicine and chief of the
Clinical Sciences at the USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. Back to page
51. The average man lives to 72. Back to page
52. A study of 22,071 male physicians was published in the New England Journal of
Medicine, July 28, 1989. Back to page
53. The study of 87,678 women who were registered nurses was reported in the
Journal of the American Medical Association, July 24/31, 1991. Back to page
54. The study of the men was five years; the study of the women, six years. The
study of the men included 22,071 men; the study of the women included 87,678
women. See the New England Journal of Medicine, op. cit., for the men’s study;
ibid., for the women’s study. Back to page
55. The work was done by Dean Ornish at the Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center.
See Pamela King, “The Pretended Self,” Psychology Today, May 1989, p.
60. Back to page
56. The hospital death rate for men in a study of New England hospitals was 3.2
percent versus 7.3 percent for women. See the Journal of the American Medical
Association, August 14, 1991. Back to page
57. See Lamb, op. cit. Back to page
58. Ibid., p. 3. Back to page
59. Dr. Vivek Varma, Journal of American College of Cardiology, “Are Women
Treated Differently than Men with Acute Myocardial Infarction?” vol. 19, no. 5,
April 1992. Interview with Dr. Varma on July 23, 1992, confirms text. Back to
page
60. The increased risk of death was found in data from New England, Denmark, and
Canada. See N. P. Roos, “Mortality and Recuperation after Open and
Transurethral Resection of the Prostate for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia,” New
England Journal of Medicine, vol. 320, no. 17, April 27, 1989, pp. 1120–24.
New surgical and pharmaceutical developments have improved men’s
potency and life expectancy prognoses. The only advocacy group for men with
prostate cancer is Patient Advocates for Advanced Cancer Treatments (PAACT)
at 1143 Parmelee NW, Grand Rapids, MI 49504 at 616–453–1477.
Back to page
61. American Journal of Epidemiology, December 1990. Cited in “Vasectomies and
Prostate Cancer: A Link?” The New York Times, January 1, 1991, p. A-16. Dr.
Lynn Rosenberg of the Boston University School of Medicine, along with five
colleagues, found that 10 percent of men with prostate cancer had had
vasectomies, while only 2.4 percent of men without cancer had had
vasectomies. Back to page
62. Confirmed August 17, 1992, through the American Cancer Society’s Cancer
Response System at 800-ACS-2345. See “For Men Only,” a publication of the
American Cancer Society. Call 800-ACS-2345. Back to page
63. The print ad ran in Time, Newsweek, Fortune, Forbes, Smithsonian, Washington
Monthly, Scientific American and a black version with a black model ran in
Essence, Ebony, and Black Enterprise. A parallel TV ad ran during network
news and sports. Note that the target audience is not only women but men and
women who are potential investors. The rationale? A company that protects
women will do well: Invest in DuPont. The publications in which the ad ran are
from an interview on March 18, 1991, with Dick Woodward, Corporate
Advertising Division of DuPont. Back to page
64. Justice John Paul Stevens discovered it in 1992 during a routine screening test
when he was 71; Justice Harry A. Blackmun discovered it in 1987 during a
routine screening test when he was 78. Back to page
65. Verified in an interview on August 4, 1992, with Enid Galliers of the Oral
Contraceptives Division of the Food and Drug Administration. Back to page
66. Lawrence Schneiderman, Journal of the American Medical Association, vol.
241, May 18, 1979. Back to page
67. Interview with Dr. Lawrence Schneiderman, December 9, 1991. Back to page
68. Lawrence Schneiderman, Journal of Family Practice, vol. 23, no. 1, 1986, pp.
49–53. Back to page
69. Women constitute 61 percent of office visits; men constitute 60 percent of
hospital admissions. These figures do not include veterans’ hospitals, in which,
of course, almost 100 percent of patients would be men. See USDH&HS/NCHS,
“National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 1990 Summary,” 1992, p. 1. Back
to page
70. This was true even in religious publications. For example, see Lori Durso,
“Minorities Face Large Health-Care Gap,” Catholic Telegraph, January 13,
1989, p. 6. Lori Durso is a reporter for Maturity News Service. Back to page
71. Approximately 7,200 boys died each year of the eight years of the Vietnam
War. In 1991, for example, 32,000 men died of prostate cancer. Since prostate
cancer is highly curable with early detection, it is probable that well over 7,200
of their lives would be saved with better education programs. Back to page
72. American Journal of Epidemiology, op. cit. Back to page
73. From the U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform
Crime Reports for the United States: 1988.
National Arrests for Driving Under the Influence
Men Women
1,139,227 154,289
88.1% 11.9%
Back to page
74. Unpublished data, USDH&HS/NCHS, Centers for Disease Control, National
Hospital Discharge Survey, op. cit. Back to page
CHAPTER 8
The Insanity Track
1. Joseph Campbell and Bill Moyers, The Power of Myth (New York: Double-day,
1988). Back to page
2. Herbert Hildebrandt and Edwin Miller, “The Newly Promoted Executive,”
monograph, University of Michigan, Graduate School of Business
Administration, Ann Arbor, 1984. This is the most recent data I was able to
track down on this subject. Back to page
3. American Bar Association Journal, February 1984, as reported by Paul Ciotti,
“Unhappy Lawyers,” Los Angeles Times, August 25, 1988. Back to page
4. “The alcoholism rate among lawyers is an estimated 15%-20%, almost twice as
high as the general population.” Cited in Ciotti, op. cit. Back to page
5. Mary Kay Barbieri, 45, as quoted in “Leaving Behind the Sharks of Seattle, Two
Legal Eagles Find Happiness Hiking with Llamas,” Starting Over section,
People, October 31, 1988, p. 111. Back to page
6. Lujuana Treadwell, placement director, UC Berkeley Law School’s Boalt Hall,
as reported by Ciotti, op. cit. Back to page
7. The firm was Wald, Harkrader, and Ross. See David Brock, “The Real Anita
Hill,” The American Spectator, March 1992, pp. 21–22. “One Wald attorney . . .
says that Hill was caught falsifying times sheets used to bill clients, because she
couldn’t meet the demands placed on young associates at the firm.” Back to
page
8. James Barron, “Making Sure Doctors Get Enough Sleep,” The New York Times,
May 22, 1988. Back to page
9. Ibid. Back to page
10. Ibid. Back to page
11. Suzanne Daley, “Hospital Interns’ Long Hours to Be Reduced in New York,”
The New York Times, June 9, 1988. Back to page
12. As adapted from David Clement Scott, A Cyclopaedic Dictionary of the
Mang’anja Language Spoken in British Central Africa (Edinburgh, 1892), p.
97 Back to page
13. American Medical Association, Division of Survey and Data Resources,
“Federal and Non-Federal Physicians by Specialty and Corresponding Board
Certification,” Physician Characteristics and Distribution in the United States,
1988, tables B-13 and B-14. Back to page
14. See Colette Dowling, The Cinderella Complex (New York: Pocket Books, 1981),
p. 41. Back to page
15. Term used by Mike Driver, professor of management and organization at the
USC business school, as reported in Ciotti, op. cit. Back to page
16. Dr. Kiyoyasu Arikawa found that sudden deaths among top executives
skyrocketed from 10 in 1969 to about 150 in 1987, and most recently, the
number of such deaths has grown fastest among those in their 40s and 50s—
men who could normally live to almost 80. Cited by Elaine Kurtenbach, “Death
from Overwork Growing Problem in Japan,” The Sunday Camera, July 16,
1989. Back to page
17. Government-affiliated Leisure Development Center survey, 1987. Cited in
Kurtenbach, ibid. Back to page
18. Leslie Helm, “The Rule of Work in Japan,” Los Angeles Times, March 17, 1991,
p. A-l. Back to page
19. Helm, ibid., p. A-25. The Japanese “hell camp” was also featured on “60
Minutes” in early 1991. Back to page
20. Nancy Reagan, with William Novak, My Turn: The Memoirs of Nancy Reagan
(New York: Random House, 1989), as excerpted in “Close-Up on Ronnie,”
Newsweek, October 23, 1989. Back to page
21. Ibid. Back to page
22. Leslie Helm, op. cit., p. A-l. Back to page
23. Oxford English Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 2d ed., pp. 437–39
and 663–64. The definition of “faggot” (pp. 663–64) includes, “with special
reference to the practice of burning heretics alive . . . a bundle of sticks, twigs or
small branches bound together to be used as fuel.” Also the definition of
“witch” (pp. 437–39) includes a reference to heretics being burned alive. As
Arno Karlen discusses on p. 128 of Sexuality and Homosexuality (New York: W.
W. Norton, 1971), between one fourth and one fifth of the records from
Plymouth Colony dealing with sexual offense punished homosexuals. In nonPuritan colonies (like New York) there were a number of homosexual
punishments, including burning at the stake. Back to page
24. Richard H. Ropers, “The Rise of the New Urban Homeless,” Public Affairs
Report (Berkeley: University of California/Berkeley, Institute of Governmental
Studies, 1985), October-December 1985, vol. 26, nos. 5 and 6, p. 4, table 1,
“Comparisons of Homeless Samples from Select Cities.” Back to page
25. Ibid. Back to page
26. James D. Wright, Address Unknown: The Homeless in America (New York:
Aldine De Gruyter, 1989), p. 59. Wright explains: “To arrive at these results, I
simply dropped from the data base all HCH clients known to be members of
homeless family groups, and then calculated the age and sex distributions for
those who remained. The sample size for the calculations is 17,633.” Back to
page
27. James Wright conducted a nationwide study of 17,633 homeless. See ibid., p.
57. Back to page
28. See Wright, op. cit. Back to page
29. See ibid., pp. 58–59. Wright explains: “The adult family members also suffer
fewer chronic physical disorders, are more likely to be short-term (or
situationally) homeless, and are rated as having better housing and employment
prospects than the lone homeless are. In general, their prospects for the future
are much brighter.” Back to page
30. State of California, Department of Housing & Community Development, “A
Study of the Issues and Characteristics of the Homeless Population in
California,” April 1985, p. 7. Back to page
31. Associated Press, “Co-Workers Comforted Controller after Her Fatal Error,
Paper Says,” The New York Times, February 11, 1991, p. A-12. Back to page
32. Ibid. The air traffic controller’s name (Robin Lee Wascher) was eventually
leaked. Back to page
33. The term “sanity track” was coined by Harvard Business School Professor
Leonard Schlesinger. Reported by Carol Hymowitz, “Stepping Off the Fast
Track,” The Wall Street Journal, June 13, 1989, p. B-l. Back to page
34. E. Lowell Kelly, Lewis R. Goldberg, Donald W. Fiske, and James M. Kilkowski,
survey published in American Psychologist, vol. 33, no. 8, as cited in “Do
Psychologists Have Less Fun?” Psychology Today, November 1978. Back to
page
CHAPTER 9
Violence Against Whom?
1. The latest data available in 1991 are that 74.6 percent of all murder victims are
male (13,632 males versus 4,611 females). U.S. Department of Justice, Federal
Bureau of Investigations, Crime in the United States, 1988, p. 11, table titled
“Age, Sex, and Race of Murder Victims, 1988.” Back to page
2. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Criminal Victimization in the United States, 1987, publication #NCJ115524, June 1989, table 3, “Personal Crimes, 1987,” p. 16. Per 1,000
population, males are 1.7 times more likely than females to be victims of
violent crimes. This statistic includes rape, but excludes murder, of which males
are 3 times more likely to be victims. Back to page
3. U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime
Reports, Crime in the United States: 1990, pp. 15 and 51. Excluding forcible
rape, the numbers of violent crimes are:
1981 1990
1,267,316 1,718,575
Back to page
4. The rape rate decreased from 1.8 per 1,000 in 1973 to 1.2 per 1,000 in 1988.
See the U.S. Bureau of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime
Survey Report, Criminal Victimization in the United States, Annual (1973–
1988), p. 15. This figure comes from a national sampling of households. It is
considered a more reliable comparison of rates than reports of rapes to the
police, since reports of rape to the police have increased as public awareness of
rape has increased and as the definition of rape has broadened (e.g., to include
ignoring a verbal “no”) in the last decade. But even here there has been a 9
percent increase in rapes reported to the police between 1981 and 1990 versus a
36 percent increase in violent crimes of which men are the primary victims that
were reported to the police between 1981 and 1990. For the source of the 9
percent increase, see ibid. Back to page
5. Crime in the United States: 1990, op. cit. The exact figures are 102,555 forcible
rapes and 1,757,572 violent crimes (murder, robbery, and aggravated assault,
excluding forcible rapes). Back to page
6. U.S. Department of Justice, Crime in the United States, 1981. As cited in Mark
L. Rosenberg, M.D., M.P.P., and James A. Mercy, Ph.D., “Homicide:
Epidemiologic Analysis at the National Level,” Bulletin of the New York
Academy of Medicine, 1986, vol. 62, no. 5, p. 389. Back to page
7. U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, National Survey of Crime Severity (Washington, D.C.: USGPO,
1985), #NCJ-96017; conducted by Marvin E. Wolfgang, Robert M. Figlio, Paul
E. Tracy, and Simon I. Singer from the Center for Studies in Criminology and
Criminal Law, the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Back to page
8. Murray A. Straus and Richard J. Gelles, “Societal Change and Change in Family
Violence from 1975 to 1985 as Revealed by Two National Surveys,” Journal of
Marriage and the Family, vol. 48, August 1986, pp. 465–79. Back to page
9. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health
Statistics, Monthly Vital Statistics Report, vol. 38, no. 5, supplement, September
26, 1989, p. 6, table D, “Ratio of Age-Adjusted Death Rates for the 15 Leading
Causes of Death by Sex and Race: United States, 1987.” Back to page
10. Criminal Victimization in the United States, 1987, op. cit., p. 1. Back to page
11. David Zeman, Knight-Ridder Newspapers, “Father, Martyr, Fraud?” Detroit
Free Press, May 25, 1990, p. 1-F. Back to page
12. Robert Gramling, Craig Forsyth, and Jeff Fewell, University of Southwestern
Louisiana, “Crime and Economic Activity: A Research Note,” Sociological
Spectrum, vol. 8, no. 2, 1988, pp. 187–95. Back to page
13. [JT: Removed in current edition]
14. Chicago Tribune Annual Index, 1988, pp. 407–8.
15. Paul Feldman, et al., “Faces of Death: 10 Men Slain by Officers in Riots,” Los
Angeles Times, May 24, 1992, front page. Back to page
16. Vivian S. Toy, “Violence by Boys Forces Removal of Women Teachers,”
Detroit News, November 17, 1988. Back to page
17. Florida, Illinois, Maryland, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Texas are just a few of the
twenty-nine states still allowing teachers and administrators to employ corporal
punishment in disciplining students. From a telephone interview February 28,
1991, with Jordan Riak of Parents and Teachers against Violence in Education, a
national organization based in Danville, California. Back to page
18. Kathleen Doheny, “Sexual Abuse: When Men Are the Victim,” Los Angeles
Times, January 10, 1989, part V, p. 1. The ratio of 1 boy to 1.7 girls is also based
on an increasingly broad definition of sexual abuse. For example, a boy who is
touched on the rear is far less likely to mention it to anyone, therefore not
becoming part of the 16 percent of boys and 27 percent of girls said to be
subject to sexual abuse. The definition of sexual abuse has gotten so broad as to
make many teachers fear helping elementary school children on or off with their
clothes, cuddling them, or play-wrestling with them. Back to page
19. Ibid. Back to page
20. Associated Press, “War on Women Must Stop—Bush,” Los Angeles Times, June
27, 1989. Back to page
21. Ibid. Back to page
22. 1991–92 Handbook of the National Federation of State High School
Associations, Kansas City, Missouri. Back to page
23. Editorial: “The Jogger and the Wolfpack,” The New York Times, April 26,
1989. Back to page
24. Ellen Goodman, “Safety for Women? Try Removing Men,” Santa Barbara
News-Press, Tuesday, January 9, 1990. Back to page
25. Gerald Galison, Letter-to-the-Editor, The New York Times, May 7, 1989. Back
to page
26. No Circ Newsletter, vol. 3, no. 1, fall 1988, p. 1. Back to page
27. Edward Wallerstein, Circumcision: An American Health Fallacy (New York:
Springer Publishing Co., 1980). Wallerstein is a New York-based
urologist. Back to page
28. Ibid. Back to page
29. Ibid. Back to page
30. Anesthesia reduced stress by reducing the level of stress hormones. It prevented
infection indirectly by minimizing the suppression of the immune system. It
also made newborns less prone to the acid buildup in muscles. See M. C.
Rogers, M.D., “Do the Right Thing—Pain Relief in Infants and Children,” New
England Journal of Medicine, January 2, 1992, p. 55. Back to page
31. Howard J. Stang, M. R. Gunnar, L. Snellman, L. M. Condon, and R.
Kestenbaum, “Local Anesthesia for Neonatal Circumcision: Effects on Distress
and Cortisol Response,” Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 259,
no. 10, March 1988, pp. 1507–11. Dr. Stang is with the University of
Minnesota. Back to page
32. Edward Wallerstein, op. cit. Back to page
33. Ibid. Back to page
34. A nationwide study of circumcision could be conducted for under $1 million.
The cost of the Persian Gulf War was half a million dollars a minute. See “The
Cost of a Day of War,” Los Angeles Times, February 9, 1991, p. A-5. The
newspaper’s sources were the Congressional Budget Office and Forecast
International, 1990. Back to page
35. E. L. Wynder, et. al., “A Study of Environmental Factors in Carcinoma of the
Cervix,” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 68, no. 4, April
1954, p. 96. Back to page
36. “Circumcision and Cancer,” Time, vol. 63, no. 14, April 5, 1954, p. 96. Back to
page
37. M. Terris, et. al., “Relation of Circumcision to Cancer of the Cervix,” American
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 177, no. 8, December 15, 1973, pp.
1056–62; and A. Lilienfeld and Saxon Graham, “Validity of Determining
Circumcision Status by Questionnaire as Related to Epidemiological Studies of
Cancer of the Cervix,” Journal National Cancer Institute, vol. 21, no. 4, October
1958, pp. 713–20. Back to page
38. Edward Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 72. Back to page
39. The average child watches 3,024 people killed each year. See Tom and Nancy
Biracree, Almanac of the American People (New York: Facts on File, 1988), p.
241. Back to page
40. From my own calculations based on daytime and prime-time TV monitoring
and movie monitoring. Percentages are approximate because in westerns and
war movies, all the people killed were men, but it couldn’t always be
determined how many, and at other times I was just watching the movie
(!). Back to page
41. This is my own approximate calculation based on watching approximately 1,500
to 2,000 movies (just under two movies per week over the last twenty plus
years, the time period during which I have been conscious of these differences
in violence). I usually just enjoy the film and do a mental calculation later, so
this is not a perfect tabulation. Back to page
42. Bret Easton Ellis, American Psycho (New York: Vintage Books, 1991). The
three men murdered are on pages 131, 165, and 217; the murder of the little boy
is on page 298. Credit to Robert Keith Smith for this observation. Back to page
43. For example, two nationwide studies of both sexes that are among the 14 twosex studies are reported in Straus and Gelles, op. cit. Back to page
44. Martin S. Fiebert, Department of Psychology, Cal State, Long Beach,
“References Examining Assaults by Women on their Spouses or Male Partners:
An Annotated Bibliography, 2013.” The bibliography examines 341 scholarly
investigations. The aggregate sample size is 430,850. For an in-depth
understanding of the implications, see Warren Farrell, Women Can’t Hear What
Men Don’t Say, (N.Y.: Berkely Books, 1999). Back to page
45. Robin Simon and Anne Barrett, “Non-Marital Romantic Relationships and
Mental Health in Early Adulthood: Does the Association Differ for Women and
Men?” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, June, 2010. The study is of 1,000
unmarried young adults between 18 and 23. Back to page
46. U.S. Senate, “Women and Violence Hearing before the Commission on the
Judiciary, U.S. Senate,” part I, June 20, 1990, and part II, August 29, 1990, and
December 11, 1990 (Order #J-101–80). Almost all of the fifteen women were
feminist oriented (NOW, etc.). Jon Ryan and other men were refused permission
to testify. Back to page
CHAPTER 10
If We Cared As Much about Saving Males As Saving Whales, Then . . .
1. Television commercials showing during 1991. Back to page
2. The 80 percent figure is the estimate of Ralph DeSantis (717-948-8196), of
Pennsylvania’s General Public Utilities (which runs Three Mile Island). Back
to page
3. Merrill M. Mitler, Mary A. Carskadon, Charles A. Czeisler, William C.
Dement, David F. Dinges, and R. Curtis Graeber, “Catastrophes, Sleep, and
Public Policy: Consensus Report,” Association of Professional Sleep Societies,
Committee on Catastrophes, Sleep, and Public Policy, Sleep, vol. 11, no. 1 (New
York: Raven Press, 1988), pp. 100–109. Back to page
4. Ibid. Back to page
5. Documentation that the crew were exhausted and skipped a day’s rest was
confirmed in an interview on June 29, 1992, by Leon Katcharian, coauthor of
the National Transportation Safety Board’s official report. See Leon Katcharian,
et al., Grounding of the U.S. Tankship Exxon Valdez on Bligh Reef, Prince
Williams Sound, Near Valdez, Alaska, March 2k, 1989 (Washington D.C.:
NTSB/MAR-90/04), pp. 166–67. Back to page
6. Dr. Marvin Legator, genetic toxicologist, University of Texas Health Sciences
Center, Galveston. Cited in Sandra Blakeslee, “Research on Birth Defects Turns
to Flaws in Sperm,” Medical Science section, The New York Times, p. A-l Back
to page
PART III
Government as Substitute Husband:
An Overview
1. Calvin Bradley v. the State, 156, Mississippi, 1824. See R. J. Walker, Reports of
Case Adjudged in the Supreme Court of Mississippi (St. Paul, Minn.: West
Publishing, 1910), p. 73, section 157. Back to page
2. Associated Press, “Wife of Convicted Cop Files Claim against City,” North
County Blade-Citizen (San Diego), October 1, 1992. Back to page
3. Voter Research and Surveys, New York City, provided the information to Rich
Morrin at The Washington Post, whom I interviewed on November 17,
1992. Back to page
4. Terry Pristin, “Feminists Make Their Legal Case,” Los Angeles Times, March
15, 1991, p. A-l. Back to page
5. Ibid. Back to page
CHAPTER 11
How the System Protects Women, Or . . . Two Different Laws We Live In
1. National Judicial Reporting Program data indicate that “an estimated 2 percent
of men convicted of murder or non-negligent manslaughter received a death
sentence compared to one-tenth of 1 percent of women.” Quote from U.S.
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (hereinafter US-BJS), Profile
of Felons convicted in State Courts, January 1990, publication #NCJ-120021 by
Patrick A. Largan, Ph.D., and John M. Dawson (BJS statisticians), p. 9. Back to
page
2. National Archive of Criminal Justice Data
https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/rpxlogin Search on March 1, 2012 of all available
records from 1976 to 2002. Judy Buenoano; Betty Lou Beets; Marilyn Kay
Plantz, and Lynda Lyon Block. Back to page
3. “Execution Update” (NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.),
January 18, 1990. NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, 1275 K Street
NW, Suite 301, Washington, DC 20005. Back to page
4. Matthew Zingraff and Randall Thompson, “Differential Sentencing of Women
and Men in the USA,” International Journal of the Sociology of Law, 1984, no.
12, pp. 401–13. The 12.6-year difference is on p. 408. The journal is published
by Academic Press, a subsidiary of Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich
publishers. Back to page
5. USBJS, Sentencing Outcomes in 28 Felony Courts: 1985, July 1987, publication
#NCJ-105743, table 5.5, “Average Prison Term (in Months) Imposed, by Sex of
Offender and Conviction Offense, 1985.”
6. For the smaller impact of racial differences, see USBJS, Profile of Felons, op.
cit., p. 1, col. 2. For the smaller impact of other differences, see Zingraff and
Thompson, op. cit. Back to page
7. State of Washington, Sentencing Guidelines Commission, Sentencing Practices
Under the Sentencing Reform Act: Fiscal Year 1987 by Dr. David L. Fallen,
research director, p. 72, table 37, “Average Sentence Length by Gender.”
Women’s average sentence length was 3.5 months; men’s was 8.3
months. Back to page
8. From Dr. David L. Fallen, research director, state of Washington, “Sentencing
Practices under the Sentencing Reform Act: Fiscal Year 1991,” in unpublished
written correspondence to author, March 15, 1992. Back to page
9. Washington, Sentencing Practices . . . 1987, op. cit., p. 74, table 39. Nineteen
percent of women versus 14 percent of men were eligible for early
departure. Back to page
10. See Howie Kurtz, “Courts Easier on Women,” The Sunday Record (Bergen
County, N.J.), October 5, 1975. Back to page
11. Ibid. Back to page
12. Attorney David D. Butler, “Males Get Longer Sentences,” Transitions, vol. 10,
no. 1, January/February 1990, front page. Back to page
13. Seth Mydans, “With One Trial Just Ended, McMartin Figures Face 2d,” The
New York Times, March 5, 1990, p. A-ll. Back to page
14. Ann Hagedorn, “Child Molestation Trial Ends in Acquittals,” The Wall Street
Journal, January 19, 1990, p. B-8. Back to page
15. Justin Atholl, The Reluctant Hangman: The Story of James Berry, Executioner,
1884–1892 (New York: J. Long, 1956). This characterization is of James Berry,
executioner in London, England, from 1884 to 1892. Back to page
16. Hugo Adam Bedau and Michael L. Radelet, “Miscarriages of Justice in
Potentially Capital Cases,” Stanford Law Review, vol. 40, no. 1, November
1987, pp. 21–179. This study covered 350 cases from 1900 to 1984 in which
defendants convicted of capital or potentially capital crimes were later found to
be innocent. Twenty-three defendants (all men) executed were later found
innocent and eight (all men) died while serving their sentences. Back to page
17. USBJS, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, 1991, p. 442, table 4.7. Back
to page
18. John T. Kirkpatrick and John A. Humphrey, “Stress in the Lives of Female
Criminal Homicide Offenders in North Carolina,” Human Stress: Current
Selected Research, vol. 3, ed. James H. Humphrey (New York: AMS Press,
1989). Back to page
19. Streib, American Executions, op. cit. See previous citation for detailed
explanation. Back to page
20. Ron Rosenbaum, “Too Young to Die?” The New York Times Magazine, March
12, 1989. Back to page
21. Ibid. Back to page
22. Tom Gorman, “Woman Who Kills Child Remains Free,” Los Angeles Times,
April 26, 1989. Back to page
23. Butler, op. cit. Back to page
24. Figures for 1987 (the latest figures available) show that 96 male inmates
committed suicide and 91 died by execution or at the hands of another—187
total. With 555,371 men in prison, these deaths amount to 33.67 men per
100,000 men in prison. This compares to 1 woman out of 29,064 women in
prison in 1987, or 3.44 per 100,000 women in prison. When the 33.67 is divided
by 3.44 and multiplied by 100 (for the percent), the difference is 978.8 percent.
Suicide, execution, and homicide data for 1987 are from USBJS, Correctional
Populations in the United States, publication #NCJ-118762, December 1989, p.
105, table 5.17, “Deaths among Sentenced Prisoners Under State or Federal
Jurisdiction, by Sex and Cause of Death, 1987.” Prison statistics for 1987 are
from the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical
Abstracts of the United States: 1991, 111th ed., p. 195, table 338, which sources
the annual reports of the USBJS, Prisoners in 1987. Back to page
25. The California State task force mandate to study only female prisoner health
issues was established in 1992 by Assembly Bill 900, sponsored by
Assemblywoman Lucille Roybal-Allard (D), Los Angeles. Back to page
26. The average monthly cost per capita from 1988–89 for male prisoners in
Wisconsin was $1,120; for female prisoners, $2,100. See the Summary of
Distribution Per Capita Costs for the Year Ended June 30,1989: Section E,
published by the Madison, Wisconsin, Department of Health and Social
Services, Division of Corrections, Office of Policy, Planning and Budget.
(Contributed by Jim Novak.) Back to page
27. George J. Church, “The View from behind Bars,” Time, special fall issue 1990,
p. 20. Back to page
28. USBJS, Midyear Prisoners 1991, June 30, 1991, p. 6. The most recent figures
available are: 758,294 men; 46,230 women. Back to page
29. Fred Strasser and Mary C. Hickey, “Running Out of Room for Women in
Prison,” Updates section, Governing, October 1989, p. 70. (Other examples of
special privileges for women are also from above source.) Back to page
30. Ibid. Back to page
31. Allan R. Gold, “Sex Bias Is Found Pervading Courts,” The New York Times, July
2, 1989. Back to page
32. Ibid. Back to page
33. Speech by Norma Juliet Wikler, founding director of the National Judicial
Education Project, on its origination in 1979 and its decision to be sponsored by
the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund and the National Association of
Women Judges. See Wikler, “Water on Stone: A Perspective of the Movement
to Eliminate Gender Bias in the Courts,” keynote address, National Conference
on Gender Bias in the Courts, Williamsburg, Virginia, May 18, 1989. Back to
page
34. Most have a ratio of about three or four women to one man. They usually
include no men’s activists and approximately half women’s activists. See, for
example, Bruce Hight, “Male Group Says Too Many Women on Panel,” Austin
American-Statesman, January 31, 1992. Back to page
35. USBJS, Profile of Felons, op. cit., p. 5, table 3. Back to page
36. Ibid., p. 5. Back to page
37. Howie Kurtz, op. cit. Ms. Barbara Swartz is credited with this term. Back to
page
38. Ibid. The Women’s Prison Project is a New York-based program to teach law to
female inmates. Back to page
39. Ibid. Article quotes Bergen County (N.J.) Assistant Prosecutor Ronald
Schwartz. Back to page
40. Ibid. Back to page
41. Ibid. Back to page
42. Interview with Alex Landon, San Diego, July 16, 1991. Back to page
43. Attorney David D. Butler, op. cit. Back to page
CHAPTER 12
Women Who Kill Too Much and the Courts That Free Them: The Twelve
“Female-Only” Defenses
1. Associated Press, “After 21 Years, Man Is Freed in Poison Case,” The New York
Times, April 27, 1989. See also Mark Lane, Arcadia (New York: Holt, Rinehart,
Winston, 1970). Back to page
2. Ibid, (both) Back to page
3. Interview on May 15, 1990, with Don Horn, the prosecutor who handled the
Richardson appeal. Back to page
4. Ibid. The sheriff’s name is Klein; the nurse to whom Bessie Reese confessed is
Belinda Frazier. Back to page
5. Times Wire Services, “Father in Prison for Poisonings Is Freed,” Los Angeles
Times, April 26, 1989. While Bessie Reese’s confession is inadmissible due to
“mental incompetence,” the state could still bring charges against her on
independent evidence collected and most likely used to release Richardson. This
the state has not done, leading one to wonder whether categorizing her as
“mentally incompetent” was a method the state used to avoid the expense and
complications of trying her. Back to page
6. See Robert D. McFadden, Ralph Blumenthal, M. A. Farber, E. R. Shipp, Charles
Strum, and Craig Wolff, Outrage: The Story behind the Tawana Brawley Hoax
(New York: Bantam Books, 1990). Back to page
7. Eloise Salholz with Andrew Murr, “Arsenic and Old Lace,” Newsweek, August
14, 1989. Back to page
8. Joyce Wadler, “Killing Her Husband Wasn’t Enough for Stella Nickell; To
Make Her Point, She Poisoned a Stranger,” People, vol. 30, no. 1, July 4, 1988,
pp. 87–92. Back to page
9. Donald Dale Jackson, “Who Killed Sue Snow?” Reader’s Digest, vol. 138, no.
826, February 1991, pp. 149–54. Back to page
10. Associated Press, “Wife Admits 1981 Slaying; Husband Freed,” Daily Camera
(Boulder, Colo.), January 1984; and Edward Frost, “Ex-Wife’s Confession Frees
Convicted Killer,” Reporter Dispatch (N.Y.), January 18, 1984, p. A-l. Back to
page
11. First, Nathaniel’s attorneys pursued the case on their own even after Nathaniel’s
conviction. Second, they turned up enough new evidence to get a new trial.
Third, when detectives located Delissa to tell her of the new hearing, she
thought they were there to arrest her and she spontaneously decided to
confess. Back to page
12. Mary Brown Parlee, “New Findings: Menstrual Cycles and Behavior,” Ms.,
September 1982, p. 126. Back to page
13. Ibid. Back to page
14. Andrea Ford, “Woman Who Killed Infant Son Allowed to Get Mental Help on
Outpatient Basis,” Los Angeles Times, March 11, 1989. Back to page
15. Parlee, op. cit. Back to page
16. Marv Balousek, “Woman Who Shot Mate 5 Times Gets Probation,” Wisconsin
State Journal, August 19, 1988, p. 1-B. Back to page
17. Ibid. Back to page
18. Interview April 19, 1990, with Assistant District Attorney Judy Schwaemle of
Dane County, Wisconsin, who handled the case. Back to page
19. Ibid. Back to page
20. Isabel Wilkerson, “Clemency Granted to 25 Women Convicted for Assault or
Murder,” The New York Times, December 22, 1990, p. A-l. Back to page
21. For example, Governor Schaeffer of Maryland and Governor Gardner of
Washington. Back to page
22. Nancy Ray, “Judge Allows ‘Battered Woman’ Defense,” Los Angeles Times,
September 21, 1982. Back to page
23. Wilkerson, op. cit. Back to page
24. See, e.g., California Assembly Bill 785 by Assemblyman Gerald R. Eaves, DRialto, which took effect on January 1, 1992. Back to page
25. Tom Gorman, “Court Told How Son Was Driven to Kill Spiteful Mother,” Los
Angeles Times, December 19, 1989, p. B-l. Back to page
26. Ibid. Back to page
27. The story was based on Francine Hughes. See Susan Paterno, “A Legacy of
Violence,” Los Angeles Times, April 14, 1991, pp. E-l and E-14. Back to page
28. Leonard Maltin, TV Movies and Video Guide: 1991 Edition (New York:
Signet/Penguin, 1990). Back to page
29. The sentence was commuted by Governor James G. Martin of North Carolina.
Jane Ruffin, “Battered Wife Released from Prison,” The News and Observer
(Raleigh, N.C.), July 8, 1989, front page. Back to page
30. Howard Schneider, “Meeting Battered Women Face to Face,” The Washington
Post, January 15, 1991, p. B-7. Back to page
31. Wilkerson, op. cit. Back to page
32. For example, two nationwide studies of both sexes that are among the 14 twosex studies are reported in Murray A. Straus and Richard J. Gelles, “Societal
Change and Change in Family Violence from 1975 to 1985 as Revealed by Two
National Surveys,” Journal of Marriage and the Family, vol. 48, August 1986,
pp. 465–79. Back to page
33. Coramae Richey Mann, “Getting Even? Women Who Kill in Domestic
Encounters,” Justice Quarterly (Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences: 1988),
vol. 5, no. 1, March 1988, p. 49. Back to page
34. Ibid. Back to page
35. Ibid. Back to page
36. Ibid., pp. 33–51.I couldn’t quite believe this, so I telephoned Coramae Richey
Mann at the Department of Criminal Justice at Indiana University on April 23,
1990. She verified the findings. I asked how she obtained the information. She
explained that no woman’s files included a single indication of the woman
having been abused by the husband or lover she killed. It was obvious to her that
many women are battered, and some who are battered kill their batterers, but
apparently either their prison terms are short enough that at the point in time
she did her study none of the battered women were in prison or, on the other
hand, some never went to prison to begin with. This study was done years after
1982 (when the battered woman syndrome was first used as a legal defense).
The value of her findings is that, contrary to Rationale #3, some women do kill
without first being abused. Additionally, 41 percent of the women did not even
claim self-defense as a motive, and of the 59 percent who did, Dr. Mann could
not find any whose definition of self-defense matched the legal definition of
“imminent physical threat to one’s life with no means of escape.” Back to page
37. Ibid., p. 49, footnote 10—interview of Lieutenant Harvey Wyche of the New
York City Police Department. See also Mike Clary, “Fast-Lane Saga Over:
Widow Guilty in Murder of Husband,” Los Angeles Times, November 17,
1989. Back to page
38. Straus and Gelles, op. cit. Back to page
39. Fred Hayward, Westworld, September 5, 1989, concerning restraining
orders. Back to page
40. Kevin Svoboda lives about forty miles from the Lancaster County jail where his
wife was imprisoned. See Wire Dispatches and Staff Reports, “Jailed Wife Plots
to Kill Husband,” Washington Times, January 23, 1992, and Chicago Tribune
Wires, “Wife Sentenced in Plot to Kill Spouse,” Chicago Tribune, February 12,
1992. Back to page
41. The states are: Delaware, Maine, Minnesota, Nevada, Oregon, Utah,
Connecticut, Virginia, Washington, New Jersey, Wisconsin, Rhode Island.
Among the cities are: Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles. From Karyl Spriggs
at the National Coalition against Domestic Violence (NCADV), 1991. Back to
page
42. Craig Anderson, a gay counselor at Family and Children Services in
Minneapolis, quoted in Julio Ojeda-Zapata, St. Paul Pioneer Press, October 21,
1990, p. 1-B. Back to page
43. Steve Metzger, “The Shooting of Josh Wagshall,” Transitions, vol. 8, no. 2,
March/April 1988, p. 2. Back to page
44. Verified in telephone interview with Nancy Young of Elizabeth Holtzman’s
press office, February 7, 1991. Back to page
45. “Battered Woman Is Freed in Slaying of Husband,” The New York Times,
October 29, 1989. Back to page
46. The 60 Minutes story aired in October 1989. Back to page
47. The governor was Booth Gardner. Back to page
48. “Battered Woman is Freed,” The New York Times, op. cit. Back to page
49. Ibid. Back to page
50. Paul Dean, “Husbands Too Ashamed to Admit Abuse by Wives,” New York
Newsday, January 20, 1981. Back to page
51. John T. Kirkpatrick and John A. Humphrey studied seventy-six female
murderers at the North Carolina Correctional Center in Raleigh. See John T.
Kirkpatrick and John A. Humphrey, “Stress in the Lives of Female Criminal
Homicide Offenders in North Carolina,” Human Stress: Current Selected
Research, vol. 3, ed. James H. Humphrey (New York: AMS Press, 1989), pp.
109–20. Back to page
52. John T. Kirkpatrick as cited by Glen Collins, The New York Times News
Service, July 18, 1986. Back to page
53. Nancy Gibbs and Jeanne McDowell, “How to Revive a Revolution,” Time,
March 4, 1992, p. 57. Back to page
54. Kirkpatrick and Humphrey, op. cit. Back to page
55. Ford, op. cit. Back to page
56. Tom Gorman, “Woman Who Killed Child Remains Free,” Los Angeles Times,
April 26, 1989. Back to page
57. While free on probation, Mesa hid another pregnancy from her probation officer
and repeatedly missed appointments. Even her own probation officer
recommended a thirty-day sentence. Once again, she was let go. Was it because
she needed to take care of the new baby? No. The new baby was put in the
custody of the father. Back to page
58. “Illinois—Two Times, Too Much,” American Notes section, Time, July 24,
1989, p. 25; and Associated Press, “Mother Found Guilty in Death of ‘Stolen’
Baby,” Los Angeles Times, January 31, 1990. Back to page
59. Bruce Langer, “Ward Woman Gets Probation for Killing Abusive Husband,”
Daily Camera (Boulder, Colo.), December 15, 1989. Back to page
60. As taken from U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Report to the Nation on Crime and Justice, publication #NCJ-105506,2d ed.,
March 1988, p. 31:
In all States, citizens may use deadly force if they reasonably believe their life
is in danger. However, the danger must be imminent and immediate. For
example, if an intruder in a dwelling pulls a gun, a confronted person has reason
to assume he or she is in imminent and immediate danger of losing his or her
life. If the same person encounters the intruder peacefully, several hours after
leaving home, no imminent and immediate danger would exist, so deadly force
at that time would not be justified. In most States, if the assailant is provoked,
the use of deadly force is not justified.
Back to page
61. David Margolick, “A Father Is Charged in Crash after Unbelted Daughter Dies,”
The New York Times, December 29, 1990, front page. Back to page
62. Ibid. Back to page
63. Isabel Wilkerson, “Court Backs Woman in Pregnancy Drug Case,” The New
York Times, April 3, 1991, p. A-13. Back to page
64. Ibid. Back to page
65. Dianne Klein, “A Coroner’s-Eye View of Drug Babies,” Los Angeles Times,
March 3, 1991. The 11 percent figure was confirmed in an interview on April
30, 1992, with Mona Brown of the National Institute for Drug Abuse at the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Back to page
66. Judith A. Stein, et al, “An 8-Year Study of Multiple Influences on Drug Use and
Drug Use Consequences,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol.
53, no. 6, December 1987, pp. 1094–1105. Back to page
67. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the
United States, 1990, p. 53, table 69, “Children Under 18 Years Old by Presence
of Parents 1970–1988.” Back to page
68. Newsweek, September 18, 1989, “Overheard” section, which highlighted the
quote from The New York Times. Back to page
69. Suzanne Daley, “Born on Crack, and Coping with Kindergarten,” The New York
Times, February 7, 1991, pp. A-l and A-16. Back to page
70. The New York Times, May 25, 1990. Based on costs incurred in the Los Angeles
school system. Back to page
71. The federal judge was U.S. District Judge A. Andrew Hauk, one of the federal
bench’s most senior members. See Gale Holland, San Diego Union, May 10,
1989. Back to page
72. Interview of Lieutenant Harvey Wyche of the New York City Police
Department, in Coramae Richey Mann, op. cit. See also Mike Clary, op.
cit. Back to page
73. See Jerry Hicks, “Jury Will Decide If Suspect Was Killer for Hire,” Los Angeles
Times, October 11, 1989. Details confirmed in an interview on May 15, 1990,
with Sergeant Peterson, Huntington Beach (Calif.) Police Department. Back to
page
74. Greg Zoroya, “Murder-Conspiracy Convict Gets Maximum Term Despite Jury
Pleas,” Orange County Register, June 6, 1990. Back to page
75. Steve Emmons, “Daughter, 3 Others Held in Killing of Man,” Los Angeles
Times, April 23, 1989, p. 18. Back to page
76. Miles Corwin, “Murder of Beach-Goer Shocks Santa Barbara,” Los Angeles
Times, September 23, 1989, p. 1-25. Back to page
77. “Woman Is Charged in Death of Husband on Nudist Beach,” The New York
Times, October 11, 1989, p. A-27 (no author cited). Back to page
78. I. P. Weston, “Money, Revenge Motives Claimed in Beach Slaying,” Santa
Barbara News Press, January 3, 1990. Back to page
79. Eric Bailey, “Teen Sentenced for Helping Kill Wayne Pearce,” Los Angeles
Times, May 25, 1989; and Rocky Rushing, “Pearce Admits Having Sex with
High Schooler,” North County Blade-Citizen (Oceanside/San Diego, Calif.),
March 2, 1990, p. A-l. Back to page
80. CBS, “Hard Copy,” March 1991; Associated Press, “Dead Spouse’s Recording
Trips Up Wife, Teen Lover,” Chicago Tribune, March 26, 1991. Back to page
81. Bob Hohler, “Further Smart Charges Dropped,” The Boston Globe, April 2,
1991. Back to page
82. Ibid. Back to page
83. Newsweek, vol. 117, no. 13, April 1, 1991, p. 26. Back to page
84. Barbara Carton, “Pamela Smart’s Booster Club,” The Boston Globe, June 29,
1992. Back to page
85. Branco took $1,000 out of the bank account of her millionaire husband, George
Archer Mueller, to give to Ronald Tellez to kill George. See Matt O’Connor,
“Ex-Blue Island Cop Convicted in Murder of Indian Bar Owner,” Chicago
Tribune, April 29, 1992. Back to page
86. Interview of Lieutenant Harvey Wyche of the New York Police Department, in
Coramae Richey Mann, op. cit. See also Mike Clary, op. cit. Back to page
87. David Brown hired a hit man to kill his wife, in part to gain $835,000 from her
insurance policies, including several that he took out on her life just before her
murder. The hit man turned Brown in. He cooperated with police to obtain a
tape-recorded conversation in which Brown stated he would pay $21,700 to have
his wife killed. The hit man also testified against Brown in court. Unlike Pamela
Smart, Brown has no fan club. He is more often described as despicable. See
Eric Lightblau, “Prosecutor Portrays the Husband of a Slain Woman as a
Despicable Manipulator who Designed His Wife’s Death,” Los Angeles Times,
June 13, 1990. Back to page
88. Eric Malnic and Scott Harris, “Marlon Brando’s Son Held in Fatal Shooting,”
Los Angeles Times, May 18, 1990, p. A-l. Back to page
89. From 1985 through 1988, 4,986 men were killed by women; 10,190 women
were killed by men. This is from the U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Crime in the United States for the years 1985, 1986, 1987, and
1988 (four different editions), table titled “Victim Offender Relationship by
Race and Sex.” Back to page
90. U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigations, Crime in the
United States (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1990), p. 11, table titled “Victim
Offender Relationship by Race and Sex.” The notes adjoining the tables state
that “Multiple Offender” killings are not broken down into gender categories.
Only “Single Victim & Single Offender” crimes are broken down into gender
categories. Back to page
91. Wendy Cole, People section, Time, May 20, 1991. Back to page
92. Lucy Howard and Gregory Cerio with bureau reports, “Reversal of Fortune?”
Justice section, Newsweek, June 10, 1991. Back to page
93. April 11, 1990, interview with Frank Brennan, Australian psychologist, author,
and university professor. Brennan can be reached for comment at 95 Clydesdale
Street, Como, Perth, Western Australia 6152. Back to page
94. Based on a three-year observation (1989–92) of high school students by
Elizabeth Brookins, chair of the Department of Mathematics, El Camino High
School, Oceanside, California. Back to page
CHAPTER 13
The Politics of Sex
1. John Leo, “A Milestone in Sexual Harassment,” US News & World Report,
January 27,1992. The chemical engineering professor’s name is Richard
Hummel; the student is Beverly Torfason. Back to page
2. Jane Gross, “Schools Are Newest Arenas for Sex-Harassment Issues,” The New
York Times, Education section, March 11, 1992, p. B-8. The high school was
Duluth Central High School in Minnesota. Back to page
3. Scripps-Howard News Service, “Second-Grader Files Sex Harass Lawsuit,”
North County Blade-Citizen (San Diego), September 30, 1992. Back to page
4. Gretchen Morgenson, “Watch That Leer, Stifle That Joke,” Forbes, May 15,
1989, pp. 69–72. Back to page
5. U.S. Department of Labor, “A Working Woman’s Guide to Her Job Rights,”
leaflet no. 55, June 1988. Back to page
6. Ibid. Back to page
7. Ibid. Back to page
8. Clarence Thomas gave his signed approval to these modifications on October
25, 1988. The modifications are explained in a footnote on page 12 of the sexual
harassment guidelines of 1988. Cited in Richard Pollak, “Presumed Innocent?”
The Nation, vol. 253, no. 16, November 11, 1991, pp. 573 and 593. In an
interview on April 6, 1992, the EEOC verified that what I said in the text is still
accurate under the guidelines as revised in 1990. Back to page
9. Pollak, ibid., p. 593. Back to page
10. Morgenson, op. cit. Back to page
11. “How to Make an Impact on a Man,” featured in special section “How to Attract
Men Like Crazy,” Cosmopolitan, February 1989, p. 177. See discussion of
women’s magazines in Why Men Are the Way They Are (New York: Berkley,
1988), pp. 18–23. Back to page
12. Ronnie Snadroff, “Sexual Harassment in the Fortune 500,” Working Woman,
December 1988. Back to page
13. Cosmopolitan, op. cit. Back to page
14. Ibid. Back to page
15. Ibid. Back to page
16. Forbes reports that the romance novel buyer spent an average of $1,200 in 1991.
Since the price of the average romance novel was about $5 in 1991, an average
of approximately 240 books a year, or 20 books per month, were purchased. For
women who also read their friends’ books, the number of books they read is
more than 20 per month; for women who do not do this but buy some
hardcovers, the figure is less than 20 per month. See Dana Wechsler Linden and
Matt Rees, “I’m hungry. But not for food,” Forbes, July 6, 1992, pp. 70–75. The
1983 figure comes from an interview on February 18, 1985, with John Markert,
independent researcher and author of “Romancing the Reader: A Demographic
Profile,” Romantic Times, no. 18, September 1984 (based on his doctoral
dissertation). Back to page
17. Ibid. Back to page
18. Ibid. Back to page
19. There are chapters called “Using Your Job to Meet Men,” but no chapters called
“Using Your Job to Meet Women.” See Margaret Kent and Robert
Feinschreiber, Love at Work: Using Your Job to Find a Mate (New York:
Warner Books, 1988). Back to page
20. Ibid., p. 54. Back to page
21. I asked this of about 2,000 U.S. and Canadian women between the ages of 25
and 80, from all walks of life, from 1989 to 1992. Back to page
22. See James Martin and Sheila Murphy. “The Romantically Charged ‘80s Office,”
Los Angeles Times, September 11, 1988. Back to page
23. Barbara A. Gutek, Sex and the Workplace (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985), p.
ix. Back to page
24. “Just Desserts,” Periscope section, Newsweek, August 10, 1992, p. 4. Back to
page
25. Sexual harassment legislation does much more than censor a form of humor, but
it is also doing that. Back to page
26. Virginia Adams, “Psychic Combat at Annapolis,” Psychology Today, October
1980, pp. 56–57. Back to page
27. Ibid. Back to page
28. From Richard Halloran, “Military Academies Are Becoming Even Tougher on
Body and Mind,” The New York Times, May 22,1988. “In the eight classes with
women who have graduated from the Naval Academy, for instance, 35 percent
of the women left before graduation, compared with 23 percent of the
men.” Back to page
29. Adams, op. cit. Back to page
30. Ibid. Back to page
31. The study, directed by Professor Richard J. Light of the Graduate School of
Education and the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, is
“The Harvard Assessment Seminars: Explorations with Students and Faculty
about Teaching, Learning, and Student Life.” The first summary was made
public on March 4, 1990. As reported in Edward B. Fiske, “Of Learning and
College: How Small Groups Thrive,” The New York Times, March 5,
1990. Back to page
32. See Jack Anderson and Dale Van Atta, “White House Board under Scrutiny,”
The Washington Post, March 18, 1991, p. B-8; and Bill McAllister,
“Presidential Commission on Carpet,” The Washington Post, December 11,
1990, p. A-21. Also see “Hard Copy,” January 23, 1991. Back to page
33. Martha Sherrill, “The Brain Surgeon Who Hit a Nerve: Insensitivity Cuts Both
Ways in Stanford’s Operating Room,” The Washington Post, November 6, 1991,
p. B-l. Back to page
34. Ibid. Back to page
35. Ibid. Back to page
36. Ibid. Back to page
37. Ibid. Back to page
38. David Brock, “The Real Anita Hill,” The American Spectator, March 1992, p.
26. Back to page
39. Ibid. Back to page
40. Ibid. Back to page
41. Ibid., p. 27. Back to page
42. Ibid., p. 26. Back to page
43. Ibid. Back to page
44. Ibid., pp. 21–22. “One Wald attorney . . . says that Hill was caught falsifying
time sheets used to bill clients, because she couldn’t meet the demands placed
on young associates at the firm.” Back to page
45. Ibid., p. 21. In an affidavit by John Burke, Jr., “ . . . her work was not at the level
we would expect. . . . I suggested to Anita Hill that it would be in her interest to
consider seeking employment elsewhere . . . her prospects at the firm were
limited.” Back to page
46. Ibid. Back to page
47. Ibid., p. 25. “Then-Education Secretary Terrel Bell received several allegations
of sexual harassment from Anita Hill during the time she worked at the
department. . . . The charges were directed at Education officials other than
Clarence Thomas. . . . Bell had the charges checked out, but nothing came of
them.” Back to page
48. Amber Coverdale Sumrall and Dena Taylor, Sexual Harassment: Women Speak
Out (Freedom, Calif.: The Crossing Press, 1992). Back to page
CHAPTER 14
The Politics of Rape
1. Gail Jennes, “Out of the Pages,” People, February 20, 1983. Back to page
2. Attributed to Vassar College Assistant Dean of Student Life Catherine Comins,
in Nancy Gibbs, “When Is It Rape?” Time, June 3, 1991, p. 52. I called
Catherine Comins and then faxed a letter to her at Vassar to be certain she was
not misquoted. She did not respond. Back to page
3. Written correspondence to me from Charles P. McDowell, Ph.D., M.P.A.,
M.L.S., supervisory special agent of the U.S. Air Force Office of Special
Investigations, March 20,1992. This is based on an air force study of 556 rape
allegations, the methodology and details of which are explained just below in
this chapter.
4. Thirty-two percent of the alleged rapists were perceived by the victim as being
black males; approximately 10 percent of the male population is black. See U.S.
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (hereinafter USBJS),
Criminal Victimization in the United States: 1987, publication #NCJ115524,
June 1989, p. 47, table 41, “Percent Distribution of Single Offender
Victimizations by Type of Crime and Perceived Race of Offender.” Back to
page
5. This myth was popularized by Susan Brownmiller in Against Our Will: Men,
Women, and Rape (New York: Bantam, 1976). Back to page
6. USBJS, Criminal Victimization in the United States: 1987, op. cit., pp. 18–19,
table 5. Back to page
7. Ibid. Back to page
8. For a more detailed explanation of how the male socialization process leads
predictably to rape, see Warren Farrell, Why Men Are the Way They Are (New
York: Berkley, 1986), pp. 242–52; pp. 110–38, and pp. 57–66 (in that
order). Back to page
9. Charlene L. Muehlenhard and Lisa C. Hollabaugh, “Do Women Sometimes Say
No When They Mean Yes? The Prevalence and Correlates of Women’s Token
Resistance to Sex,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1988, vol. 54,
no. 5, p. 874.
10. Rosemary Rogers, Sweet Savage Love (New York: Avon Books, 1974).
11. Catharine MacKinnon, Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989), p. 176. Back to page
12. See Neil Gilbert, “The Phantom Epidemic of Sexual Assault,” The Public
Interest, no. 103, spring 1991, p. 61. In her own words, MacKinnon puts it this
way: “Under conditions of male dominance . . . if sex is something men
normally do to women, the issue is less whether there was force than whether
consent is a meaningful concept.” See ibid., pp. 177–78. MacKinnon also credits
Carol Pateman with this idea. Pateman says: “Consent as ideology cannot be
distinguished from habitual acquiescence, assent, silent dissent, submission, or
even enforced submission. Unless refusal or consent or withdrawal of consent
are real possibilities, we can no longer speak of ‘consent’ in any genuine sense.”
See Carol Pateman, “Women and Consent,” Political Theory, vol. 8, May 1980,
pp. 149–68. Back to page
13. MacKinnon’s exact words are, “Women, as a survival strategy, must ignore or
devalue or mute desires, particularly lack of them, to convey the impression that
the man will get what he wants regardless of what they want. In this context, to
measure the genuineness of consent from the individual assailant’s point of
view is to adopt as law the point of view which creates the problem.” See
MacKinnon, op. cit., p. 181. Back to page
14. The study is by Mary Koss, Christine A. Gidycz, and Nadine Wisniewski, “The
Scope of Rape: Incidence and Prevalence of Sexual Aggression and
Victimization in a National Sample of Higher Education Students,” Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, vol. 55, no. 2, 1987, pp. 162–70. Among its
publicity outlets were The New York Times, April 21, 1987, and Peter Jennings’s
ABC special “Rape Forum,” following the documentary “Men, Sex, and Rape,”
May 5, 1992.
15. Koss et al, ibid., p. 167.
16. Ibid., p. 167, table 3.
17. See Robin Warshaw, / Never Called It Rape: The Ms. Report on Recognizing,
Fighting, and Surviving Date and Acquaintance Rape (New York: Harper &
Row, 1988), p. 63. This book is based on Mary Koss’s survey.
18. Charlene L. Muehlenhard and Stephen W. Cook, “Men’s Self Reports of
Unwanted Sexual Activity,” Journal of Sex Research, 1988, vol. 24, pp. 58–
72. Back to page
19. Ibid. Back to page
20. Of the 62,830 women who were victims of completed rapes, 37 percent said
they had not reported it to the police; of the 67,430 women who were victims of
attempted rape, 54 percent had not reported it to the police. See USBJS,
Criminal Victimization in the United States (Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1991),
p. 102, table 101, “Percent Distribution of Victimizations by Type of Crime and
Whether or Not Reported to Police.”
21. The rape rate is 1.2 per 1,000 per year based on the most recent year of the
National Crime Survey Report. See USBJS, National Crime Survey Report,
Criminal Victimization in the United States, Annual (1973–1988), p. 15. This
means women have more than 80 chances in 1,000 of being raped in a lifetime
—or about 1 in 12. Since 62,830 women per year are victims of completed rapes
versus 67,430 per year who are victims of attempted rapes, about 1 in 25 are
victims of completed rapes in a lifetime, about 1 in 23 are victims of attempted
rapes in a lifetime. For the breakdown between completed and attempted rapes,
see Criminal Victimization . . . : 1990, ibid.
22. The rape rate decreased from 1.8 per 1,000 in 1973 to 1.2 per 1,000 in 1988.
USBJS, Criminal Victimization . . . (1973–1988), ibid. This figure comes from a
national sampling of households. It is considered a more reliable comparison of
rates than reports of rapes to the police, since reports of rape to the police have
increased as public awareness of rape has increased in the last decade. But even
here there has been a 9 percent increase in rapes reported to the police between
1981 and 1990 versus a 36 percent increase in those violent crimes of which
men are the primary victims that were reported to the police between 1981 and
1990. For the 9 percent increase, see U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau
of Investigations, Uniform Crime Reports, Crime in the United States
(Washington, D.C.: USGPO, 1991), pp. 15 and 51.
23. USBJS, Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin, “Crime Victimization, 1991,”
forthcoming, spring 1993. This survey was taken during and after the Mike
Tyson and William Kennedy Smith rape trials. Although it is based on such a
small sample of women who were victims of rape or attempted rape and
therefore within the sample’s margin of error, it is nevertheless statistically
significant and represents a 59 percent increase in rapes and attempted rapes
among women, as well as an increase in the rate among both sexes combined
(from 0.6 per 1,000 in 1990 to a 1991 rate of 1.0 per 1,000).
24. Associated Press, “Man Guilty in Sex Assault on Woman with 46 Identities,”
Los Angeles Times, November 9, 1990, p. A-20. Back to page
25. For example, see Ira Michael Heyman, Office of the Chancellor, University of
California at Berkeley, “Acquaintance Rape,” January 20, 1987. He explains it
is campus policy that “rape occurs when . . . the victim is prevented from
resisting by the use of alcohol or drugs.” In an interview on May 18, 1992,
Jessica White at Berkeley’s Rape Prevention Education Program directly
verified that her program interprets date rape as defined in the text. Concerning
Swarthmore, see John Wiener, “Rape by Innuendo at Swarth-more, Date Rape,”
The Nation, vol. 254, no. 2, January 20, 1992, p. 54. Concerning Harvard, the
Washington Post reported that Harvard’s date rape task force recommended that
the university policy define rape to include a woman who was impaired by
“intake of alcohol or drugs.” See Cathy Young, “What Rape Is and Isn’t,” The
Washington Post (national weekly ed.), June 29-July 5, 1992, p. 25. Back to
page
26. National Clearinghouse on Marital and Date Rape is in Berkeley,
California. Back to page
27. If we pass laws allowing women who are drinking to injure men, then we have
to make women as guilty for having sex when drinking as we make drivers
guilty for driving when drinking. Back to page
28. Charles Salter, Jr., “A Lasting Shadow,” The News & Observer (Raleigh, N.C.),
February 17, 1992, p. 1-C. Back to page
29. Ibid. Back to page
30. Ibid., p. 2-C. Back to page
31. Interview on May 13, 1992, with psychologist Michael Teague, North Carolina
State Department of Crime Control and Public Safety. Back to page
32. Salter, op. cit., p. 1-C. The University of New Mexico hospital did eventually
reinstate his job offer. Back to page
33. Written correspondence to me from Charles P. McDowell, Ph.D., M.P.A.,
M.L.S., supervisory special agent of the U.S. Air Force Office of Special
Investigations, March 20, 1992. Back to page
34. Charles P. McDowell, Ph.D., M.P.A., M.L.S., “False Allegations,”Forensic
Science Digest, vol. 11, no. 4, December 1985, p. 64. The Digest is a publication
of the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Washington, D.C.
35. Cathleen Crowell Webb and Marie Chapian, Forgive Me (Old Tappan, N.J.:
Fleming H. Revell Co., 1985), appendix B.
36. Stephen Buckley, “Unfounded Rape Reports Baffle Investigators,” The
Washington Post, June 27, 1992, pp. B-l and B-7. Back to page
37. Ibid. Back to page
38. The 9 percent are part of the 47 percent (as described in the text), but as is
pointed out, they are not necessarily false allegations—they are merely
“unfounded.” This “unfounded” category probably has the highest percentage of
false accusations, but as far as the FBI knows, the percentage of false
accusations overall could be anywhere from zero to 100 percent. The
“unfounded” category consists of 8.6 percent or 8,818 out of 102,655 reported
or alleged offenses. This is from U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of
Investigations, Uniform Crime Reports Section, Crime in the United States
(Washington, DC: USGPO, 1990), p. 16. Confirmed in telephone interview on
April 29 and May 11,1992, with Harper Wilson, chief of Uniform Crime
Reporting, FBI. Back to page
39. Ibid. Back to page
40. This 53 percent is categorized as “cleared by arrest or exceptional means.” The
alleged rapist was arrested, but the FBI has no information as to whether he was
found guilty or innocent. Ibid (both sources). Back to page
41. Associated Press, “San Diego Police: Woman Lied About Nordstrom Rape,”
Blade-Citizen, January 16, 1993, p. A-10. Back to page
42. Buckley, op. cit. Back to page
43. Ibid. Back to page
44. Charles P. McDowell, Ph.D., M.P.A., M.L.S., “The False Rape Allegation in the
Military Community,” unpublished paper, Washington, D.C.: US Air Force
Office of Special Investigations, March 1983. A total of seventy-five women
who acknowledged they had made false accusations also volunteered their
motivations. Back to page
45. McDowell, “False Allegations,” op. cit., pp. 68–71. Back to page
46. McDowell, “The False Rape Allegation in the Military Community,” op.
cit. Back to page
47. From Kermit Cain’s written correspondence to me, September 1991, and
interviews with Kermit in June and July 1991, and June 1992. Back to page
48. For example, see Heyman, “Acquaintance Rape,” op. cit.; Wiener, “ . . .
Swarthmore . . . ,” op. cit.; and Young, op. cit. Back to page
49. “Beauty Pageant Official Drops Tyson Lawsuit,” Newswire section, Los Angeles
Times, December 2, 1991. Back to page
50. Kenneth B. Noble, “Key Abortion Plaintiff Now Denies She Was Raped,” The
New York Times, September 9, 1987, p. A-23. Back to page
51. Associated Press, “Girl Admits Rape Lie; Man Free After 513 Days,” Dayton
Daily News, January 18, 1990, p. 2-A. Back to page
52. McDowell, “The False Rape Allegation in the Military Community,” op.
cit. Back to page
53. In-person interview with John Hoover on July 17, 1992. Back to page
54. Webb and Chapian, op. cit. Back to page
55. Associated Press, “Ruling Favors Victim’s Word in Rape Cases,” San Diego
Union-Tribune, May 8, 1992. Back to page
56. See Michigan v. Lucas, 111 S. Ct. 1743, May 1991. The Supreme Court ruled
that a woman might be shielded from having her sexual past used against her—
the “rape shield” law. Back to page
57. Ibid. The Supreme Court ruled that an accused rapist cannot present evidence of
the “victim” having a previous sexual relationship even with him unless he
notifies the court ahead of time. Back to page
58. Associated Press, “Pedophile Fined, Given Probation,” Blade-Citizen (San
Diego), March 3, 1992. The woman, Pam Mouer, was forty-five. Note that
although she committed statutory rape, she is not called a rapist—only a
pedophile. Note that the headline says “Pedophile Fined, Given Probation,” not
“Woman Rapes Boy.” The headline ignores the fact that a woman committed a
sexual crime. Back to page
59. Muehlenhard and Cook, op. cit. Back to page
60. USBJS, Criminal Victimization . . . (1973–1988), op. cit. Back to page
61. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstracts of
the United States: 1991, 111th ed., p. 83, table 120, “Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome Deaths.”
Men 69,929 (90.4%)
Women 7,421 (9.6%)
Back to page
62. Deryck Calderwood, Ph.D., “The Male Rape Victim,” Medical Aspects of
Human Sexuality, May 1987, pp. 53–55. Back to page
63. Ibid. Back to page
64. This issue has received little coverage in the mainstream press, with the
exception of “Overflowing Problems in U.S. Prisons,” Christian Science
Monitor, August 21, 1990, p. 20, which stated that “more men are raped in
America’s prisons than women anywhere in the country.” This type of statement
is a guesstimate and projection. See Wayne S. Wooden and Jay Parker, Men
behind Bars (New York: Plenum Press, 1982). The penal institution studied was
located in California, with a prison population of more than 2,500 men. Eighty
percent of the population was heterosexual, 10 percent bisexual, and 10 percent
homosexual. Fourteen percent of the prison population had been pressured to
have sex against their will—they had either been raped or sexually assaulted.
Since every prison has its anomalies, no reliable projection can be made until a
sampling of prisons nationwide—especially including maximum security
institutions (which this was not)—is made. Back to page
65. The figure of one million or more males being raped or sexually assaulted in
jails and prisons comes from the fact that 8,643,525 males pass through a
combination of state and federal prisons and local jails each year (see
Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, 1990, table 6.33 for 1987–88 data on
jails; the same Sourcebook, table 6.63 for 1985 data on state prisons; and the
same Sourcebook, tables 6.89 and 6.90 for the numbers in federal prisons
[calculated from figures for 1988 and 1990]). Fourteen percent saying they had
been raped or sexually assaulted at any given moment in time leads to a total of
1,210,094. However, dozens of factors make this figure little more than
guesswork. Back to page
66. The 120,000 figure (119,780) is higher than the reported number because it
includes the 55 percent of rapes that the Justice Department found were not
reported when it asked women nationwide who had been raped whether or not
they had originally reported it. See USBJS, Office of Justice Programs, National
Crime Survey Report, Criminal Victimization in the United States: 1973–88
Trends, July 1991, publication #NCJ 129392, p. 15, table 6, “Rape:
Victimization Levels and Rates.” For the 55 percent figure, see USBJS, Office
of Justice Programs, National Crime Survey Report, Criminal Victimization in
the United States, 1989, June 1991, publication #NCJ129391, p. 89, table 103,
“Personal Crimes, 1989: Percent of Victimizations Reported to Police, by Type
of Crime, Victim-Offender Relationship, and Sex of Victim.” Back to page
67. In a July 1992 nationwide computer search on Lexis/Nexis of more than 700
different newspapers, magazines, and journals during the 1980s until June 1992,
there were no stories of women being raped (e.g., via broomsticks, fists, or
forced oral sex) by women inmates. There were, however, forty-one stories of
various types of sexual encounters between guards and prisoners, some of which
clearly appeared to be rape, others of which appeared to be the woman being
sexual with the guard in exchange for cigarettes, drugs, privileges, etc. Back to
page
68. For example, the Department of Corrections in the state of Washington shows
that the average daily cost per male prisoner is $37.62; per female prisoner,
$80.62. In Wisconsin, the average monthly cost per capita, 1988–89, for male
prisoners was $1,120; for female prisoners, $2,100. See “Summary of
Distribution Per Capita Costs for the Year Ended June 30, 1989: Section E,”
Department of Health and Social Services, Division of Corrections, Office of
Policy, Planning, and Budget, Madison, Wisconsin. Back to page
69. April 11, 1990, interview with Frank Brennan, Australian psychologist, author,
and university professor. Brennan can be reached for comment at 95 Clydesdale
Street, Como, Perth, Western Australia 6152. Back to page
70. From a flyer prepared by the National Coalition of Free Men for the William
Hetherington Defense Fund, c/o William Lasley Law Offices, P.A., 215 North
Olice Avenue, #130, West Palm Beach, FL 33401. In an interview on May 1,
1992, William Lasley explained that Hetherington’s assets were frozen in his
civil case, thus preventing him from using them for his criminal defense or
from being declared indigent so he could get a public defender. Back to page
71. David Zeman, Knight-Ridder Newspapers, “Father, Martyr, Fraud?” Detroit
Free Press, May 25, 1990. Back to page
72. Interview, October 26, 1990, with Fran Hovey, Ohio reporter covering the
case. Back to page
73. Zeman, op. cit. An interview with Hetherington’s attorney, David Wright, on
March 17, 1992, verified that the judge did give Hetherington fifteen to thirty
years and that this did exceed the sentencing guidelines for the case. Back to
page
CHAPTER 15
From Husband Sam to Uncle Sam: Government as Substitute Husband
1. Credit to Fred Hayward for the question and portions of the answer. Back to
page
2. Johnson v. Transportation Agency of Santa Clara County, 480 US 616
(1987). Back to page
3. Tamar Lewin, “Pregnancy and Work Risks Posing ‘Fuzzy’ Legal Arena,” The
New York Times, August 2, 1988. Back to page
4. Michael Levin’s Feminism and Freedom (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction
Books, 1988), p. 175, discusses the 15,000 to 20,000 women’s studies courses.
The “Directory of Men’s Studies Courses Taught in the U.S. and Canada,”
compiled by Sam Femiano of the American Psychological Association, lists the
91 men’s studies courses. Back to page
5. For example, Maryland budgets $200,000 each year for the Maryland
Commission on Women, and the city of Baltimore contributes $175,000 for its
Women’s Panel. See Jack Kammer, “A Matter of Men and Children,” The Sun
(Baltimore), March 26, 1992. Back to page
6. Congress originally authorized the Office of Family Planning to “provide
family planning services for persons in need.” In 1982, the federal office sent a
directive to its local centers telling them they would receive money only for
female clients. See Douglas Beckstein and Kevin McNally, “Federal Office of
Family Planning Discriminates Against Men,” Men’s Reproductive Health, fall
1987, p. 1. Back to page
7. The Canadian equivalent to the National Organization for Women is the
National Action Committee, which receives a half million dollars yearly from
the Department of Education. There is also a Canadian Cabinet Ministry on the
Status of Women. See Betty Steele, The Feminist Takeover: Patriarchy to
Matriarchy in Two Decades (Gaithersburg, Md.: Human Life International,
1990), pp. 9–10 and p. 68. Back to page
8. Ibid., p. 69. Back to page
9. Eric D. Sherman, in letter appearing in Gender Issues newsletter, June 1988, p.
2, slightly condensed. Back to page
10. The Family Support Act of 1988, which became effective in January 1990, gives
a parent—in essence, the mother (for the reasons described)—the right to be
involved with the child either full time or part time until the child is 6 and, if
she desires to work or go to school, to have transportation, child care, and food
provided for the child. Back to page
11. “The hundred-hour rule” is only one of a number of direct and indirect
discriminations against the male in the workfare and welfare programs. Other
provisions (such as the “lump-sum award”) make it much more difficult for the
family to get aid with the man present than with the man absent. These
provisions were explained to me by Colleen Fahey Fearn of the Legal Aid
Society of San Diego, Inc. Back to page
12. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the
United States: 1991, 111th ed., p. 358, table 584. Back to page
13. See Lorie Hearn, “A Woman’s Work,” California Lawyer, February 1989, p. 26.
Judge Murphy of San Diego ruled that it was in the best interests of the child for
certain mothers to work if the child is over 3, could have a responsible sitter,
and so on. This mother nevertheless won the case. See Hearn article for a
discussion of state and federal welfare laws exempting mothers with children
under 6 from work requirements. Back to page
14. Men’s average benefit per year is $8150.40; women’s is $6223.20. See U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration,
Social Security Bulletin Annual Statistical Supplement (Washington, D.C.:
USGPO, 1991), p. 149, table 5. Al, “Number and Average Monthly Benefit by
Race, Age, and Sex at the End of 1990.” Back to page
15. Men contribute $75 billion versus women’s $38 billion. These figures are from
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security
Administration, Office of Research and Statistics, Earnings and Employment
Data for Wage and Salary Workers Covered Under Social Security by State and
County, 1985, compiled by Lilian A. Fribush, publication no. 13–11784,
October 1988, p. 1, table 1, “Number of Wage and Salary Workers, Taxable
Wages, FICA Contributions, and Age Worker Attained in 1985, by State, Sex,
and Race, 1985.” Back to page
16. If the average man and woman retire at age 65 to collect full Social Security
benefits and live out their average life span, he will live another seven years,
receiving $8150.40 per year for a total of $57,052.80; she will live another
fourteen years, receiving $6223.20 per year for a total of $87,124.80—
approximately 153 percent of what the man will receive. See Social Security
Bulletin, op. cit. Back to page
17. LA Department of Water and Power v. Marie Manhart, 435 US 702,
(1978). Back to page
18. Interview on August 10, 1992, with Metropolitan Life Insurance branch
manager Tim Kime. Back to page
19. Kerry Pechter, “6 Who Were Sacked,” Men’s Health, summer 1988, p.
22. Back to page
Conclusion
1. Richard Stengel, review of Fire in the Belly by Sam Keen, “Bang the Drum
Quickly,” Time, July 8, 1991, p. 58. Back to page
2. For documentation, see the AJPH, January 1988 endnote in chapter 6, “The
Suicide Sex.” Back to page
3. For documentation, see the National Center for Health Statistics, Vital
Statistics: 1988, endnote in chapter 1, “Is Male Power Really a Myth?” Back to
page
4. For documentation, see the Public Affairs Report, October-December 1985,
cited in chapter 10, “. . . Saving Males as Saving Whales . . .” Back to page
Bibliography 2014
August, Eugene R. The New Men’s Studies: A Selected and Annotated Bibliography
(Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 2nd
 Edition,1995).
Bly, Robert. Iron John (NY: Addison-Wesley, 1990).
Diamond, Jed. Men Alive (San Raphael, Calif.: Fifth Wave Press, 2012).
Farrell, Warren. The Liberated Man (N.Y.: Random House, 1974; Berkley Books,
revised 1993).
Farrell, Warren. Why Men Are the Way They Are (N.Y.: McGraw-Hill, 1986; Berkley
Books, 1988).
Farrell, Warren. Women Can’t Hear What Men Don’t Say (N.Y.:
Tarcher/Putnam/Penguin, 1999; Berkley Books, 2000).
Farrell, Warren. Father and Child Reunion (N.Y.: Tarcher/Putnam/Penguin, 2001;
ebook, 2012).
Farrell, Warren. Why Men Earn More: The Startling Truth Behind the Pay Gap—and
What Women Can Do About It (N.Y.: AMACOM, 2005; ebook, 2011)
Fisher, Helen. Why Him? Why Her? (N.Y.: Holt, 2009).
Friedan, Betty. The Second Stage (N.Y.: Summit Books, 1981).
Gilder, George. Men and Marriage (Gretna, La.: Pelican, 1992).
Goldberg, Herb. The Hazards of Being Male (N.Y.: Signet, 1977).
Gray, John. Why Mars and Venus Collide (N.Y.: Harper, 2008)
Gurian, Michael. The Minds of Boys (N.Y.: Jossey-Bass, 2007).
Hoff-Sommers, Christina. Who Stole Feminism (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 1995)
Kauth, Bill. A Circle of Men (N.Y.: St. Martin’s, 1992).
Keen, Sam. Fire in the Belly (N.Y.: Bantam, 1991).
Levin, Michael. Feminism & Freedom (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1988).
Nathanson, Paul and Katherine Young, Legalizing Misandry (Canada: McGillQueens U Press, 2006)
Nathanson, Paul and Katherine Young, Spreading Misandry (Canada: McGill-Queens
U Press, 2006)
Nathanson, Paul and Katherine Young, Sanctifying Misandry (Canada: McGillQueens U Press, 2010)
Paglia, Camille. Sexual Personae (N.Y.: Vintage Books, 1991).
Rosin, Hanna. The End of Men (N.Y.: Riverhead/Penguin, 2012)
Sax, Leonard. Boys Adrift (N.Y.: Basic Books, 2007)
Smith, Helen. Men on Strike (N.Y.: Encounter Books, 2013)
Tiger, Lionel. The Decline of Males (New York: St. Martins Press, 1999).
Venker, Suzanne. The Flipside of Feminism (Washington, D.C.: World Net Daily,
2010)
AUDIOS and DVDs
See www.warrenfarrell.com for the audios, CDs, DVDs and downloadable options
for the following:
Farrell, Warren. The Best Interests of the Child (DVD and CD), 2003. See
www.warrenfarrell.com/audiobooks/
Farrell, Warren. The Myth of Male Power (3 CD set; audiobook; downloadable
options)
Farrell, Warren. Understanding Each Other (YouTube Audio of Warren Farrell’s
role reversal date and men’s beauty contest. Original recording by Sounds True in
1992).
Farrell, Warren. Why Men Are the Way They Are (3 CD set; audiobook;
downloadable options).
Farrell, Warren. Why Men Are the Way They Are, unabridged (Costa Mesa, Calif.:
Books-on-Tape, 1988).
Farrell, Warren. Women Can’t Hear What Men Don’t Say, 3 CDs; downloadable
options).
Robbins, Anthony. Power Talk with Warren Farrell. Downloadable audio.
SELECTED MEN’S RESOURCES 2014
A Voice for Men (www.avoiceformen.com/)
Boys’ Initiative (theboysinitiative.org)
National Coalition for Men (ncfm.org)
National Parents’ Organization (nationalparentsorganization.org)
New Male Studies: An International Journal (newmalestudies.com)
Men’s Health Network (menshealthnetwork.org)
White House Council on Boys and Men Proposal (whitehouseboysmen.org)
warrenfarrell.com The Liberated Fan tab for an updated list of resources