Martin Van Creveld
THE
PRIVILEGED
SEX
The Privileged Sex
Also by Martin van Creveld
Wargames: From Gladiators to Gigabytes
The Age of Airpower
The Land of Blood and Honey: The Rise of Modern Israel
The Culture of War
The American Riddle (in Russian)
The Changing Face of War: Lessons of Combat from the Marne to Iraq
Defending Israel
Moshe Dayan
Men, Women and War
The Art of War: War and Military Thought
The Rise and Decline of the State
The Sword and the Olive: A Critical History of the Israeli Defense Force
Airpower and Maneuver Warfare
Nuclear Proliferation and the Future of Conflict
The Transformation of War
The Training of Officers: From Professionalism to Irrelevance
Technology and War: 2000 B.C. to the Present
Command in War
Fighting Power: German and U.S. Army Performance, 1939-1945
Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton
Hitler’s Strategy 1940-1941: The Balkan Clue
The Privileged Sex
By Martin van Creveld
DLVC Enterprises
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Van Creveld, Martin, 1946 -
The Privileged Sex / Martin van Creveld
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Women—History. 2. Men—History. I. Title.
First Edition: 2013
ISBN-13: 978-1484983126
Copyright © 2013 by Martin van Creveld
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage
and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Publisher.
DLVC Enterprises
POB 2766
Mevasseret Zion
90805 Israel
For Eldad, my son.
“In every respect the burden is hard on those who attack an
almost universal opinion. They must be very fortunate, as
well as unusually capable, if they obtain a hearing at all.”
John Stuart Mill, The Subjection of Women.
Table of Contents
Preface to the English Edition
 xi
Introduction
 xiii
Chapter 1: Three Legends
 1
1. The Myth of Oppression
 1
2. Were Greek Woman Secluded?
 2
3. The Great Witch Hunt
 7
4. Nazi Treatment of Women
 15
5. Conclusions
 27
Chapter 2: Masculinity and its Troubles
 29
1. The forgotten Sex
 29
2. The Bio-Psychological Basis
 30
3. Compete and Provide
 38
4. Growing Up Male
 47
5. Conclusions
 62
Chapter 3: Men, Women and Work
 66
1. A Short History of Labor
 66
2. Men’s Work, Women’s Work
 69
3. Industrialization and its Impact
 79
4. The Great Transformation
 88
5. Conclusions
 104
Chapter 4: From Dowries to Social Security
 106
1. The Great Riddle
 106
2. The Economics of Marriage
 107
3. Women and Charity
 122
4. Inside the Welfare State
 130
5. Conclusions
 136
Chapter 5: Facing the Law
 139
1. The Weaker Vessel
 139
2. Historical Overview
 139
3. The 20th
 Century
 152
4. Women vs. Men
 161
5. Conclusions
 174
Chapter 6: In the Maws of Mars
 177
1. The Principle of the Thing
 177
2. The History of Military Service
 177
3. The Protected Sex
 189
4. The Chivalrous Male
 196
5. Conclusions
 203
Chapter 7: The Quality of Life
 205
1. Once upon a Time…
 205
2. Civilization and its Comforts
 207
3. The Demographic Revolution
 215
4. Ladies of the Leisure Class
 226
5. Conclusions
 234
Chapter 8: The Complaining Sex
 238
1. Femininity and its Grievances
 238
2. Dungeons and Dragons
 240
3. The Rise of the Female Patient
 244
4. The Anorgasmic Woman
 261
5. Conclusions
 274
Conclusions
 280
Index
 288
Preface to the English Edition
By the time I began working on this edition of “The Privileged Sex” in
early 2013, a decade had passed since I first published the book, in
German. I expected that extensive changes would be needed in order to
bring it up to date, but was surprised to find that this was not the case.
Though some of the details had changed, the essentials had not. In fact,
today women are arguably more privileged than they were when I first
began investigating the subject. In the early 1990s, for example, 300
million people lived in countries where men’s life expectancy was higher
than that of women. Today, the number is practically zero. In today’s
Europe, to cite another example, several countries have in place quotas
reserving a minimum percentage of seats in parliament for women. The
result has been far more women winning seats than would have been the
case if elections were truly open and fair. One of those who owed at least
part of her meteoric rise to this system is German Chancellor Angela
Merkel. These are but two examples, and consequently this edition needed
little beyond occasionally updating statistics and acknowledging those
who have helped me in my research since “Das Bevorzugte Geschlecht”
came out in 2003.
Now as ever, many feminist claims concerning the alleged oppression
of women by men at various times and places are unfounded. Now as ever,
both biologically and socially, becoming and being a man is in many ways
harder than becoming and being a woman. Now as ever, men work longer
hours, performing harder, dirtier and more dangerous work than women
and suffering proportionally far more industrial accidents. Throughout
history it was husbands who supported their wives, not the other way
around. And in 9 of 10 households today, this remains the case. Women
also receive proportionally far more welfare benefits. Around the world,
the law in many ways treats men much more severely than women. In
armed forces that admit women — and by no means all do — men
proportionally suffer nearly 10 times more casualties than women.
Women, meanwhile, receive far more medical attention, which helps to
explain why, as mentioned above, women’s life expectancy exceeds that of
men. And in many other ways, women continue to enjoy a better quality of
life. Yet none of these facts has prevented feminists from shedding tears
over their lot. A man who “yammers” — in the words of the late “mother
of feminism” Betty Friedan — is certain to be despised or ridiculed. But a
woman doing the same — and that is indeed what many feminists have
done — is much more likely to get what she wants.
Ever since I started writing about women and feminism in the late
1990s, my views on these subjects have gotten me into endless trouble.
Those troubles have taught me that Freud was, in fact, wrong. The
strongest human drive is not sex — it is the desire to make others shut up.
As a man who has dared disagree with feminist myths, however incredible
and foolish they might be, I have learned over the past dozen years just
how strong that desire is among the guardians of feminism. In publishing
this new version of “The Privileged Sex,” I invite readers to study the facts
and come to their own informed conclusions.
Jerusalem, March 2013
Introduction
Like most books, this one was born out of curiosity. Long ago, I read
Simone de Beauvoir. She once pointed out that though the world had
always belonged to men, no one could offer a sufficiently good
explanation of why this was the case. I found the idea striking, and decided
to search for a sufficiently good explanation. The riddle that she, the
woman of letters, had posed, I, the male historian, would solve.
Born in 1946, I reached maturity in a world constructed around the
ancient tale of women’s oppression. As the mythology has it, once upon a
time there was a golden age when people lived in extended families and
tended their gardens. Both men and women worshipped earth-goddesses
and were blissfully unaware of fatherhood. What government existed was
in the hands of women, with men content to live under, or at any rate with,
it. This Garden of Eden was eventually overthrown, however. Women’s
benevolent rule was ended, and the wicked reign of men took its place.
With women’s defeat came materialism, competition, hierarchy, war and
countless other societal calamities. They ranged from the commodification
of sex to rape and from meat-eating to the destruction of the environment.
For millennia on end, women chafed under patriarchy. Then, the dam gave
way and the torrent broke through. Modern feminism appeared in all its
glory and the world was changed forever. Vive la révolution!
If this tale were indeed true, I wondered, then precisely when, where
and why was matriarchy overthrown? How did women’s oppression begin,
and how did it grow and develop? How could the 50 percent of humanity
who are men impose their will upon the remaining 50 percent, and
continue to do so at all known times and places? If women are oppressed
and rebellion against patriarchy is the answer, why do so many indulge in
the “illusions of post-feminism” and so few follow the feminist call to
arms?[1] Why is it that in the United States, only one in three women call
themselves feminists, and many others are outright hostile to feminism?
Why is it that many well-known women, from Florence Nightingale to
Simone de Beauvoir to former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina have
declared that they never suffered from the liabilities supposedly associated
with their sex?[2] Why do polls among women of several nationalities
show that most do not feel they have been discriminated against?[3] And
last but not least, to the extent that women have rebelled, why has their
rebellion not led anywhere significant, and why is a brave new society
nowhere in sight?
After a few months of work, so many problems and contradiction were
jostling each other that they seriously threatened my mental balance. It
was at this point that my wife suggested that I take a walk. I had scarcely
reached the street when I realized that I had been asking the wrong
questions. Perhaps my assumption, and that of countless other before me,
was wrong. Perhaps, I considered for the first time, women are not in fact
oppressed. If women are not in fact oppressed, it could explain why no
convincing account of the origins and perpetuation of their oppression has
ever been produced. If women are in fact the privileged sex, it could
explain why most women seem to be more or less satisfied with their lot,
why more women have not cast off their cosmetics and started working
jobs like garbage collection. Today, as in yesteryear, women generally
continue to do what they can to seek out men, to attract them, to marry
them, to make love to them, and to have children by them. Certainly the
proposition that women are content with their privileges is more
convincing than the claim, by at least one leading feminist, that
generations of women have been “mistaken about truth, morality, or even
their self-interests”[4] — as condescending a slur as any ever directed
against women.
Lest there be any mistaken assumptions drawn by readers of this book,
let me clarify just exactly what I mean when I speak of the “privileged
sex.” To employ this phrase is not to deny that nature, by giving women
weaker physiques and making them carry the burden of menstruation,
pregnancy, delivery and lactation, has in some ways made their lot harder
than that of men. Nor is the phrase meant to imply that their lives are a
rose garden. What the “privileged sex” is meant to imply is that there is
another face to the matter — that for every disadvantage under which
women labor, they enjoy a privilege that is equally important to their lives,
if not more so. Far too many female authors, because they are determined
to see oppression everywhere, and far too many male ones, because they
have been made to feel guilty by their female colleagues, ever mention
these privileges. Yet without them much of social life becomes
incomprehensible. In what follows, I endeavor to set the record straight.
The outline of the book is as follows. Chapter 1 sets the stage by
examining several central beliefs about the oppression of women at
various times and places in history, and then exposing them for the myths
they are. Chapter 2 deals with the different paths that lead toward,
respectively, manhood and womanhood, and shows how both nature and
society have conspired to make it much harder to become, and to be, a
man than a woman. Chapter 3 investigates the privileges women have
historically enjoyed, and continue to enjoy, with respect to work. Chapter
4 explains how, because women have traditionally done less and easier
work than men, different societies at different times and places in history
have sought to ensure women’s economic welfare through support by men.
Chapter 5 looks at women’s position with respect to crime and the law, and
shows how laws are often drafted and applied specifically to help women.
Chapter 6 shows how women have been freed from participation in war, as
well as looks into the attempts to protect them against its horrors. Chapter
7 deals with the results of women being granted their privileged position,
including women’s more comfortable existence, the greater attention paid
to their welfare, and the longer lives they enjoy. Chapter 8 examines why
women, in spite of their many privileges, continue to bemoan their lot.
And finally, Chapter 9 presents my conclusions.
When I first embarked on the project, I initially feared that finding
evidence concerning women’s privileges would be as hard as distilling a
few ounces of gold from tons of rock. My fears not only turned out to be
unfounded, it soon became clear that the challenge was not a shortage of
material, but an almost incredible surplus. Gathering, sifting, indexing,
evaluating, digesting, arranging and writing down all this material would
have required the lifetime not of a single Methuselah, but of a hundred. I
can only ask my readers’ indulgence for having undertaken this enormous
task, and hope that the numerous gaps in my research will be filled by
others better qualified than I.
To those who helped me in my work on “The Privileged Sex,” please
let me express my appreciation. My gratitude to the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation, which financed my stay in Potsdam, Germany,
during the first year of my research. My appreciation as well to the
Margaret and Axel Johnson Foundation and its director, Mr. Kurt
Almqvist, who provided money with which to buy books. And last but by
no means least, my thanks to those who helped find material, to those who
listened to me discuss my research, and to those who reviewed my
manuscript, who in so doing saved me from countless errors and
misinterpretations. They are, in alphabetical order: Ms. Kate Aspy, Dr.
Yuval Harari, Ms. Margalit Israeli, Dr. Chaim Kahana, Dr. Martina Kayser,
Dr. Jonathan Lewy, Dr. Miriam Liepsma, Mr. Amit Perl, Prof. Israel
Shatzman, Ms. Ella Shofman, Mr. Paul Spier, Ms. Varda Schramm, and
Prof. Ben Ami Shillony. I do not know where I would have been without
you; thank you, thank you, all.
Finally, the usual special thanks are due to Prof. Benjamin (“Beni”) Z.
Kedar. Though he is a medievalist by training, very often I have drawn on
his advice as if he knew everything — which, in some ways, he does.
Long familiar with my theories, he was skeptical at first. Whether or not I
succeeded in convincing him, I do not know. However, his doubts did not
prevent him from providing everything that I have become accustomed to
receiving from him over the past three decades. His conversation, his
encouragement and his criticism amount to the very definition of
friendship, and for that he has my sincere gratitude.
Jerusalem, March 2001
Chapter 1: Three Legends
1. The Myth of Oppression
This chapter seeks to dismantle several of the myths concerning women’s
oppression at the hands of men. Those myths start with the claim that men
in developing countries shorten women’s lives by robbing them of food
and medical care. In fact, in nearly all countries (both developing and
developed), women outlive men. These myths also include the belief that
“hard” professions like engineering feature so few women because men
“steer” women away from such work;[5] in fact, not even Stalin was able
to force female students to study technological subjects.[6] Some myths
about women’s oppression are simply foolish, such as the claim that the
ubiquitous QWERTY keyboard has remained in use for more than a
century because it makes life harder for female typists.[7] And some are
outright preposterous, such as the argument that physicians at the turn of
the 20th century who persuaded mothers to breastfeed their babies and
thereby cut child mortality rates were guilty of “male imperialism
perpetrated on females.”[8]
In this chapter I shall focus on three case studies, selected for inclusion
here because they have led to some of the shrillest denunciations. The first
is the claim that ancient Greek men confined ancient Greek women to the
home and seldom permitted them to leave their rooms. The second is the
claim that early modern misogynist European male witch-hunters arrested,
tortured and executed countless women simply in order to preserve
patriarchy. The third is that the Nazis persecuted women almost as much
as they did homosexuals, gypsies, Jews and others.
2. Were Greek Women Secluded?
The debate over the position of women in ancient Greece, particularly
Athens, is now more than two centuries old. Some, like Rousseau, held up
Greek attitudes toward women as a model. Others rejected that model,
claiming that it oppressed women and was inherently evil. Though
seclusion is only one out of many bad things Greek men are accused of
having done, its role in the attack on patriarchy is crucial. In the words of
one historian, if women were to be oppressed, then it was first necessary to
ensure that they “scarcely ever left the women’s apartments.” If women
“seldom crossed the thresholds of their own front doors,”[9] then surely
they were oppressed.
The above argument consists of two parts. The first is that women
were confined to their own quarters inside the home; the second, that they
were forbidden to leave it. However, if women were in fact allowed to go
out into public, then confining them to certain rooms inside the home
would not have made much sense. The main source “proving” that women
did not go out is usually given as Xenophon’s Oeconomicus. More an
exercise in rhetoric than a description of real life, the book purports to
explain how the ideal wife should run a household while her husband goes
about his business. The second is a passage from Euripides in which a
woman is made to say that “leaving the house and walking about” is “one
act which swings scandalous speech [in women’s] way beyond all
else.”[10]
There also exist numerous shorter references with relevant figures of
speech, such as Plato’s “to cower at home like a woman,” and from
Pericles’ funeral speech for the dead of the Peloponnesian War, “the best
woman is one about whom nothing is ever said, neither favorable nor
unfavorable.”[11] However, these phrases should be understood as
expressions of a cultural ideal, rather than as simple descriptions of reality
at the time. Likewise, while a Jewish proverb has it that “a king’s daughter
wears her honor inward,” this does not prove that Hassidic women were
confined to their homes.
Starting our inquiry with mythological females, clearly they were not
secluded.[12] At one point in the Iliad Zeus confined the gods to Olympus
so as to help the Greeks. Though this policy applied to males as well as
females, his wife, Hera, subverted it. First she made love to him; next she
slipped away to help the Trojans. Neither did Thetis, a sea-goddess, have
any trouble visiting her son Achilles or going on various errands on his
behalf. The same goddess also abandoned Achilles’ father, Peleus, because
he was not sufficiently sexy.[13] This hardly sounds as if she were
sequestered. In the Odyssey, Aphrodite was able to get away to enter into
an adulterous liaison with Ares. Athene both helped Achilles in front of
Troy and welcomed Odysseus as he was coming home. Goddesses roamed
the fields, including Daphne, Persephone and Persephone’s powerful
mother Demeter. One goddess, Artemis, haunted forests and mountains
and never even had a home in which she could have been confined.
The same applies to the human heroines of Greek epics. During the
siege of Troy, Helene mounted the city walls to watch her two husbands,
Menelaus and Paris fight. Far from being rebuked, she got an explanation
of the proceedings from her father in law, Priam.[14] Andromache met her
husband at the gate of Troy and often visited her friends in the city. During
the final duel between Hector and Achilles, Hector’s mother Hecuba and
her ladies also mounted the wall to watch. In the Odyssey, Nausicaa and
her female servants went to the spring to do their laundry. When Odysseus
recounted his adventures in the hall of King Alcinous, both the latter’s
wife and his daughter were present. Penelope’s husband being absent, she
preferred to stay at home. However, there was nothing to prevent her from
appearing in public whenever she wanted to. Greek tragedies, too, abound
with such cases; had women really been sequestered, then the vast
majority of Greek myths would have been impossible.
Furthermore, goddesses belonged, by definition, to the upper classes,
as did the ladies of myth because they were normally the relatives of
powerful men. Though several spun and weaved, none were supposed to
work outside the home. For this reason, and also because they had servants
of both sexes whom they could send on errands, if anything they were
more sequestered than ordinary women. Most people were middle or low
class and, at best, could only afford a few slaves. They lived not in the
town but in the countryside, working in agriculture. In fact, evidence about
women working outside the home is overwhelming.[15] Greek women
went to the fountain to fetch water or wash clothes. Others acted as nurses
or midwifes or as courtesans, entertainers and prostitutes. Others took
wages to do agricultural work. Women even worked as vendors, as is made
clear by the fact that Athenian law made it an offense to rebuke any
citizen, male or female, for selling in the market.[16] Aristotle wrote that
preventing poor women from going out was both impossible and unfair.
After all, he noted, they did not have slaves who could go on errands or
accompany them.[17]
Women also left home, the literature shows, to visit their favorite
soothsayer,[18] participate in some public ceremonies,[19] admire works
of art on the Acropolis,[20] visit men in prison,[21] argue their case before
arbitrators,[22] and attend courtrooms to rouse the sympathy of juries for
their male relatives.[23] Women also listened to public speeches; one,
Elphinike, reproached Pericles after the latter gave a speech in honor of the
Athenians killed in the war against Samos.[24] Plato says that refined
women preferred tragedy to comedy; from this, as from two other
passages, it appears that women frequented the theater as well.[25] Not
only did women participate in their relatives’ funerals, but without them
those funerals could not be carried out at all. Women were active in
religion.[26] They could become priestesses; indeed, some priesthoods
were reserved exclusively for women. Some religious rites in which
women participated were carried out daily, while others focused on
festivals held on fixed dates. Some of the festivals were mixed, with others
reserved for women. None could have taken place if women had been
confined at home. And that is not to mention the feast of Dionysus, during
which women not only left their homes but the city as well, making for the
mountains instead.
Thousands of works of art show women engaged in all manner of
activities. Some of the activities portrayed, such as getting dressed, putting
on jewelry, weaving or eating at a table, undoubtedly must have been
carried out indoors. Others, however, such as playing a game of
knucklebones, minding a child or spinning, could have been carried out
either indoors or outdoors. This even applies to having sex; one vase has a
picture of a woman masturbating near a fountain with another woman and
a man looking on. And others activities, such as encountering a satyr,
carrying water, playing ball, making a sacrifice or dancing ecstatically,
could take place only on the assumption that women went outside. Had art
been the sole evidence available, then any speculation about women’s
alleged seclusion would have quickly been laid to rest.
Art is not, of course, the sole available evidence. Xenophon’s
aforementioned Oecomenicus is arguably the single most important
account of the lives of Athenian housewives early in the fourth century
B.C. His treatise, it must be noted, was one of a series intended to present
reality as it should have been — not as it actually was. One of the
characters, Isomachos, explains that human children are tender and require
shelter. In order that they would be raised indoors, the gods made women
love small children more than men do. By contrast, men’s bodies are fit for
“traveling and military campaigns.” Human laws reflect those the gods had
made. Men and women are praised or blamed according to whether they
follow their respective natures. Isomachos compares his wife to a queen
bee, declaring that if she deserts the home, the home will collapse.[27]
However, the fact that his wife’s main function was in the home does not
mean he prohibited her from leaving it. Drawing such a conclusion is as
erroneous as it is to claim that, since it was considered shameful for a man
to spend too much time indoors, men lived out in the open like beasts.
If women were free to go out of the home, then obviously it did not
make sense to confine them inside it, let alone in women’s quarters. The
sources do contain a few references to women’s quarters. Closer
examination, however, reveals that a number of these women’s quarters
were in fact those of female slaves. Female slaves, Isomachos says,
occupied separate quarters, in order for their master to control their
reproduction. It is true that for a stranger to enter the inner rooms of a
house without being invited was considered rude. In an extreme case it
might lead to violence, and even be mentioned in a lawsuit.[28] Yet a man
was perfectly able to visit a friend’s house and talk to his wife.[29] Even
today, many otherwise modern people would not like visitors to their home
peeking into their bedrooms; few would suggest that this proves that those
rooms are being used for locking up wives and daughters. At most, one
could find evidence that women were more likely to be found at home.[30]
One could also find evidence that modesty may have dictated that women
leave the dining room and retreat into the inner rooms when male guests
visited.
Faced with overwhelming evidence to the contrary, some modern
historians have resorted to wild casuistry to support the claim that ancient
Greek women were secluded. If Greek beds are narrower than present-day
American ones, then obviously Greek men and women did not sleep
together and women occupied separate quarters which men seldom visited.
[31] If Isomachos’ wife has the run of the house, then this is only because
Xenophon “resists the conventional Athenian role for his wife.”[32] If
countless paintings show women engaged in all sorts of outdoor activities,
then those women must have been either courtesans or slaves. If the
women of myth and drama for the most part move about just as they
please, then this proves that imaginary women did what real ones could
not.[33] If the evidence concerning women appearing in public during the
decades following the Peloponnesian War is overwhelming, then this is
because the end of that war led to a vast, though entirely undocumented,
social revolution.
In truth, the question before modern historians is not whether Greek
women were secluded. Rather, it is how to account for such a determined
unwillingness to look the facts in the face.
3. The Great Witch Hunt
Over the past four decades, an enormous amount of literature has been
produced on the early-modern European period of witch-hunting (ca.
1500-1650). In the English-speaking world, interest in the field was
triggered by the work of Keith Thomas’ Magic and the Decline of Religion
(1971). It offered new interpretations and set new standards of scholarship
in the field. Thomas himself wrote that “the idea that witch-prosecutions
reflected a war between the sexes can be discounted.”[34] However, this
and other denials did not prevent scholars from claiming that witchhunting originated in male hatred for women. One scholar went so far as to
argue that the phenomenon constituted “not merely the reflection of an
age-old stereotype, not merely the by-product of a patriarchal society; the
witch hunts were a part of, and one example of, the ongoing mechanism
for social control of women.”[35]
Just how and why patriarchy translated into witch-hunting at this
particular time and place is by no means clear. Rather than attempting to
answer that question, I shall endeavor to show that witch-hunting was not
simply a matter of female-hating men conjuring up the most horrible
crimes in order to burn some women and put the rest in their place. First, it
must be underscored that contemporaries, both men and women, firmly
believed in witchcraft.[36] Just as few people doubted that there was a
God, or that the sun revolved around the earth, so too there was little
question about the existence of witches. Contemporaries would have
scoffed at the notion that witchcraft was “a crime without criminals,” as
some modern historians have called it.
The mythology of witchcraft was put together over several centuries,
and was substantially complete by 1480. Some witches swore formal
allegiance to the devil or were possessed by him. Some witches were
visited by the devil in their own homes, while others mounted broomsticks
and flew to orgies known as Sabbaths. At these orgies, which were held in
secret and were reachable only to the initiated, witches ate, drank, danced
and had promiscuous sex. In return for the devil’s promise to give them
power over people and things, they renounced Christianity and defiled its
symbols.
According to the mythology, witches were guilty of committing
maleficia, or evil deeds. These maleficia were regarded as a real menace,
both to individuals and to society. Maleficia were not merely a matter of
malicious intent, but of actual death and destruction. Some witches
brought about natural disasters such as storms, hail or flooding. Others
killed people and livestock, as well as caused a variety of diseases, many
of them never heard of before or since, such as making women give birth
to rabbits. Some witches prepared love potions to attract new lovers and
bring back unfaithful ones. They could also make men impotent. Thanks to
being allied with the devil, witches could do things that ordinary criminals
never could.[37] Thus there was as much, if not more, reason for society to
oppose witchcraft as there was to fight crime in general.
Throughout history, there have been both male and female witches. In
1484, when Pope Innocent VIII issued his Bull against witchcraft, he
explicitly stated that it was being practiced by “many persons of both
sexes.” In 1572 the Elector of Saxony ruled that “sorcerers, man or
woman, shall be executed with the sword.”[38] Even in England, where
the percentage of women among the accused was unusually high, the law
always referred to “persons.” Pictures of Sabbaths regularly show the devil
attended to by both men and women. One expert, the Puritan minister
William Perkins, went so far as to blame Moses for his use of the feminine
gender in ordering that “thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.”[39] In truth,
he said, the Bible “exempeth not the male.” Many other experts agreed
with him in this respect.[40]
So uncomfortable did contemporaries feel about the “fact” that most
witches were female that they time and again questioned why it was so.
Even King James I of England felt obliged to reflect on the question.[41]
Precisely because witchcraft was considered real and not something
society had invented, the reason had to be sought in the nature of women
themselves. Most experts agreed that women were more malicious than
men. Their nature was weaker and their minds not as clear; as a result, the
devil was able to ensnare them “after only a light skirmish.”[42] Female
writers who addressed the issue tended to agree with their male comrades.
[43] The authors of the most famous handbook on witch-hunting, the
Malleus Maleficarum, claimed that the word “feminine” itself derived
from “fe-minus,” “less faith.”[44] But this did not prevent them from
including 10 pages on male witches.
An instructive modern analogy is the crime of murder. While the crime
is committed by both men and women, more than 80 percent of convicted
murderers are men. When we look for an explanation for this fact, we do
not say that murders were invented by a man-hating society in order to
execute men or put them behind bars. Rather, we seek the reasons in
qualities that are innate to men: for example, the much higher levels of
testosterone that make them more aggressive than women. In other words,
it is not necessarily true that those whose job it was to deal with female
witches hated women — no more true than the argument that those who
claim that violence is a defining male characteristic hate men. All the
witch-hunters were trying to do was what criminologists, sociologists and
psychologists of both sexes are doing today — namely, explaining a social
phenomenon they found puzzling.
Some historians have claimed that, in persecuting witches, men were
trying to suppress female sexuality.[45] This is nonsense. As Shakespeare
could have said, “t’is mighty strange” that most of the accused were older
women. Some were very old indeed. The oldest on record, a woman by the
name of Isabeau Blary, was already past her 100th birthday. Subjected to
interrogation, Blary “confessed” that she had been sodomized by the devil.
[46] Needless to say, the argument makes no sense, no more so than, say,
the fact that young, single men are over-represented among violent
criminals proves that society is out to suppress their hormones. All it
means is that such men are more inclined to break the law, and less afraid
of the consequences, than either older men or women.
In Italy, clerics were perhaps even more at risk of being accused of
witchcraft than women were. In Germany, where it was often a question of
forcing a witch to identify her accomplices so as to get at the latter’s
property, prominent men were among the accused. The same applied to
Sussex.[47] Typically persecution would start at the level of the village or
the neighborhood, usually after the suspect had acquired an unpleasant
reputation. The breaking point would come when he or she asked for a
favor, such as food, lending a hand or a small loan. Upon being rebuffed,
not always politely, she might retaliate by uttering a curse or a threat.
Once the threat or curse appeared to come true, gossip would spread
the news, and the authorities would get involved. Quite often it was up to
the authorities, who were male, to put the brakes on local outbreaks of
witch-hunting. In 1597 James VI of Scotland, as he was then known,
abolished the general commission against witchcraft he himself had
appointed specifically because people were using it to settle scores.[48] In
the second half of the 17th century, when belief in witchcraft among the
elite began to decline, popular persistence in bringing accusations led to
many acquittals.[49]
It is true that there were few women among the intellectual elite that
wrote about witchcraft and held the trials. On the other hand, female rulers
were as apt to persecute witches as were male ones. In the Netherlands,
persecutions peaked during the first half of the 16th century, when the
country was governed by three successive female regents acting for
Charles V: Margaret of Austria, Mary of Hungary, and Margaret of Parma.
[50] Later, when William the Silent took over, the persecutions declined.
Similarly, in France persecution peaked late in the 16th century under the
rule of Catherina de Medici. The Scottish Witchcraft Laws, meanwhile,
were enacted during the reign of Mary, Queen of Scots. In 1547, 9-yearold King Edward VI of England, acting on the advice of his male
entourage, had all the penalties against witchcraft repealed. Sixteen years
later Elizabeth allowed Parliament to reinstate them in even worse form.
The reign of “Good Queen Bess” marked the high point of persecution.
Under her male heir, both the number of cases and the conviction rate went
down.[51] These facts hardly confirm the claim that the objective of witchhunting was to reestablish patriarchal control.
Women participated in witch-hunts at least as much as men did. Most
maleficia were directed by women at women.[52] It was mainly women
who accused other women of violating normal standards of conduct,
insisting that their husbands or other male relatives take action against
suspected witches.[53] It was mainly women, bewitched by other women,
who suffered from convulsions and fainting fits. It was mainly women,
bewitched by other women, who vomited pins, needles and toads and
whose statements to that effect might or might not be believed by the
responsible male officials.[54] The first Englishwoman tried under the
Elizabethan statute, Elizabeth Lowys, was accused mainly by women.[55]
The last English witch to stand trial, Jane Wenham, not only was accused
by another woman, she herself implicated three other women. All were
acquitted. Wenham herself was convicted by the jury, but promptly
pardoned by a skeptical judge. Unable to return home, she found refuge on
the estate of a male landowner.[56]
Women also played an important role in cases that, rising above the
level of neighborhood rivalry, were referred to the courts. Some women
initiated proceedings against others. And since prostitutes, who were
otherwise barred from providing testimony in court, were permitted to
testify in cases involving witchcraft, women may actually have been overrepresented among witnesses. In addition, just as modern police forces
now employ women to deal with female offenders, early modern women
often guarded suspected witches in jail. Others joined men in acting as
witch-prickers, professionals who used pins to probe body marks to check
if the victim would indeed bleed. One well-known pricker, a Mr. Patterson
of Scotland, turned out to be a woman in disguise.[57] Whether because of
personal animosities or because they were tortured, the accused women
cooperated, implicating other women. Others brought accusations out of
jealousy because the devil had preferred some other, more prominent,
woman to themselves.[58]
Since there were no women among those who tried witches, had
accusations of witchcraft really involved male hatred for women one
would expect a higher proportion of female witches to be convicted than
male ones. That, however, did not happen. In Scotland a larger proportion
of female suspects were executed than male ones, but a larger proportion
of female suspects were also acquitted. In Geneva the situation was the
reverse. In Italy the vast majority of female witches turned over to the allmale Inquisition ended up with very light penalties or none at all. A clear
bias against women — in the sense that fewer were acquitted and more
executed — can only be detected in the trials conducted by the circuit
courts in England.[59] However, England had relatively few executions.
And of those that did take place, by no means all were ordered by the
circuit courts.
Contrary to uninformed present-day opinion, the problem of witchcraft
did not stand on its own. Rather, it formed part of a much larger complex
of “spiritual” offenses that included heresy, apostasy and blasphemy,
among others. All were considered to be crimes against God and religion,
and all deserved to be punished as harshly as witchcraft. Consequently,
witchcraft comprised only a small fraction of the cases brought before the
Inquisition. In Venice, the figure amounted to just over 20 percent, and the
vast majority of those involved received very light sentences, if any.[60]
But whereas most of those accused of witchcraft were women, most of
those charged with other spiritual offenses were men. Thus, the same
qualities that caused women to be disproportionally indicted on charges of
witchcraft — namely, their supposed lesser intelligence — often meant
that they were not held accountable for related crimes. This is one reason
why women accounted for only 10 percent of all those executed during the
period in question. Indeed, far fewer women were executed for witchcraft
than for those twin archetypical feminine crimes, infanticide and
poisoning.[61]
In describing the witch-hunts, most historians have focused on the
period from 1500 to 1650. However, this is misleading. Before 1350,
nearly three times as many men as women were tried for witchcraft.[62] In
northern France between 1351 and 1400, the number of defendants of both
sexes was roughly equal.[63] For Europe as a whole, between 1300 and
1499 the number of accused men is said to have nearly equaled that of
accused women.[64] In the Netherlands, “before the persecution of
witches was seriously undertaken some authorities had already begun to
punish cunning men.”[65] In Finland, too, the older native traditions
usually saw witches as men.[66] In the British Isles during the period in
question, men comprised 59 percent of those accused. In the Swiss canton
of Neuchatel they accounted for 80 percent and in Wallis 78 percent; in
Switzerland as a whole, the figure was just under 50 percent.[67]
Concentrating on the period from 1500 to 1650 also conceals the fact that
subsequently in Germany the stereotype was reversed. Persons accused of
witchcraft were no longer mainly old women, but mostly young men.[68]
Indeed, even the term “early modern period” as used in reference to
witch-hunting is arbitrary. Both before and after that period the balance
between males and females was quite different. The same is true about the
term witchcraft itself. Had historians treated it in conjunction with other
“spiritual” offenses, as contemporaries did, then the proportions of those
people belonging to either sex who were either accused or executed would
have shifted. Womenbelieved in witchcraft just as much as men did. Their
contribution to witch-hunting was as important as that of men. In certain
respects it was more so. Very often it was women who decided that a
particular individual should be accused of witchcraft, women who
provided the evidence, and women who implicated others. In fact, it seems
that the further removed from neighborhood disputes the male authority
responsible for witch-hunting was and therefore the fewer women were
involved the more fair the treatment witches were likely to receive.[69]
In short, no more than the fact that most present-day murderers are
male proves that men are being hunted by matriarchy, does the fact that
most early modern witches were female prove that patriarchy targeted
women as women. If anything, it proves that when contemporaries said
they were out to hunt and eradicate witches of both sexes, they meant what
they said.
4. Nazi Treatment of Women
The idea of presenting the Nazis as the oppressors of women par
excellence goes back to Betty Friedan. In 1959 she attended a gathering of
magazine editors, all of them male, who were discussing subjects that
might interest American women. What she heard did not please her. “As I
listened to them, a German phrase echoed in my mind — ‘Kinder, Küche,
Kirche,’ the phrase by which the Nazis decreed that women must once
again be confined to their biological role.”[70]
Friedan’s accusation against the Nazis was taken up by some of the
most important pioneers of modern feminism, including Kate Millett,
Germaine Greer, Susan Brownmiller and Andrea Dworkin; Friedan herself
repeated it in her memoirs.[71] These feminist scholars endeavored to
prove that the Nazis persecuted women almost as much as they did
homosexuals, gypsies, Jews and other “inferior” people. Others claimed
that the Nazi idea of womanhood represented a form of “secondary
racism.”[72] Others still argued that anti-feminism was as basic a part of
National Socialism as was anti-Semitism, save for the deadly results.[73]
The fact that the Nazis constructed “polarized identities for males and
females” and did not accept the feminist dogma about men and women
being similar in every respect was said to be one of their worst misdeeds.
In the Nazis’ attitude toward women, one scholar even argued, lay “the
roots of genocide.”[74]
What was the real position of women in Nazi Germany? To answer
this question, it is best to start by looking at German feminism before
Adolf Hitler’s rise to power in 1933. There were, as it so happens, a wide
variety of feminist groups in Germany: a Catholic Frauenbund, a
Protestant Frauenbund, as well as conservative, liberal, socialist,
communist, colonial and Jewish Frauenbünde, to name but a few of the
230 or so women’s organizations active at the time. Some were in favor of
equal rights for women. Others opposed them in the name of motherhood
and blamed the Weimar Republic for having enfranchised women. Some
supported abortion rights, while others opposed them, and yet others
advocated the compulsory sterilization of “unfit” persons.[75] Over time
the socialist and liberal women’s movements, which demanded equal
rights for women, lost power and adherents, while those promoting
motherhood grew in stature. By the final years of the Weimar Republic,
the label “feminist” itself had become anathema to many women.[76]
The organization that claimed to speak for all the rest was the Bund
Deutscher Frauen (BDF), a loose confederation of many different groups.
Its head was Gertrude Bäumer, a veteran campaigner for women’s rights.
[77]Before 1914 she had opposed both abortion and contraception. In 1919
she helped rewrite the program of the BDF, injecting it with a right-wing,
nationalist ideology. By 1932 the organization was advocating the
abolition of democracy and the establishment of a corporate state modeled
on fascist Italy. It called on women to help undo the consequences of the
Great War, as World War I was then known, by having as many children as
possible. Conversely, the societal ills allegedly associated with the Weimar
Republic sexual libertarianism, pornography, abortion and venereal
diseases were to be combated and defeated.
Much of what the BDF had to say found an echo with Hitler. The Nazi
objective was to save women from being debauched at the hands of Jews,
modernists, internationalists and other enemies of Germany. Healthy
values were to be restored, and women would be judged primarily by the
number of children they had given the Reich. The objective of girls’
education should be to “prepare them for motherhood.” Marriage was
merely a means for “multiplying and maintaining the race.” Childless
women (and men) were regarded as harmful to the Volk, though ultimately
the only measure taken against them was heavier taxation.[78] “By
nature,” a man was destined for the world, for society. “By nature,” a
woman was destined for her husband, her family, her children and her
home.[79] Female intellectuals were, in the eyes of contemporaries, a pain
in the neck. Like most people at the time, Hitler believed that women who
did not have children would eventually become mentally ill.[80] His
closest collaborators, including Arthur Rosenberg, Robert Ley, Gregor
Strasser, and Gottfried Feder, agreed with him on this point. Women’s
main task was motherhood, and they had to be protected from having to
work outside of the home.
How did the Nazis’ views on women’s place in society go down with
German women? The answer is, perhaps surprisingly, better and better.
From its very inception, the party succeeded in attracting women. Most
were matrons who liked its fiery young leader. One, Countess von
Reventlov, called Hitler “the coming Messiah.” Others gave him expensive
presents. As if to confirm Nietzsche’s famous words, they even competed
among themselves to see who could give him the most elaborate whip.
One woman, whose name has since been lost to history, produced the first
experimental design of the swastika flag.[81] Another woman, Gertrude
von Seydlitz, raised the money needed to turn the Nazi newspaper Der
Völkischer Beobachter into a daily. Other women financed Hitler’s
November 1923 Putsch. After it failed, it was a friend’s wife, Helene
Hanfstängel, who prevented Hitler from committing suicide, knocking a
gun out of his hand and lecturing him on his duty to live for Germany.
During his 13 months in prison he was visited by many women. As Hitler
wrote in Mein Kampf, during this difficult period it was women who kept
the Nazi Party from disintegrating. Indeed, even the paper on which
Rudolf Hess took down the Führer’s autobiography was provided by a
woman, Winifred Wagner, the famed composer’s daughter in law.
The Nazis were out to seize power, if not by actual violence then by
“the conquest of the streets.” As a result, Nazi women were probably less
tied down to the traditional feminine role than in most other societies at the
time. They marched, held meetings, raised money, distributed propaganda
and faced hecklers. Others sewed uniforms for S.A men, bandaged their
wounds and ran soup kitchens for them. In the decisive elections of 1930,
45 percent of Nazi voters were female. The voting pattern later became
even more pronounced. Observers of Nazi rallies noted the way women
always occupied the front rows.[82] Hitler’s own basic belief was that
women were governed by emotions, rather than by intellect, and that they
reserved their greatest admiration for the strong. And he knew exactly how
to talk to them. They, in turn, cheered him as loudly as anyone, often while
weeping uncontrollably.
If anything, women’s worship of Hitler intensified after 1933. The
crowds that followed him wherever he went were made up partly of
women. Other women made the pilgrimage to Berchtesgaden to give the
Nazi salute or to hold out their children for him to touch. For his birthdays,
women used to send him acres of scarves, pillow covers and blankets, all
embroidered with swastikas of every size, color and variety. He, in turn,
was careful not to disillusion them. Once he rhetorically asked a crowd of
women what he had given them, and then answered his own question with
“The Man.”[83] It was for their sake that he remained single and kept
secret the fact that he had a mistress. Nothing was allowed to disturb the
love affair between German women and their Führer. And until the fall of
Hitler and the Third Reich, nothing did.
Following the Nazis’ rise to power, women’s organizations saw their
numbers swell. In 1933 alone, 800,000 new members joined the
Nationalsozialistische Frauenschaft (NSF). Membership in the women’s
league eventually reached 3.5 million. It included some groups, such as
domestic servants, who had previously been excluded and who were
brought in against the wishes of “respectable” women. The NSF, like
nearly all other organizations in the totalitarian Nazi state, wielded little
real power. However, it received an enormous amount of funding, as well
as substantial leeway in its own areas of activity. The NSF primarily
focused on women’s welfare and education, particularly the kind of
education needed to raise the “racial quality” of the German people. State
backing enabled the NSF to pursue its agenda on a scale seldom dreamt of
by any women’s organization before that time. Forty years later, the leader
of the Frauenschaft, Gertrudee Scholz-Klink, was still proud of how she
and her assistants, all female, had beaten the “feminists” at their own
game, doing as they pleased without interference from men.[84]
Female opponents of the regime were often treated with kid gloves.
During the “wild” early days of the Third Reich, only one woman was
killed, the Social-Democrat Reichstag member Minna Cammens. Out of
some 150 concentration camps built before World War II, just one,
Möringen, housed women. It was only in 1938 that the regime carried out
its first “legal” execution of a female victim, the socialist Lieselotte
Hermann. Accused of passing classified information to the headquarters of
the banned German Communist Party in Switzerland, she was convicted of
treason and guillotined along with three of her male colleagues. Certainly
life in Ravensbrück, the main concentration camp for females, was far
from a picnic. Still, it was not nearly as bad as in some of the camps.
Indeed, some women were transferred to Ravensbrück from Auschwitz
precisely because the mortality rate in the latter was deemed to be too
high. Until the beginning of 1945, when deteriorating conditions led to
severe malnutrition and outbreaks of infectious diseases, “only” around 3
percent of the women in Ravensbrück died each year.[85]
Meanwhile, the Nazis began pursuing their dream of creating a pure
Aryan race by instituting a series of practical measures designed to
encourage women to marry, stay at home and have children. Symbolic
measures directed toward the same end were also enacted, such as the
celebration of Mother’s Day and the awarding of medals to fertile women.
Some of these measures either antedated Nazi Germany or were not
unique to it. Others, such as child allowances and tax deductions for
families with children, were part of the contemporary, near-universal drive
toward a welfare state. To assist working mothers while at the same time
alleviating female unemployment, the regime permitted taxpayers to
deduct a certain sum for child care.[86] This privilege was retained when
the Federal Republic of Germany was established in 1949. In the United
States, by contrast, it was only introduced into law by the Reagan
administration.
Perhaps the best-known Nazi incentive for mothers to settle down and
have a family was marriage loans. At the time, a similar measure was
adopted in Social-Democratic Sweden. Provided both mother and father
were of Aryan stock, a German couple was eligible for a loan if the bride
undertook not to take up paid work for two years after the wedding. For
each child a quarter of the sum was written off. Later the demand that the
woman not work was quietly dropped so that all mothers enjoyed the
benefit.
Then there was the Lebensborn Institute, a unique type of Nazi welfare
organization aimed specifically at women. At the time and later, rumor
described the Institute as a stud farm where unmarried women could be
impregnated by S.S men. Its real mission was much more prosaic. S.S
commander Heinrich Himmler’s views were pro-life, provided that the life
in question should be Germanic and free of heritable diseases. One
objective of the Lebensborn institutes was to offer suitably Aryan pregnant
women an alternative to abortion. Another goal, according the S.S. leader,
was to remove some of the stigma that “ridiculous blockheads” had
imposed on single mothers in Germany. The association provided the
women with temporary shelter at extremely cheap rates. Mothers-to-be
spent the last weeks of pregnancy at Lebensborn institutes under medical
supervision, then gave birth, recovered and obtained basic training in how
to care for a baby.
Most Nazi measures aimed at helping mothers proved to be immensely
popular. The leader of the Catholic German Women’s Association, Antoine
Hoppman, called them “a stroke of genius.”[87] Less popular, but still
acceptable to the vast majority of women, were the negative aspects of
Hitler's policies. Along with a considerable portion of contemporary public
opinion in Germany and abroad, the Fuehrer saw women as delicate
creatures unsuited for the rough and tumble world of politics.[88] He
detested lawyers in particular. While realizing that he could not do without
them, he never stopped calling lawyers “traitors,” “idiots” and “absolute
cretins.” The idea that women should be sheltered from the seamier side of
law and politics led to the dismissal of female politicians, senior civil
servants and judges, as well as the professional disqualification of some
300 female lawyers. These measures were supported both by the head of
the Nazi Women’s Association — who rejoiced in Hitler’s promise to
liberate women from work[89] — and by the grande dame of German
feminism, Gertrude Bäumer.[90] In any case, they only affected about 1
percent of all working women. And most of those who lost their jobs,
including female school principals, were transferred to other positions. The
rest received full pensions.[91]
Nazi beliefs concerning women in academia resembled those held by
contemporaries all over the developed world at that time. Such beliefs
began with the argument that women were by nature creatures of emotion
rather than of intellect, and as such were less suitable for academic life
than were men. Women in academia were also believed to be far more
likely than their male colleagues to be unhappy and fall prey to mental
illness. And female scholars were understood to be far less likely to get
married or have children, than non-academic ones. The first two beliefs
could not be statistically proven. However, the third certainly could be.
[92] Absent comprehensive figures concerning the fate of female
academics during the Third Reich, those originating in the University of
Hamburg are instructive. When the Nazis came to power there were 22
women in a faculty of 330 academics. Of those 22, seven lost their jobs —
but not because of their gender. Five owed their misfortune — the term
being used relatively here, as four of the five were able to leave the
country and thereby escape the Holocaust — to the fact that they were
Jewish. Of the other two, one committed suicide rather than accept a
transfer, and the second resigned rather than join the Nazi Party. At most,
one woman may have been dismissed simply because she was a woman,
and even in her case the exact cause for dismissal is not clear.[93]
In December 1933, the Nazis took their one and only measure against
female students by establishing a numerus clausus of 10 percent for
women. Once again Bäumer supported the decree. Earlier in her career she
had made her name as perhaps the most effective proponent of female
higher education in Germany.[94] Now she felt that declining standards
called for a partial retreat. In any case, in February 1935 the decree was
rescinded. Thus the only female students affected were those in the
graduating class of 1934. And even those women could earn retroactive
credit, provided they wanted to and provided they had been registered with
the university as “listeners.”
By the outbreak of the World War II, the policy of steering women
away from faculties considered unsuitable for them, such as law and
political science, had actually led to a substantial increase in the
proportion of female students in “practical” fields such as pharmacy,
physical education and journalism.[95] By that time, too, the government
had started paying female students who gave birth — whether married or
not — a “delivery allowance” of 50 Reichsmark. That was a privilege
never equaled in any country before or since. From 1939 to 1944 the
proportion of students who were female went up seven-fold, reaching 49.3
percent of the total student body. Many women at the time took the
opportunity to enter nontraditional fields. Women came to dominate the
natural sciences, rising from 10.8 percent to 63.5 percent of all students. In
engineering and technology, the rise was from 0.7 percent to 11.7 percent,
while in medicine women’s representation more than doubled, to 35
percent. In law, the jump was more than six-fold, from 2.5 percent to 16.4
percent.[96] By the end of the war medicine had become women’s favored
field of study, even surpassing the humanities. If there ever was a regime
that did not “steer” its female students toward the “softer” subjects of the
humanities, it was the Nazi Party during the final years of World War II.
In 1933, proportionally far more German women worked than their
American counterparts.[97] At the time Germany, like the rest of the
world, was suffering from the Great Depression. One widely adopted
solution to the problem of unemployment was dismissing women in
double-income families. Austria, Belgium, Britain, France, Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and the United States all
either passed similar measures or contemplated them. In Germany, the
only such bill that made it into the books was passed not by Adolf Hitler,
but by Weimar-era chancellor Heinrich Brüning. That law had little effect,
and few women lost their jobs. Within a year of the Nazi’s rise to power,
attempts to implement it had ended.
By this time whatever ideological reservations the Nazis may have had
concerning the presence of women in the labor force had vanished. As
early as 1932, Joseph Goebbels noted that the Führer regarded woman as
the “comrade” of man at work. “That’s how it has always been, and that’s
how it will ever be... Man is the organizer of life, woman his helpmate and
right hand.”[98] At a later date, he added that, “we would be fools not to
draw on women in the common task of building our nation.”[99] As the
Nazis’ other measures against unemployment began to bear fruit, the
number of women paying social insurance rose from 4.6 million in 1932 to
4.75 million in 1933 and 5.05 million in 1934.[100] By the late 1930s, a
larger percentage of German women were economically active than in any
other European country except France.[101] As in other countries, the
nature of women’s participation in the labor force changed. Increasingly
they were drawn into white-collar occupations such as secretarial work,
communications, commerce and the professions.[102] As has been said,
“five years of Nazi rule in some ways did more to help professional
women than a decade of feminist pressure in the Weimar Republic.”[103]
As in other countries, German women during the Nazi period earned
less than their male colleagues. As in other countries, the main reasons
were the reluctance of their families to invest in their professional
education, as well as their own tendency to drift in and out of the labor
force with interruptions for childbirth and other family obligations. On the
other hand, the authorities in the Third Reich tried harder to protect
women than their opposite numbers in any other country did. One law
prohibited employers from requiring women to work on pedal-operated
machinery. Others prohibited women from working underground, dealing
with poisonous materials or carrying heavy weights. Nor could they be
employed on shift work or night work. In the late 1930s, however, a
shortage of labor forced German employers to woo their female
employees. As a result, their wages rose faster than those of men. Women
began receiving equal wages with men in industries such as textiles,
mines, metal, electronics and bricks. Of this achievement, the Arbeitsfront,
the Nazi trade union, was very proud.[104] There were also arrangements
designed to help working women, including special facilities for mothers
at work, a “birth premium” and a “breastfeeding premium,” as well as free
nursing services, medical treatment and medicine. Many proved so
advanced that they remained part of German law long after 1945.
The man in charge of Germany’s economic preparations for war was
Hermann Göring. Among other measures, he developed plans for
registering women for compulsory labor. It was to no avail, however, as
hundreds of thousands of women found ways of avoiding it. From 1940
onward, other key leaders of the economy and of industry exercised
pressure in the same direction. Again, it was to no avail. As Hitler told his
plenipotentiary for labor, Fritz Sauckell, “long-limbed” German women
were not suited for heavy labor. They could do such work only at very
great physical expense and psychological hardship. As he saw it, during
World War I the state had failed to protect women. It caused them to
undergo “untold suffering,” which in turn damaged morale and contributed
to defeat. That was an error Hitler vowed he would not repeat.
Furthermore, if only because this was something their uniform-wearing
“husbands, fiancées, fathers and brothers had a right to expect,” “at all
costs” working women had to be defended against “maltreatment,
overburdening, insults or moral damage.” Unfortunately, the war did not
permit for protecting women to the full extent appropriate. But looking
forward, “the goal remained to ensure that, in 20 years' time, no woman
would be obliged to work in a factory.”[105]
Social reality reflected these views. With millions of men called up
and unable to help women carry out their domestic tasks, between October
and December 1939 the number of working women declined by 300,000.
By May 1941 there were 500,000 fewer women in the workforce than in
May 1939. One reason for this was that German provisions for
maintaining the families of members of the armed forces were much more
generous than those of other countries. In October 1939, a law was passed
which explicitly permitted soldiers’ wives to stop working. A British wife
with two children received 38 percent of her absent husband’s income,
while an American one received 36 percent. Their German sisters, by
contrast, got 75 percent. Alone among all the belligerents of World War II,
Germany provided pensions to the fiancées of fallen soldiers and also to
the mothers of their illegitimate children.[106]
Later during the war, the trend toward a smaller female labor force
reversed itself. However, the vast majority of newly employed women
found work in public administration, where their numbers rose from
954,000 in May 1939 to 1,746,000 in 1943.[107] Proportionally, there
were fewer German women than Allied women tasked with heavy work in
factories, mines and transportation. And for those who did such labor,
conditions were relatively good. In the United States in 1943, 50 percent
of all employed women worked night shifts; in Germany, the restrictions
against women working late hours were only lifted in January 1944.
Germany also provided far more subsidized kindergarten places for
children of working women than did either the United States or Britain.
[108]
Another reason why German women had it easier in some ways than
their sisters elsewhere was the use of foreign slave laborers. The relative
comforts that German women enjoyed during the war were partly due to
the exploitation of both women and men. There were an estimated
10,000,000 male slave laborers toiling for the Third Reich. Working in
mines and factories, they died like flies. There were also an estimated
2,000,000 female slave laborers. Nearly all these women were taken from
the east; the Germans in the occupied west did not forcibly take women, as
they did men. Of the 2 million female laborers, several hundred thousand
were brought in specifically to assist German women whose menfolk had
been drafted.
While most German women enjoyed the perks of their position, the
regime went to considerable lengths to promote and publicize the exploits
of a few particularly industrious women, as examples for the rest of
society. The best known of them, Leni Riefenstahl, produced the most
famous propaganda films ever made for a political movement. Meanwhile,
at a time when British and American women were only permitted to fly
aircraft on transport missions behind the front, at least three German
women became test pilots. One, Hanna Reitsch, flew the world’s first
helicopter. Another, Melitta Schiller, flew no fewer than 1,500 missions
testing Stuka dive-bombers, as well as test flying the world’s earliest jet
and rocket planes. A third test pilot who flew jets and rockets was Flight
Captain Beate Köstlin. After the war, when she was known as Beate Uhse,
she became rich and famous by establishing a very successful company
dealing in pornography and sexual aids.
How did German women confront the more criminal measures of the
Nazi regime? The answer is that, to the extent that they had the
opportunity, they supported such measures. Some Frauenbünde began
expelling their Jewish members even before they were officially required
to.[109] Later the leaders of the NSF spent considerable energy educating
women on the need to maintain racial purity. And as previously mentioned,
some Frauenbünde long favored compulsory sterilization. Since the
sterilization program depended almost entirely on denunciation, women
were found both among the informers and in the service of the police.
During the war, 40 percent of Gestapo personnel in Vienna, and perhaps in
other cities as well, were female.[110] Often the proceedings were initiated
by female social workers who visited women in their homes.
Female doctors helped examine candidates for sterilization and carried
out some of the operations. Others performed compulsory abortions on
female concentration camp inmates.[111] Female nurses killed thousands
of mentally and physically handicapped people, of all ages. Women, most
of them lower class but including some middle class ones as well,
comprised 10 percent of concentration camp guards. Surviving inmates
remembered them as being particularly vicious. At Auschwitz, female
guards were known to crowd around peepholes to watch as gas chambers
were filled with cyanide and the victims entered their death throes.[112] At
Ravensbrück, a female doctor, Herta Oberheuser, carried out horrific
medical experiments on female inmates.[113] She was not the only Nazi
doctor to do so.
In summary, early on certain Nazi leaders had peculiar ideas
concerning women’s place in society. This did not prevent women from
working for the Party, campaigning for it, and increasingly voting for it.
Later on, far from attacking feminism, Hitler adopted the goals of many of
its leaders, from Bäumer on down. He saw German women as the most
precious asset of the Volk, an asset that had to be protected “at all cost.”
This protection had both negative and positive repercussions. The negative
aspects affected only a very small number of women, mainly in the civil
service, academia and the legal profession. Even so, by 1945 far more
women were studying law than in 1933. In all other respects, Nazi policy
was expressly designed to help women in the field most of them had long
considered their primary occupation, motherhood. Many of the relevant
measures resembled those instituted by other countries during this period.
Most received high praise from German women. Perhaps the only
exception was Lebensborn, which was surrounded by all kinds of unsavory
legends. Its real fault, though, was that it threatened to erase the distinction
between pregnant women who had husbands and those who did not.
As in other countries, the Nazis tried to overcome unemployment by
firing women in double-income families. However, the attempt was halfhearted and went nowhere. Earlier than in other countries, once the
Depression was over the Nazis started encouraging women to take up paid
employment. Less than in other countries during World War II were
German women compelled to enter the labor force. More than in other
countries, those who did enter the labor force were mostly employed in
white-collar work. Meanwhile it was non-German slave laborers, men and
women, who did arduous work in the fields and factories. German women
were protected by various laws and regulations. They also enjoyed
benefits, such as allowances and subsidized kindergartens, which would
have been the envy of their non-German sisters. No wonder most German
women retained their loyalty to Hitler to the very end. Far from being
persecuted, to the extent that they were permitted to they cooperated in
persecuting others.
5. Conclusions
These three myths are but a few of the many modern feminists have spun
to “prove” men’s oppression of women. A detailed examination has shown
that all three are false. As best we can tell, ancient Greek women were not
secluded, either to the home or inside it. The witch craze of the period
between 1500 and 1650 was not simply a mechanism invented by
patriarchy to control women who did not stay in their place. Among other
things, it was often used by women to get at other women, which may be
one reason why the majority of witches were female. Finally, had the
Nazis set out to oppress German women, they would scarcely have
attracted German women’s enthusiastic support. Rather, Nazi policy was
mainly designed to help women perform what they and their own leaders
had long considered their principal task, namely motherhood. In many
ways the policy succeeded in doing exactly that, both in its own right and
in comparison to other countries. As the Nazis themselves pointed out, for
the implementation of racial policies, women’s cooperation with National
Socialism was at least as important as that of men.
In many other cases, too, the notion that female-hating men have
discriminated against women, oppressed them and subordinated them is a
myth. In fact, very often the opposite is the case. In many ways, both
society and nature have conspired to make women’s lives easier than those
of men. Far from being discriminated against, in many ways women have
been and still are exempt from many of the burdens placed on men. This is
true from the moment they are born to the moment they die, to say nothing
of the longer lives they lead in between. To convince him or herself of
these truths, all the reader has to do is to peruse the pages that follow.
Chapter 2: Masculinity and its Troubles
1. The Forgotten Sex
In the wide body of feminist literature, no accusation is more frequently
found than the claim that men tend to treat themselves, and are themselves
treated, as the standard sex against which women are measured. This claim
is not without some basis in fact. In many languages, the term “man” is a
synonym for “human being.” However, there is another side to the coin.
Precisely because men are considered, and consider themselves, standard,
being female is to be put into a niche which is seen as particularly
interesting. Conversely, being male often means that, as a man, one is
taken for granted and one’s very existence is ignored. A search at the
Library of Congress will show that books with the word “women” in their
titles outnumber those with “men” 12 to one. At Amazon.com, there are
four times as many “women’s guides” as men’s. On the same website,
books on “women” and “exercise” outnumber those concerned with men
nearly five to one.
Possibly because so many women do not enjoy sex, the staple fare of
sexology is said to be the “narrative of the (female) orgasm.” By contrast,
“there is little literary concern for the male’s orgasmic experience.”[114] A
major work on female psychology was published by Helene Deutsch in
1944 and remained the standard for several decades. Since then it has been
followed by those of Nancy Chodorow and Carol Gilligan (both 1989),
among others. However, to this day there is no equally authoritative work
on that of men. It is as if male-specific psychological problems do not
exist. Similarly, in the field of education, the body of material on the
special needs of girls can only be called staggering. But when it comes to
those of boys, the silence is almost deafening. As one female historian has
written, given that there is no book on ancient Egyptian men, a reader
might question the justification of writing one on ancient Egyptian women.
[115] Needless to say, that observation did not prevent said female
historian from going right ahead with the book.
In part, the neglect of men may be traced to institutional arrangements
that discriminate against them. Before the advent of so-called “second-
wave feminism” around 1970, this was because men were taken for
granted. What everybody knows, or believes he or she knows, does not
need to be studied. Since then it has been done by design, as part of the
campaign against “patriarchy,” which threatens to turn any attempt to
focus on men’s needs and men’s requirements into a court case. Whenever
fewer women than men study a subject, then this fact is immediately seen
as a problem. However, when fewer men take up a subject than women, as
is the situation in fields such as foreign languages, most of the liberal arts,
and some of the social sciences, nobody seems to care. As one author has
written,[116] a visitor from outer space exploring our libraries and our
academic life might be excused for concluding that there exists only one
gender: the female one.
This chapter will argue that, in fact, becoming and being a man is
much harder than becoming and being a woman. I start with a brief
summary of the bio-psychological basis of the problem from the moment
of conception on. Next, I examine the way men compete for and support
women, as well as some of the consequences of their failing to do so. Next
I show the way society, claiming to prepare young men for the greater
burdens that they will have to carry as adults, makes their lives harder still.
The last section sums up these problems and explains how, on top of
everything else, men are prohibited from talking to others about these very
same problems.
2. The Bio-Psychological Basis
Why has nature created two sexes instead of one? Today most biologists
would answer that the function of sexual reproduction is to enable each
generation to create new life.[117] Life is seen as a process of
deterioration, as some genes undergo spontaneous mutation and develop
anomalies. Others suffer damage from ultra-violet light. By recombining
two strands of DNA, each of them originating in a different parent, sex
causes the errors to be canceled out, much as one can make a new car by
dismantling two wrecks and joining the undamaged parts from both.
To form a new organism, two sex cells, each with half the normal
number of chromosomes, must merge. Next, sufficient nutrition must be
provided to carry the zygote through the earliest phase of life. In theory,
the two requirements could be met by two cells coming from two different
organisms, each of which is equally mobile (for seeking out the other) and
equally nutritious. This solution, known as isogamy, is found in certain
mushrooms. However, it is like building an aircraft that is both a transport
plane and a high-performance fighter. The resulting hybrid is unlikely to
fill either function very well. Like aircraft, the overwhelming majority of
sexually reproducing species have developed differently. Some of the
parent organisms produce small, mobile sex cells (sperm) and are known
as males. Others produce larger, less mobile but more nutritious cells
(eggs) and are known as females.
It is the female that is the primary sex. He exists to service her, not the
other way around. Since the blueprint of every fetus is either female or
sexually undifferentiated, the Bible got it wrong. Males are built on a
female chassis, so to speak. To be formed into a male organism requires an
extraordinary event: namely, the appearance from somewhere of a Y
chromosome that will trigger the process. Otherwise the zygote, taking the
path of least resistance, will develop into a female.[118] Nor is conception
the end of the story. In many species, such as turtles and crocodiles, the
sex of the young is determined by the temperature at which the eggs are
incubated. Here, too, nature is said to show “a striking female bias.”[119]
With humans, even though a Y chromosome is present, hormonal
disturbances can still result in the baby looking and behaving like a
female. So hard is it to become a male that, in all species for which
information is available, once the sex of the fetus is determined, more
males than females are aborted.[120]
Biologically speaking, becoming female is taking the path of least
resistance. Since society permits girls to follow straight in their mothers’
footsteps, psychologically speaking becoming female also means taking
the path of least resistance. Like girls, boys are born to women and spend
the first years of childhood under their care. Unlike girls, boys must at
some point renounce their mothers, start identifying with their fathers and
grow into men. This may be because the father threatens them with
castration, as Freud thought. Or it may be because the mother is seen as
big and threatening.[121] Or, as some feminists have claimed, it may be
because boys, forced to witness the sufferings their fathers inflict on their
mothers, will do whatever it takes not to share them.[122] One way or
another, men labor under an Oedipus complex. On pain of remaining
forever in a state of childhood, they must resolve it; doing so may be the
hardest thing they are called on to do in their lives.
Since a single male can impregnate a very large number of females,
the great majority of males are not needed to begin with. Once they have
donated their sperm, they are needed even less. All this suggests, in the
words of one biologist, that males are nature’s way of creating additional
females, and a rather wasteful one at that.[123] In reality, all that is needed
are a syringe and a few cubic centimeters of semen. Should current
experiments with fertilizing eggs with DNA taken from other eggs be
extended from mice to humans, soon we will not even need that. The fact
that the necessary techniques were invented by men merely adds offense to
injury. It is as if each time men try to help women along, men only make
themselves more superfluous.
Male dispensability is most obvious in the case of the mantis and the
black spider. The females of these species actually eat the males even as
they copulate with them. In addition to donating his sperm, the male also
gives away the rest of his protein. Where mammals are concerned, nature’s
solutions are less radical and less deadly. However, the same principles
apply. Whether male animals understand their own dispensability, we do
not yet understand. Yet the spectacle of young males of some mammals,
such as baboons and zebras, sacrificing themselves to defend females and
their young suggests that, at some level, they do. Among humans the fact
that “man is the unfruitful animal,” in the word of Friedrich Nietzsche, is
evident to all. In many cultures, it is hammered in from infancy on. Even
as children, girls are told they will one day have babies, whereas boys are
told they must become men.[124]
As if to confirm this line of argument, a society consisting solely of
women is not only conceivable but has often been conceived.[125]
Consider the myth of the ancient Amazons. For our purposes, the most
important “fact” about them was not that they were warriors “equivalent to
men” and capable of fighting and conquering them. Rather, it is that they
lived on their own without men. Just how they managed to do this and still
have offspring was the subject of several legends, most of them dating to a
comparatively late period.[126] So powerful was the impact of the
Amazon legend on people’s imagination that it led to countless imitations.
Thus, Mary E. Bradley in Mizora (1890) describes a world of blond,
powerful, Brunhildes whose discovery of “the Secret of Life” permitted
them to eliminate all men.[127] In Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland
(1915), women, having somehow rid themselves of “their brutal [male]
conquerors,” lead an isolated life on an Amazonian plateau. At first they
expected their race would perish, owing to a lack of offspring. But thanks
to some unforeseen miracle, not only did they start reproducing by
parthenogenesis, the resulting offspring consisted solely of females.[128]
The second wave of feminism in the 1960s and 1970s generated a
fresh crop of such tales. In Joanna Russ’ The Female Man (1975),[129]
most men were killed by a mysterious disease that affected only their
gender. The rest were dispatched by Jaël, a man-hating fury with
retractable steel fingernails. Children were created by bringing ova
together. In The Wanderground (1978), Sally Gearhart achieved the same
feat by “implantment” and “egg merging.” Children had the good fortune
of being brought up not by one mother but by seven.[130] Other women’s
utopias suggest that children be brought up by machines, so as to leave
their mothers free to attend to their own spiritual development. In fact, it is
not impossible that one day the sperm-less fertilization of eggs — based
on triggering the genetic code present in any cell of the body — will
become a reality.[131]
Until such advances are realized, it might occur to women to keep a
few men around in cages for the purpose of reproduction, as well as for
sexual enjoyment. Gearhart suggested that they be limited to 10 percent of
the population. Monique Wittig, for her part, was prepared to let a few
men live.[132] Provided, that is, they accepted a feminist society of
primitive communism, laid no claim to any children they might beget, and
wore their hair long. Other feminist visionaries suggested that men be
given injections to induce lactation, or else be taught a Pavlov-like
response to “the sweet pealing of bells” so as to produce an erection on
demand.[133]
Male writers, by contrast, have hardly ever sought to rid the world of
women, partly because they realized that women are indispensable and
partly because they liked them so much. Men’s greater need for women
may be a function of the reproductive mechanism itself.[134] The
difference in size between egg and cell varies, but the egg is always far
bigger, six to twelve orders of magnitude bigger, and sometimes even
more. Hence each egg requires the female to make a vastly greater
investment than each spermatozoid requires from the male. This applies
even if one calculates in terms of complete ejaculations. A human male
during his lifespan can ejaculate thousands of times. However, a woman
will only ovulate some 400 times. Of those eggs, only a small proportion
will be fertilized, whereas the rest will be lost in a natural way. The largest
number of children known to have been begot by a single man, an early
19th
-century king of Morocco by the name of Ismail the Bloodthirsty, is
700, daughters not included. But no woman on record ever had more than
69 children; the lady in question was a Russian who specialized in triplets.
[135]
Add the need to gestate the new organism, and the difference becomes
so vast that it can hardly even be calculated. Most healthy men short of
middle age can have sex at least once a day, possibly leading to additional
offspring. Each time a woman has sex, however, there is a chance that she
will become pregnant. Once she does, her ability to conceive will be out of
action for at least nine months. Even after delivery has taken place, the
mother will remain infertile for as long as she lactates. Depending on the
society, that period can last from a few months to three years. The
relatively small number of times she can conceive during her lifetime, and
her vast investment in each child both before and after birth, give her the
strongest possible interest to ensure that each one will survive and grow to
maturity. This causes women to be “stingy with their vaginas,” as tribal
wisdom in Papua-New Guinea puts it.[136] Experiments show that men
are much more ready to seek pleasure in the arms of strangers.[137] The
same applies to the males of other mammalian species.[138]
Society’s arrangement for regulating sexual behavior is known as
marriage. However, marriage means different things for people of each
sex. As proven by both surveys and the existence in Western societies of
an immense industry surrounding brides, women who marry are following
their inclinations and fulfilling their dreams.[139] Not so men, who have
little to gain by an arrangement whose purpose is to limit them to one or,
in non-Western societies, a few women; and who might indeed stand a
better chance of evolutionary survival if they remained single. The
imbalance explains why a magazine entitled Groom and devoted to selling
top hats and striped pants has not yet been invented. Instead, we witness
stag parties that provide a last fling at sexual freedom; or, in the form of a
stripper, a third-rate imitation of it.
Much has been written about female fear of intercourse and the
physical and mental consequences that may follow if initiation is not
carried out as it should. This is to overlook the other side of the coin,
which is no less important.[140] In having sex, as in so much else, a
woman is permitted to participate passively. Indeed, in most societies
women were traditionally required to do so; any movement on her part
was considered unladylike, and liable to decrease the chance of
conception. Not so men, who are expected to perform and without whose
performance the act cannot take place at all. As Betty Friedan, a selfproclaimed “bitch” not otherwise known for her solicitude for men, wrote
in her memoirs: “It would be terrible to have that pressure [of getting it up]
all the time.”[141] The result is that men approach the first encounter, and
by no means only the first one, with fear and trepidation. Wishing to avoid
contempt, they cannot admit ignorance to people of either sex. Often they
are driven to lie about their level of experience.
Focusing all its attention on the difficulties faced by girls, modern
society demands that boys cope on their own. Not so previous ones, which
paid much attention to the problem and tried to deal with it in ways which,
however misguided they may seem to some of us, at any rate show that it
was taken seriously.[142] Often they made special arrangements for young
men. In some societies, boys received instruction from their elders, as
among Orthodox Jews to the present day.[143] In other cultures, boys were
initiated by an experienced older woman. She might be an unmarried
servant who lived with the family, or else a prostitute. In France, Italy,
Spain and Latin America, it was customary for fathers to take their
adolescent sons to a brothel so as to spare them future embarrassment. In
Thomas Mann’s Royal Highness, which describes the way these things
were done among the upper classes in late 19th
-century Germany, a royal
charge is brought by his tutor to a friend’s mistress, who receives in return
a memento.
Failure to perform in bed may mark a man’s life just as much as it does
a woman’s. More so, in fact, since the one thing more likely to attract
opprobrium than an anorgasmic woman is an impotent man. Whereas the
former can be and often is concealed, the latter may not. A woman who
blames her failure to enjoy sex on her husband will likely be commiserated
with. But a man who accuses a woman of “castrating” him will be
ridiculed. The difference may explain why, even in societies where divorce
was hard to get, a woman whose husband could not fulfill his “marital
duty” was usually able to obtain it if she could prove her claim. Medieval
and early modern court records document the methods used to obtain the
proof; one hardly needs to explain how humiliating, even self-defeating,
they were.
Even if everything goes as it should, a man will find woman’s sexual
capability superior in some respects. Whatever she may feel, she is always
ready. She may come and come, whereas he cannot. Add the problem of
premature ejaculation, said to afflict 30 percent of men, and it becomes
understandable why, for many of them, the gap in performance represents
a constant source of anxiety. The anxiety may turn out to be all too
justified. One Cosmopolitan magazine poll showed that about half of its
married female readers had had an affair. Since Cosmo readers tend to be
young, this probably underestimates the likelihood that a woman will have
an extramarital fling at some point during her life.[144]
Worse still for husbands, research suggests that women are more likely
to conceive when they commit adultery than when they have sex in their
marriage bed.[145] DNA tests show that between 5 percent and 30 percent
of babies born to American and British married women are sired by men
other than their husbands.[146] In Germany, the figure is said to be
approximately 10 percent. Since the law only allows the results to be used
as evidence if the tests have been carried out with the woman’s consent,
this is likely to be an underestimate.[147] Not for nothing is the identity of
Jewish children always determined by way of their mothers. Not for
nothing are attempts to change this rule meeting with determined
opposition by from Orthodox rabbis. They fear, and with very good
reason, that in case paternity tests are carried out the number of Jewish
children will undergo a dramatic decline.[148]
In summary, simply becoming male is a risky enterprise. Even when it
is successfully accomplished, men remain the superfluous sex both before
coitus and after it. Of this fact, most men are acutely aware. The outcome
has been an entire literature on worlds without men; whereas the number
of attempts to create women-less worlds is very near zero. As Darwin
argued, biological factors make women pickier in having sex than men.
[149] Since men will feel a stronger urge to have sex with as many women
as possible, marriage itself entails a much greater sacrifice for them than
for women, especially where monogamy is the rule. With or without
marriage, “phallic power is an unrelenting treadmill that threatens to
collapse at any moment.”[150]And finally, woman’s sexual performance is
superior to men’s to say nothing of her ability to have offspring whose
paternity could rarely, until recently, be established with any certainty.
3. Compete and Provide
In all animals, male sex cells must seek out the less mobile female ones,
either inside the body, as with mammals, or outside it, as with fish. Heaven
forbid lest this be understood as proof that female sex cells are less
“active” than male ones; rather, the kind of activity they engage in is
different. Spermatozoids compete as they try to reach the eggs. Eggs stay
in place, using finger-like structures on their walls, to “decide” which ones
to admit and which to refuse. Thus, for male sex cells life itself starts with
a competition; out of tens of millions that enter the race, just one will live.
To deposit their sperm, males must first compete to gain access to one
or more fertile females and monopolize them insofar as is possible. The
mathematics of the competition varies by species, but the principle itself is
widespread. Male ants and bees compete with each other for the queen.
Many kinds of male fish compete for the females’ attention by chasing
them and displaying brilliant colors. Many kinds of male birds and
mammals do the same. Many develop special displays such as canine
teeth, manes, antlers or brilliant colors. Always it is the female who, unless
she is raped (which is not entirely unknown among animals either)[151]
stands and watches. The competition over, she will express her approval
by mating with the victor.
The male imperative to compete for females often comes at a heavy
cost. In some mammals, such as kangaroos, mountain sheep, deer and sea
elephants, it leads to fights that can result in life-threatening injuries. At a
minimum, the loser can expect a drop in status as well as eviction from the
most favorable feeding grounds, leading to a shortened life expectancy.
Moreover, sexual selection often operates at cross-purposes with other
evolutionary forces.[152] A male who develops disproportionately sized
organs, or displays brilliant color, or emits certain sounds, may well lose
some of his mobility or become more vulnerable to predators. Trying to
attract a female, in other words, may cost him his life.
Furthermore, developing organs or engaging in activities whose sole
purpose is sexual display can be very expensive in terms of biological
resources. Famous examples are the peacock’s tail and the stag’s antlers,
which have to be shed and re-grown each year.[153] Males, in other
words, present their biological fitness by engaging in types of display that
are not essential for survival;[154]the greater the biological cost of a color
or organ, the more it proves the owners’ ability to bear that cost. The
human analogy is a man who drives a shiny new Mercedes. Though such a
car is not essential for transportation, it demonstrates its owner’s clout in a
way that a humble Chevy or Volkswagen never could. By driving his
Mercedes, the owner is telling the world that he commands a financial
surplus one which, women hope, he will share with them and their
offspring.
In almost all cultures, a man must invest in a woman in order to attract
and keep her. To attract and keep a man, a woman must invest in herself.
[155] Few if any men can make their way simply by virtue of their looks
or by being good at socializing. Those who do are labeled as hustlers. Not
so women, for whom beauty is often the fastest way to advance and for
whom social skills may be enough to maintain their lifestyle. In American
department stores, the square footage dedicated to women’s accessories,
jewelry and cosmetics is seven times that allotted for comparable men’s
products.[156] Not by accident, most magazines that deal with selfenhancement are read by women.[157]Not by accident, most of those
which explain how to get ahead are read by men. How exactly a man
succeeds is immaterial the reward is always women with parted lips
and deep cleavages. Thus competition among men, even if it involves selfenhancement as in the case of bodybuilding, will end up by leading them
toward giving. In the end, men will be measured largely by their pockets.
By contrast, competition among women consists mainly of selfenhancement. The purpose of such efforts is to make a man pay for
them an act that is by definition egocentric.
In many societies, control over a woman’s reproductive capacities
rests with her family. A young woman may give herself to a man out of
infatuation, as Julia did to Romeo. Not so her parents or other relatives,
who are much more likely to have practical considerations in mind. The
legends of many peoples tell of rulers who organized competitions for
their daughters’ hand. In the Irish epic The Tain, the hero Cuchulainn must
kill 24 men — and risk being killed by each of them — to gain the right to
travel the “sweet country” of his beloved’s breasts. Later in the epic, a
woman, Medb, promises her daughter to seven different suitors
simultaneously, a case of fraud if there ever one was.[158] Many of the
men who lost the competitions ended up being killed in a variety of exotic
ways. Nor are situations in which women were bestowed, or bestowed
themselves, on the best fighters limited to myth. As long ago as ancient
Rome, successful gladiators received the same kind of attention from
women as today’s soccer stars. In many tribal societies, and by no means
only tribal societies, warriors are able to translate their prowess into sexual
favors, whether temporary ones before the wedding or permanent ones
after it.
Another way in which men are made to compete for women is brideservice. The biblical Jacob was made to serve Laban for seven years
before obtaining the latter’s daughter Leah, and another seven before
finally obtaining his true love, Rachel. In our own day, bride-service
continues to be practiced by many black African tribes, as well as in parts
of Oceania and Australia. It may be of a symbolic nature and last for just
one day, as among the Ngondi of Rhodesia and the Baganda of Kenya. It
may also last as many as 20 years and drain away a man’s resources, as
among the Goba of the Zambezi Valley.[159] The period in question is
stipulated in advance and starts years before the wedding can take place.
Nor is there any guarantee that the young man will get what he wants,
since either the woman or her parents may change their mind.
Some see bride-service and brides-wealth as a system old men use to
control younger ones. Others think it is meant to reassure “insecure”
husbands that their wives will not run away during the earliest stages of
marriage.[160] Focusing on Japan, others see a link between the low rate
of divorce in the country and the fact that, ere a wedding can take place,
the groom or his family must fork out as much as 30,000 (1999) dollars.
[161] Whatever the explanation may be, in all societies it is men, not
women, who must work and pay to marry. In this, as in so many other
ways, they are humanity’s beasts of burden. Not only did Cuchulainn have
to risk his life 24 times, he also had to perform “the salmon’s leap” while
carrying “twice his weight in gold.”[162]
Stimulated and abetted by women, the competition is likely to shape a
man’s entire life. The winner may gain power, riches and a rise in his selfesteem. However, even for the victor the rewards are bittersweet. The very
qualities needed to win, such as aggression, craftiness and ruthlessness, are
likely to isolate the victorious ones, making it almost impossible for them
to have real relationships with either men or women. Often the man at the
top is the one who has the fewest friends. Joseph Stalin, to cite one
example, was perhaps the most powerful man who ever lived. He made
even his closest Soviet cronies cringe, and abroad he achieved the same
effect by threatening to use his 500 army divisions and, later, atom bombs.
Contrast that with the Stalin shown in a documentary film watching a
private performance by a famous ballerina, glass of vodka in hand. After
the show he did not even bother to sleep with her; after all, doing so would
not have proved anything.
For Stalin and his ilk, providing for the family was no problem.
However, for many other men, then and now, doing so presents the hardest
thing they will do in their lives. Some, but by no means all, male birds are
monogamous and feed their females during courtship or while the latter
are roosting.[163] Even among such birds, however, this is a temporary
arrangement, not one that lasts throughout their life. By contrast, the males
of most mammalian species simply wander off after they mate, having
provided their offspring with nothing but their genes. Only a few,
including gorillas, gibbons and saddleback tamarin monkeys, provide any
form of paternal care at all. Yet even this consists of little more than
playing with the young, if and when the males are in the right mood to do
so. In no primate except man is there any question of the father providing
for his offspring.
Compared with the size of their mothers’ bodies, human babies are
enormous. This fact, plus the fact that bipedalism caused the human birth
canal to become relatively narrower than that of any other mammal, made
giving birth both difficult and dangerous.[164] Once delivery has taken
place the newborn of no other mammalian species is more helpless or
takes a longer time to raise. This is true both absolutely and in relation to
the overall life span. Even the most precocious youngsters, living in the
simplest societies, will hardly complete the process before entering their
mid-teens.[165] Almost certainly this is why our hunting-gathering
ancestors developed the arrangement, found in no other species, by which
males provide long-term economic support not only to their offspring but
to the mothers as well.
To this day, all other things being equal, a mother or father who tries to
raise children by herself or himself faces a severe handicap. He or she will
find it much harder to raise healthy, well-adjusted children.[166] To help
women cope, men’s support of them has been made essentially permanent.
It lasts from the wedding to the grave, and beyond. Regardless of whether
marriage is monogamous or polygynous or polyandrous, regardless of
whether it takes place among hunter-gatherers or in a post-industrial
society, regardless of whether those who enter into it are Christian or
Muslim or Buddhist or animist, regardless of time, place and culture with
perhaps the sole exception of the short-lived Communist experiment, it has
almost universally meant that one male supports one (or sometimes more)
women and their offspring. The exception, polyandry, is found in less than
1 percent of societies. In the vast majority of cases, men marry one or
more women. Having done so, they are expected to give up much, perhaps
most, of their subsistence to them. For most modern Western men,
abandoning their families will result in increasing their dispensable income
by as much as three quarters.[167] In the whole of nature, there is no
arrangement that is more demanding and more altruistic.
Given the immense burden under which they labor, it is hardly
surprising that some men find it hard to deal with life all of the time, or
that nearly all find it hard to deal with life some of the time. Depending on
culture and personal inclination, a range of solutions to the problem have
arisen. Several such solutions will be discussed here, in the order of the
danger they pose, both to men themselves and to society.
First there is fantasy. It can take many forms, from reading the Iliad to
playing a computer game. At all times and places, both men and women
have dreamt of he-men, albeit for different reasons. What he wants to be,
she wants to have. From the Roman games through medieval tournaments
to the modern-day Super Bowl, the function of spectator sports has been
similar. They provide men with heroes with whom to identify themselves,
thus taking attention away from reality, at least temporarily.
Pornography, too, can be understood as a subspecies of fantasy. Often
it is used by men who feel unable to obtain the women whom they want,
establishing a kind of universe in which they are all-seeing, all-knowing
and all-powerful.[168] It may also represent an attempt to penetrate the
mystery of womanhood — “the great gulf of nothingness,” as American
author Henry Miller once put it[169] — or to stimulate a flagging
performance in bed. It is true that women resort to pornography as well,
sometimes in the company, or at the insistence, of men whose interest they
hope to stimulate in this way. However, one need only go to the nearest
newsstand to see that the number of those who do so is much smaller than
that of men. Gay pornography is plentiful and has often resulted in the
most magnificent art.[170] Lesbian pornography, by contrast, hardly
exists. Nor, if psychoanalysts are to be believed, do women respond to
pornography in the same way. In particular, they do not seem particularly
keen on scenes in which force and compulsion are used.[171]
Another solution is crime. All over the world, far more men than
women become criminals. To cite but one example, in Britain during the
1990s men committed 84 percent of all recorded crimes, 92 percent of
violent ones and 97 percent of burglaries. By the time they were 25 years
old, one-quarter of all men had been convicted of one offense or another.
[172] The question is why.[173] Part of the answer may be biological and
rooted in men’s hormones. However, many sociologists believe that the
criminal propensities of young men reflect the greater difficulties they face
in trying to find their place in the world. As we shall see in the next
section, men’s greater criminality may also reflect the harsher treatment
they receive at the hands of society from the moment they are born.
Men’s problems may be compounded by the fact that modern urban
life does not allow them to fully take advantage of their most important
advantage over women: their physical courage and prowess. In simpler
societies, these qualities enable males to establish adult status. Presented
with hard if not impossible goals, handicapped as to the means that they
may use to attain them, and branded as wimps or losers if they do not
succeed, it is scant wonder that some of them turn to illegal ways. All
other things being equal, the less affluent their background, the more likely
this is to be the case. Conversely the need to have money to spend on girls
is said to be one of the driving engines behind the drug trade.[174]
One crime that needs to be discussed in this context is rape.[175] In
the case of people who know each other — so-called date rape — the cry
of “rape” may result from a misunderstanding. The importance of this fact
consists in that even the most determined female opponents of rape admit
that 50 percent of the women in question were attacked by people whom
they knew.[176] Some studies put the figure much higher. A man may
have what he thought was consensual sex with a woman and parted from
her on the most friendly of terms, only to find himself accused of rape the
next day, or even years later. No wonder that, according to police officers
with experience in the matter, virtually all of those arrested for this crime
seem to be very surprised to hear the accusations directed at them.[177] In
some cases, the charge of rape means no more than that a woman asked for
sex and was rejected. Think of the biblical Joseph and Potiphar’s wife. As
one female scholar put it, false allegations are “an old, old female
strategy.”[178]
Even taking these possibilities into account, there are undoubtedly
cases when rape means just that. Both American and British reports claim
that the vast majority of rapists are single, working-class, unskilled and
unemployed.[179] If this is true, then rape may well be a method by which
unsuccessful men gain access to women who despise them and who do not
want to have sex with them. In other cases, especially those involving
violence and various kinds of sadistic acts, rape may represent a way for a
man to use a woman to avenge himself on other women.[180] Whatever
the motive, very often rape points to the perpetrator’s inability to attract
love, his insecurity, his dissatisfaction and his powerlessness.[181]
The final option men have is to give up on life. When statistics on
suicide began to be collected during the 19th century, it was found that men
were more likely to cause their own death than women. Other men may
waste away, as is perhaps best told in Herman Melville’s short story,
“Bartleby the Scrivener.”[182] Bartleby, a copywriter working on Wall
Street, one day stops working and caring for himself. His condition starts
deteriorating, much to the horror of his employer, who acts as the narrator
and whose own gloom increases as he tells the tale. Having resisted his
boss’ entreaties to pull himself together, Bartleby ends his life curled up in
“The Tombs,” as the Manhattan Detention Complex was nicknamed at the
time.[183] There, refusing to eat, he dies of starvation. The story has likely
struck a chord with many men in the century and a half since it was
published. Men’s lot in life is endless hard work whose fruits will be
consumed largely by others. The more men bring in, the greater the
demands. Should men fail, they may lose both what they made and those
to whom they gave it. Perhaps the most terrifying thing about Melville’s
story is that, at times, Bartleby’s behavior and fate can tempt even the most
active and successful man.
In the end, the only way men can escape their burden is to grow old. In
Plato’s Republic, it is an old man, Cephalus, who opens the discussion.
Responding to a question, he explains how glad he is to be rid of the
“raging and savage” passion of sex;[184] at long last, he is able to live a
quiet life and sacrifice to the gods. Similarly, in Chinese art, a famous
motif is that of bald, fat, smiling, old men sitting comfortably in the lotus
position. They have reached a point where they have nothing to worry
about except eating as much as they please; in the best examples of the
genre, they almost seem to be floating in the air. But then reaching such a
comfortable old age depends on the ability to shoulder the burden and
survive the competition. Among humans, as among apes,[185] the road to
tranquility is littered with male corpses.
To sum up, the mathematics of reproduction turned women into the
choosy sex. The same mathematics created in men a desperate need to
possess women and compete for them. Hundreds of thousands of years of
evolution have firmly programmed this competiveness into their genes.
[186] The competition is especially ferocious in polygamous societies
which, historically speaking, have always formed the great majority. In
such cultures, many men may only be able to marry late, if at all. Starting
soon after puberty, the competition lasts during most of their adult life. It
may take the form of fighting, or of working, or of payment. Irrespective
of the form it takes, in almost all cases it will involve the burden of
economic support. Whether in terms of risk, resources, wealth or health,
the price men pay for engaging in this competition is staggering. No
wonder that, in some cases, they either resort to unconventional means or
simply drop out.
4. Growing Up Male
In everything except pregnancy, delivery and lactation, men are the sex
with the heavier burdens to bear. As youths they must be more or less
forcibly separated from their mothers so that they may grow into the adult
male role — uprooted from the maternal paradise, as one psychiatrist has
put it.[187] Next they will find themselves doomed to compete against
other men for the favors of women, whether in terms of risk-taking and
achievement or by providing them with economic support. In a certain
sense, they will always remain the superfluous sex. Like an erection,
manhood cannot be taken for granted, but must be reasserted until old age
makes it irrelevant. Given all this, how does society treat men? Does it
assist them and smooth their way? Or, to the contrary, does it place even
more obstacles in their path?
First, the dreaded break with the mother. Listen to Simone de
Beauvoir: the child, she says, can expect “a second weaning, less brutal
and more gradual than the first... the boys especially are little by little
denied the kisses and caresses they have been used to. As for the little girl,
she continues to be cajoled, she is allowed to cling to her mother’s skirts,
her father takes her on his knee and strokes her hair. She wears sweet little
dresses, her tears and caprices are viewed indulgently, her hair is done up
carefully, older people are amused at her expressions and coquetries —
bodily contacts and agreeable glances protect her against the anguish of
solitude. The little boy, in contrast, will be denied even coquetry; his
efforts at enticement, his play-acting, are irritating. He is told that ‘a man
doesn’t ask to be kissed... A man doesn’t look at himself in mirrors... A
man doesn’t cry. He is urged to be ‘a little man;’ he will obtain adult
approval by becoming independent of adults. He will please them by not
appearing to please them.” “Many boys,” she continues, “frightened by the
hard independence they are condemned to, wish they were girls.” No
wonder that “certain of them held obstinately to the choice of femininity,
even to the point of urinating in a sitting position.”[188]
The process of gender differentiation starts even before birth. Told that
they are pregnant with boys, women are much more likely to report the
fetus’ stirrings as “vigorous” than those carrying girls.[189] The greater
vigor ascribed to boys may explain why, as infants, they are much more
likely to be restrained, disparaged, threatened and ordered about.[190]
Later on, parents are more likely to push boys to actively explore their
surroundings and, in so doing, take a certain amount of risk.[191] The
male young of many other species face similar pressures; perhaps the
method of making greater demands on males is built into our genes.[192]
By contrast, girls tend to be sheltered against danger of every kind, be it
climbing trees, using swings, riding bicycles or going out alone at night.
They are also more likely to enjoy better living conditions than boys. In
Britain, for example, class by class boys are more likely than girls to suffer
from overcrowding, lack of amenities and poor psychological support.
[193] Nor are boys slow to understand either the fact that parents make life
harder for them or the rationale behind this fact. By the time they are 4
years old, research shows, they already want to be “tough.”[194]
Worse still for boys, should they be perceived as “difficult,” which is
often synonymous with “vigorous,” then the difference in their treatment
will increase accordingly.[195] The same behavior which may cause adults
to support and comfort a female toddler may cause them to chastise or
discipline a male one. Conversely, failure to perform is much more likely
to be tolerated in girls but denounced, combated and punished in boys.
Boys are also four times as likely to have their aggressive acts responded
to by teachers as are girls.[196] In the words of one psychologist, for them
“the cycle of child difficulty and... responsiveness is more robust.”[197]
All these are merely euphemisms for saying that, starting practically at
birth, males are proportionally much more likely to get a push than a hug.
Many societies use initiation rites to separate boys from their mothers.
As some tribespeople put it, the objective is to excise their “female
substance.”[198] Accordingly, as long as women do not share in them, the
precise nature of the rites does not matter much. The first step may be to
take the novices from their mother’s hut and prohibit them from ever
entering it again.[199] Next they are brought to a hallowed place outside
the village, or else locked into a house that no woman may enter. There
they will be presented with male “secrets” they must never afterward
divulge, even to the women who are nearest and dearest to them.[200]
Having graduated, the youngsters are presented with special clothing,
ornaments and implements that henceforth mark their new status as men.
[201]
A second, and closely related, aspect of initiation is to test the boys’
mettle prior to granting them full male status. As carried out in countless
societies around the world,[202] they may have to endure humiliation by
having their hair, and sometimes pubic hair, shaved. They may be made to
strike ludicrous poses, recite self-mocking formulae, or strip naked in front
of their elders. Other ordeals may include subjection to hunger, thirst, cold
and sleep deprivation, or having one’s bodies cut, mutilated and tattooed at
the cost of “terrible” pain.[203] In Papua New Guinea, the men of some
tribes were known to climb a tower, have a rope tied to their legs, and then
plunge downward head first. The rite is said to be the origin of bungee
jumping, but the traditional practice was hardly as safe as the modern one,
making the plunge a test of mettle indeed.
In many places around the world, the focal point of male initiation
consists of circumcision or some other form of genital mutilation. Except
among Jews, usually the ceremony is carried out on boys ranging in age
from 6 to 12. Since the objective is to prove that the boy can endure the
operation without flinching, it is deliberately made painful. Should he fail
the test, he will disgrace both himself and his family. Tribal women in
Australia told one researcher that they would refuse to marry a man who
had not undergone it.[204] One 19th
-century visitor to Arabia claimed to
have witnessed a ceremony whereby a youth, standing straight, had the
skin of his penis peeled off in the presence of his bride. Crouching and
playing a drum, she had the right to refuse him if he so much as stirred or
moaned.[205]
In the literature, first-hand accounts of female initiation rites are
comparatively hard to come by. Those that do exist suggest that they tend
to be comparatively mild affairs. There is little humiliation — the most a
girl may be required to do is to strip in the presence of other women. Nor
is there any question of inflicting pain. Usually all that takes place is that
the initiate, having menstruated for the first time, is secluded for a few
days. When she emerges she is washed, anointed and presented with
female articles of dress and decoration that henceforth mark her status as a
marriable woman.[206] Some societies mark and mutilate the female
genitals in various ways. However, once again there is a crucial difference
between the sexes. Whatever its purpose may be, female circumcision is
not meant as a test of character or strength. Those who undergo it are
permitted, even expected, to scream like hell.
In places as far apart as Imperial China, medieval Egypt and Christian
Europe from the early Middle Ages onward, high class boys aged 6 to 8
were often assigned to special institutions. The institutions were likely to
be military, or monastic, or some combination of the two. Modern schools
of this type often resemble prisons or concentration camps. They come
complete with barred windows, assembly grounds, walls and fortified
gates. Candidates may be made to undergo tests of courage, endurance, or
both. For example, Nazi schools for the elite made admission of 12-year
old boys conditional on their swimming 10 meters from one gap to another
under the ice.[207] Never in history has anything similar been demanded
of girls.
Once admitted, the boys were humiliated by having their hair shaved,
being dressed in strange and uncomfortable clothes, and the like.
Regardless of whether their vocation was religious or military, these
ordeals were followed by years of training. Some of the training was
corporal, including sleep deprivation, forced fasting, physical punishment
and strenuous exercise. To this was (and is) added mental exercises such as
meditation, mastering foreign languages, learning difficult or
incomprehensible texts by heart, and repeated confession of one’s most
intimate thoughts. And in addition to all that, there was always constant
supervision, denial of privacy and harassment. So rough was the Spartan
agoge, or education course for males, that Artistotle thought it was more
suitable for beasts than for men. Then as now, many of the exercises
served no purpose except creating hardship pure and simple. This was
done both as a means of “character building” — itself often a euphemism
for abuse — and to help students bond with each other and the institution.
Other boys often had to undergo some kind of schooling as well. Now
that most modern countries have adopted coeducation, schools may not
appear as particularly threatening institutions. But historically, in schools
intended for boys alone, the situation was often quite different. In both
Greece and Rome, “the leaders of youth,” who were either slaves or
freedmen, made liberal use of the stick to force what knowledge they
possessed into the heads of their charges. In ancient art, the rod became the
schoolmaster’s trademark. Exaggerating as was his wont, the Roman poet
Martial compared the noise of beatings to “that of bronze being beaten on
an anvil when a smith makes an equestrian statue for some orator”, as well
as to the cheers of a crowd in the amphitheater.[208] In medieval England,
schoolboys were known as “unbroken young colts” and were regularly
beaten.[209] One of those who experienced this kind of discipline first
hand was Erasmus of Rotterdam (1466-1536). Later he wrote an entire
book on the need to abolish it.
Partly because they were regarded as less difficult and more
compliant and partly because, as 18th
-century German handbooks on
education suggested, beating girls was simply not nice[210] girls of all
classes were much less likely to receive physical punishment. Not for
nothing have the soft and unblemished skins of upper class girls in
particular become proverbial. They took their first lessons, and often all
their lessons, from their mothers or other female members of the
household. In Europe during the early modern age, and in some places into
the 20th century, the daughters of the really well-to-do were given private
tuition at home.[211]
Yet another type of education for boys consisted of apprenticeship.
Journeymen were commonplace across Europe from the Middle Ages
onward, but historical accounts seldom mention any journeywomen. Even
when young women did leave home, they tended to stay close by so as not
to lose touch with their families.[212] Having been apprenticed, perhaps
against their will, boys entered a strange household. There they might
spend many years doing the most menial jobs for little or no pay.[213]
Whatever the precise arrangement, clearly it was capable of giving rise to
much unhappiness. It was young men of this lot who are said to have
invented the term “homesickness” early in the 19th century.[214] Girls, too,
might be apprenticed. However, as long ago as the Middle Ages, more
girls were privileged to stay behind.[215] All over Europe, the later the
date, the fewer female apprentices there were to be found.[216] Perhaps
reflecting these differences, until recently proportionally twice as many
American girls as boys remained at home until getting married.[217]
Like boys, some girls were able to obtain some form of formal
schooling without having to leave the home. And like boys, some girls
were educated outside the home in convents and the like. In the 13th
century Maimonides referred to classrooms filled entirely by girls.[218]
Visiting the Indian city of Hinawr during the early years of the 14th
century, Arab traveler Ibn Battuta noted it had 23 schools for boys and 13
for girls;[219] the women, he says, all knew the Koran by heart. This was
even truer in Germany from the time of the Reformation on. Following
Luther’s call to provide “instruction in German or Latin,” boys’ and girls’
schools developed in parallel from the time of the Reformation onward.
Each time a municipality or community founded an institution for boys, it
was only a question of time before an equivalent one was established for
the girls whom they expected to marry.
Beginning with Erasmus, a vast amount of literature was devoted to
the subject. By 1800, according to one expert, “the number and variety of
educational opportunities available for girls inside and outside their
parental or other households defie[d] the imagination.”[220] Reflecting the
preferences of parents, not just fathers, fewer girls were made to attend
school than were boys. Reflecting the demands of society, about the only
kind of education closed to them was cadet schools. Most of the schools in
question originated during the 1740s. Taking in boys from the age of 12
up, they were notorious for their Spartan character and their ferocious
discipline. If girls were excluded from them, then it was in order that
ferocious discipline and a Spartan character might be maintained. Now
that military academies have become coed, their former harshness is
largely gone.[221] Instead we get scholars who do not know the first thing
about war telling us that, in training for war, Spartan methods are
“arbitrary and unnecessary.”[222] No wonder that, over the last few
decades, almost every time Western troops were sent to fight in the
“developing” world they were soundly defeated.
Most schools for girls were modeled on school for boys. Until well
into the 19th century, the principal subject taught to youngsters of both
sexes was religion. Next came the so-called “three Rs,” reading, writing
and arithmetic. Middle-class girls were supposed to assist their future
husbands by means of bookkeeping and the like, hence much of the
instruction was similar for both sexes. The difference consisted in that both
the admission standards girls had to meet and the curricula designed for
their use tended to be less demanding. At the lowest levels, they might be
taught to read but not to write. Since historians usually judge literacy rates
by counting those who could sign their names, they may have exaggerated
the educational differences between the sexes.[223] Girls were not
required to study difficult subjects such as Latin, Greek, mathematics or
the natural sciences. But that does not necessarily mean that such subjects
were out of bounds. For parents who wanted their daughters to study them,
the corresponding schools were easily available.[224]
What all girls’ schools did have in common was a relaxed atmosphere.
In the words of the great feminist Mary Wollstonecraft, who at one point
headed one such school, it was here that pupils were “first spoiled.”[225]
Boys had their mettle tested, often with barbaric cruelty. With girls, by
contrast, the more difficult a subject, the more likely it was to be offered
on a voluntary basis and less intensively. This was as true in the United
States as it was in pre-revolutionary Russia.[226] Grading, too, was carried
out differently. Being forced to repeat a class was hardly unusual for boys.
Before coeducation came along, though, it was rarely applied to girls. A
teacher who made “the flesh of the girl tremble under the rod or ferule...
[was] liable to be charged with undue severity.”[227] All this explains why
the memoirs of 19th
-century female students, unlike those of male ones,
rarely contain expressions of fierce hatred for school.[228]
Many of the differences in education can be ascribed to the fact that
girls’schools were not supposed to prepare them for university, which with
rare exceptions were closed to women. Acknowledging this fact, however,
is not to suggest that higher education was directly discriminating against
women. First, until the second half of the 20th century, the vast majority of
men did not attend university either. Second, and more importantly,
universities were meant for those who had to earn their living. As a result,
the sons of the truly great and rich did not attend them any more than their
sisters did. Conversely, and except for a Grand Tour on which women, for
fear that they would be seduced and return home pregnant, could not
embark, the education those sisters did receive was often quite as good, or
as bad, as that of their brothers.
During the 19th century, the United States became the first country to
adopt coeducation. Other countries eventually followed, as well as began
adopting universal, compulsory schooling from about 1850 onward. In the
process, the teaching profession became overwhelmingly feminized. By
1900, three-quarters of all public school teachers in the United States were
female. Twenty years later, the figure was no less than 90 percent.[229]For
the first time in history, large numbers of boys began to be taught by
women; the more integrated the school, the more likely they were to be
treated like girls. The result was that boys were, quite simply, put at a
disadvantage whether because they developed more slowly, or because
they were physically more active and found it harder to spend endless
hours in class, or because having to compete with girls was experienced as
a humiliation.[230]
By the second half of the 19th century, girls were outperforming boys
in elementary school.[231] Since then the same has become true in the
high schools of almost all modern countries.[232] And the same trend is
currently being observed in universities as well. At the same time, the
significance of grades has been eroded. Nineteenth-century foreign visitors
noted that American schools, which were coed, tended to be less
achievement-oriented than European ones.[233] Throughout the developed
world today, criticizing a student, let alone marking a paper with an “F,”
has become taboo. As schools admitted girls, who are on average less
competitive than boys, they were compelled to adjust themselves to meet
those girls’ needs.
Sooner or later, though, the hothouse atmosphere of school, along with
the great majority of female teachers, was left behind as the sexes went
their separate ways. Unless they came from well-to-do families, and often
even then, most boys were pushed to take up paid work while in their early
to mid-teens. Not so girls, who, regarded as the bearers of culture, were
not supposed to hold jobs. They found it much easier to acquire an
education; indeed, education itself was seen as a luxury intended for girls
who did not have to earn a living. Boys who dared show their love for
learning often earned contempt instead of respect; some were called sissies
and punished. These pressures explain why, during the second half of the
19th century, girls began to outnumber boys at elementary school.[234]
Among high school students, the gap was even wider. This is not
surprising, given that secondary education for girls was sometimes free; by
contrast, boys’ parents had to pay fees.[235] By 1900, girls in American
high schools outnumbered boys three to two.[236]
Take the educational system of St. Louis, which around 1900 was
considered a large and progressive city. Twenty-three percent of 16-yearold European-American girls, but only 15 percent of boys of similar age
and background, attended school. The figures pertaining to working youths
were just the opposite: 73.7 percent of boys, but only 46.9 percent of girls,
were employed.[237] Contemporaries were well aware that American
women had more opportunities to study than American men;[238] some
people thought this was why boys, “driven from the classroom,” focused
on athletics as “the only place where masculine supremacy is
incontestable.”[239] These differences persisted. In 1950, the average
years of schooling for the population aged 25 and over stood at 9.6 for
women versus only 9 for men.[240] To this day, more girls graduate from
high school than boys. Since more female educational institutions are
closed to men than the other way around, girls also have more “collegiate
options” open to them.[241]
In times and places when girls enrolled in separate schools, they were
usually admitted on easier terms. They also enjoyed more comfortable
circumstances, took less demanding curricula, were subjected to less
severe discipline, and were able to graduate with little effort or none at all.
Still not content with these advantages, they or their instructors demanded
that subjects such as cooking and cleaning count as much toward receiving
grants and being admitted to the universities as Latin and algebra.[242]
When girls began to be educated together with boys, they still gravitated
toward the curricula which were, or which were perceived to be, less
demanding. For example, they might study the humanities rather than the
exact sciences. That may be another reason why, on average, girls have
long received higher grades. If girls were educated separately from boys, it
was claimed they were discriminated against. If they were educated
together with boys, it was said that their special needs were not being met.
[243]
When women began to be admitted to universities, the same pattern
was established. Oberlin College, founded in 1833 in order to train priests,
was the first in any country to offer tertiary education to women. And right
from the beginning, female students were exempted from calculus, which
was considered to be the most difficult subject of all. The budding priests
studying at Oberlin might have little use for calculus, one could argue, but
how they were supposed to do without both Greek and Latin is rather less
clear. These measures were not intended to discriminate against women,
but rather to attract them. Indeed, as soon as four women asked to be
admitted into the full men’s course in 1837, their request was granted.
Nevertheless, the great majority of women continued to enroll in the easier
ladies’ course.[244]
Other 19th century women's colleges developed their programs
similarly. Wellesley, founded in 1875, claimed from the outset to be as
good as any male school. But unlike its male counterparts, Wellesley it did
not require the “formidable” subject of Greek for admission. Though
Vassar and Bryn Mawr both had high admission standards, in neither was
Greek required.[245] In fact, of all the early women’s colleges, only Smith
equaled its male counterparts. Founded in 1871, after just a few years it
was left practically without students and had to start cutting corners.[246]
As late as the 1950s, only a very small minority of women’s colleges
mentioned scholarship “in the sense of developing intellectual curiosity
and love of knowledge” in the catalogues they used to attract students.
[247]
According to Mabel Newcomer, a Vassar professor of economics who
studied the question during the late 1950s, “the women’s colleges as a
whole have provided better dormitory facilities, and more elaborate
gardens and grounds, than other colleges. The economizing is done
elsewhere. The parlors of the women’s dormitories, at least, are apt to be
redecorated at frequent intervals by professional decorators, even though
the classrooms, which account for more student hours per week than any
parlor, remain dingy and unattractive. If faculty resides in the student
dormitories their quarters are more elegant than anything their colleagues
achieve on their own salaries; and faculty offices tend to be as bare as
monks’ cells.”
Justifying the amenities, Newcomer claimed that they “would be
wasted on men” who did not need “white-capped maids” to wait on them
but were happy to eat in cafeterias. Though tuition cost more in men’s
colleges than in women’s, when room and board were added the situation
was the reverse; men spent more on study, women on leading a gracious
life. Not only did living like ladies carry a price, it was a price paid
disproportionally by others. At the time two-thirds of college men, but
only half of women, contributed to the costs of their own education.[248]
As late as 1987, women received more financial support for attending
college than men did.[249]
Preparing to make a living, men chose fields such as engineering,
agriculture and law. Preparing to become housewives or, if they failed to
find a husband, to teach, women chose home economics and education.
[250] As late as 1961, only a small percentage of American female college
students were concerned with making a living.[251] The most they
expected to do was to find a nice, clean job in an office where they might
meet a future mate. Many passed straight from college into their husbands’
homes, if they did not break off their studies in order to get married first.
By and large, the same pattern has persisted to the present day. In the
United States, as in other countries, men form the vast majority among
engineering and natural science students. Conversely, women outnumber
men in the humanities and, more recently, many of the social sciences as
well.[252]
Feminists have often blamed women’s tendency to focus on the
humanities on society’s “steering” them in that direction. In fact, the
opposite is usually the case. Even as children, girls are more likely to be
admitted to boys’ company than vice versa.[253] In the past, attempts to
lure more women into technical work and the natural sciences failed to
change the situation.[254] To this day, the most demanding fields in higher
education, such as engineering and physics, are those that have the fewest
female students.[255] Barring theories concerning the different intellectual
capacities of the sexes, which at the moment are so out of fashion that a
president of Harvard was fired for mentioning them, two explanations for
this state of affairs come to mind. First, girls’ different upbringing may
mean that, having been indulged and pampered from birth, they shy away
from any subject that is, or is said to be, difficult. They are said to be
“extremely ingenious and determined” in doing so.[256]Second, relatively
few women expect to feed a family. Consequently the subjects they do
enter are often chosen with objectives other than having a lucrative
career in other words, women are freer to study what they like.
Many women enter the humanities and some of the social sciences
because these fields are initially considered easy. As the difficulty
increases, they often drop out, if not during their studies then later while
trying to climb the academic ladder. The remaining ones tend to enter
female ghettoes. Among them are two-year community colleges, gender
studies departments, and certain other departments staffed and
attended[257] almost entirely by women. “Soft” medical specialties, such
as pediatrics, psychiatry and general practice, also have more than their
share of women.[258] Surveys in several countries confirm that female
academics are, on average, considerably less productive than their male
colleagues.[259] Women’s inability or unwillingness to compete with men
may explain why, even in the five remaining all-female colleges in the
United States, males form a majority of full professors.[260] It also
explains why women-only academic contests and prizes have a long
history.[261]
Conversely, the few women who do show courage and do enter the
“difficult” specialties explicitly deny being discriminated against.[262]
Often they do as well as their male colleagues.[263] Still, even in those
fields Nobel prizes, which among other things reflect exceptionally great
effort and sacrifice, are awarded mainly to men. According to some
analyses, the much greater readiness of men to follow paths involving
harder work and leading to larger rewards is a direct result of their
enforced break from their mothers. Others believe it has something to do
with men’s hormones, testosterone in particular, which on average make
them more aggressive and more competitive.[264]
Be that as it may, we have seen that society’s way of preparing men for
the heavy burdens they must bear as adults is to put increasingly greater
burdens on them, beginning right at birth. The same behavior may cause
girls to be pampered, indulged and comforted, while boys are pushed away
and scolded. Starting with parents, these differences are reinforced by
means of initiation rites and also by whatever school system may be
available in the society in question. If only because men wanted to marry
suitable women, at any given time and place it was only the most Spartan
schools which did not have a female equivalent. The opposite also applied:
once women were admitted to such schools, it was only a question of time
before they ceased to be Spartan.
Once the schools started admitting girls and ceased being Spartan,
boys still tended to be discriminated against by the growing number of
female teachers. Unable to cope with the boys’ greater boisterousness,
female teachers did what they could to suppress it.[265] If, during breaks,
girls failed to take part in boys’ games, then it was said that they were
excluded. If they did take part, on the other hand, then it was declared that
they were being harassed. All this suppression and all this discrimination
almost certainly constitute one reason why, at most levels of short of the
highest, boys tend to do less well than girls. Conversely, the less
challenging and demanding a school, the better girls do in comparison
with boys.
When the point is finally reached when they are given a choice, both
men and women continue to do exactly what society expects of them.
Preparing to become wives whose first duty is to assist their husbands as
they make their way in the world, proportionally more women go into
fields that will enable them to wend their way through society without
undue embarrassment. Nowadays, it must be added, women must also
consider how to make a living if they should at some point in the future go
through divorce. Proportionally more men, meanwhile, preparing to
become husbands whose first duty is to provide for their wives, go for
fields that are difficult and require hard work. The more advanced the
school, the truer this becomes.
5. Conclusions
Since 1970 or so, a considerable amount of literature has sought to show
that women, as women, are disregarded, oppressed and discriminated
against by men. The truth, however, is just the opposite. Whether for
biological, psychological or social reasons, it is women and not men who
are seen as particularly interesting. This was as true around 1300, when
pseudo-Albertus Magnus wrote Women’s Secrets, as it is today. Whether
for biological, psychological or social reasons, in almost any field the
literature written about women exceeds that dealing with men many times
over. This, too, was as true in the past as it is today. At almost every stage
in life, both men and women have always made life harder for men. Since
the same applies to primates, some of it may have genetic roots. However,
for the most part it is deliberately planned by people of both sexes. The
objective is to prepare men for the hardship of adulthood, and the method
is to make life hard for them even before adulthood is reached.
The lesser efforts demanded of women may also have something to do
with the psychology of mating. This is because, to gain access to a woman,
a man has to perform and pay. All other things being equal, the better his
performance and the more he can pay, the more likely he is to impress both
the woman and her relatives. This was as true among the Australian
aborigines as it is in today’s most advanced Western societies. By contrast,
one of the best ways for a woman to attract a man is to be lonely, helpless
and poor. This is especially true if she is young and good looking, and
especially if her plight can be blamed not on herself but on some other
man. For every man who has ever “oppressed” a woman, there has been
another who was standing ready to save her so as to gain her favors, even
at the risk of his own life.
For a woman to make an effort, cope with hardship and gain
independence is but one road toward finding a mate. Worse still, such a
course of action may actually be counterproductive. Studies show that
female undergraduates believe men dislike women whom they see as too
smart,[266] and they may be right. As has been said, if it is better for a
woman to be good looking than intelligent, this is because men are better
at looking than at thinking. Now, as in the 19th century,[267] the better
educated a woman and the more successful her career, the less likely she is
to be married and have children. Most of the time, girls received their
schooling separately from boys, a fact that contemporaries justified by the
need to preserve decency. How right they were is proved by the fact that,
now that coeducation has become the norm, boys as young as 4 years old
risk being accused of sexual harassment;[268] it is as if their teachers,
almost all of whom are adult women, want to punish them for being male.
As long as they received their schooling separately from boys, girls
almost always had an easier time at it. When this ceased to be the case,
either they continued to have an easier time at it or else their “humanizing”
and “softening” presence caused everybody to be given an easier time.
Boys who, whether because of the harsher treatment they received or
because of the lack of challenge, started misbehaving were punished.
Nowadays, they are drugged; among children diagnosed with a variety of
behavioral problems, proportionally far more boys than girls are
prescribed Ritalin.[269] All this was as true in the West as it was on the
other side of the world; in early twentieth-century China;[270] at a time
when most people only attended a few classes of elementary school, as
when forty percent of a given age group enter some sort of academy or
college; when most youngsters joined the workforce as teenagers as when
“boys” of thirty-something sit for exams and “girls” of the same age have
yet to give birth.
Yet sooner or later the moment will come when almost all women
want to become pregnant, deliver babies and care for their offspring. The
moment will also come when almost all men, on pain of failing to find a
female partner or of losing the one they already have, have to assume the
extra burden which results from women getting pregnant, delivering
babies and caring for their offspring. As people of both sexes prepare for
that moment, gaps in education “human capital,” in scholarly
parlance open up. Willy-nilly, most women drop out of the rat race or
enter one of several available female ghettoes, where they are largely
among themselves and where there is less competition. Willy-nilly, most
men either work by the sweat of their brows in whatever jobs they can get,
or continue to study to prepare themselves to compete for the higher, more
responsible, more difficult and more lucrative positions society has to
offer. Though there are some exceptions, most women settle into a life in
which they are provided for and protected. Though there are some
exceptions, most men step into one in which they provide and protect.
Finally, not only are men doomed to support women but, since
resources are always scarce, doing so means that they have to compete
with other men. On top of the other hardships it involves, competition
prevents men from opening up to each other or to women. The heavy
burden they assume, and the harsh treatment they receive, must remain
unmentioned. The greater a man’s success, the truer this becomes. A man,
as the saying goes, is expected to “take it” — irrespective of what the “it”
actually entails. If he confesses his difficulties, he will likely find himself
despised by men and avoided by women.[271] All this explains why men
have a much higher threshold for crying than women do, and why married
men in particular are less likely than any group to ask for psychological
help.[272] After all, they have responsibilities to shoulder.
Should men fail, then only too often the first to desert them are their
wives. The need to compete also explains why occasional attempts to set
up men’s movements have not been very successful. As in some fairy tale,
the best a man may hope for is to meet a stranger in an inn. He may buy
him a glass of wine, pour out his troubles and hope to be presented with
some sagacious piece of advice. In one version of the story, a man is
reduced to talking to a fish. To some readers, parts of the present
chapter with its emphasis on the much greater hardship of becoming and
being a man may sound maudlin and self-pitying. If so, then this
merely proves my case.
Chapter 3: Men, Women and Work
1. A Short History of Labor
In our own day, perhaps the first question a person is asked when meeting
a stranger is what work he or she does. The implication is that not working
is, if not a misdemeanor, then at the very least slightly dishonorable. A
man who does not work for a living will probably be called a playboy or a
parasite, while such a woman will be labeled a socialite or a housewife.
However, as the biblical tale concerning the expulsion of Adam and
Eve from the Garden of Eden makes clear, during most of history work
tended to be seen as something unpleasant, hard and even dangerous.
Similar attitudes permeate the rest of the Old Testament. In fact, ancient
Hebrew does not really have a term for “work;” the modern word for it,
avoda, derives from the root avad, “to serve.” Service could be to a god, in
which case it was only positive in case it entailed worship of the great and
jealous Jehovah. It could also be to a human, in which case its
connotations were almost always negative. The Bible tells us countless
times of a people being conquered and made to “serve” another ruler. The
Israelites called out to God against the “service” forced upon them by the
Egyptians. In short, to work was an act that was anything but agreeable. In
fact a secondary meaning of the term is “to pay tribute.” From avad, too,
comes the standard word for “slave,” eved, implying that work equals
servitude, and vice versa.[273]
Likewise, the Greek term for labor, ponos, can also mean “suffering”
or “penalty”[274]; its opposite, hedone, can be translated as “ease” or
“pleasure.” A good example of what ponos might involve is provided by
the 12 “labors” Zeus imposed on Heracles for killing his brother
Eurystheus in a drunken fit. Some ponoi were humiliating. Others
involved working in mountains of filth, whereas others still were lifethreatening. As with the Greek ponos, the Latin term labor also carries
secondary meanings of “endurance” “suffering” and “hardship. ” It also
carries another meaning, “distress,” including the kind of physical distress
that women suffer in childbirth.[275] The modern English “labor,” the
Italian “lavoro” and the French “travail” have retained these various
meanings. English, moreover, makes the link between work and suffering
doubly clear by suggesting that a person “labors under” this or that
difficulty.
In both Greece and Rome, the fundamental distinction was between
slaves who worked (and very likely suffered as they did so) and free men
who, if they could, did not work. In Buddhist thought, the fundamental
distinction was between secular persons and sacred ones. Secular persons
were either those who worked for a living, such as merchants or craftsmen,
or else ruled over others who did so and supported them by their labor,
such as princes and warriors. Sacred ones were also supported by the labor
of others. However, rather than taking charge of society, they spent their
time praying or looking at their navels. It is true that Taoist thought did not
distinguish between sacred and secular persons to the same extent.
However, here too the ideal was not work, but meditation. Selfenhancement, understood as freedom from earthly concerns, was and
remains the common goal of both religions.
The common language of the Middle Ages being Latin, many of the
connotations which that language associated with “labor” remained as
they were. If anything, Western Christianity, guided by the Old Testament,
created an even stronger association between work, sin and punishment.
[276] It is often said that medieval society consisted of those who fought,
those who prayed and those who worked. Though this is an
oversimplification, the fact that those who worked were located at the
bottom of the societal ladder speaks for itself. What made the Middle Ages
different from the ancient world, and also from biblical times, was the fact
that chattel slavery the kind of slavery in which a class of people were
legally the property of others, had no rights whatsoever, and were
predestined for nothing but work was rare. As a result, working was not
automatically associated with servitude. At least in theory, it was not
considered demeaning either. Particularly if one lived in a town rather than
in the countryside, one could engage in work and still be a free person.
In theory, if not in practice, those at the top of the ladder were not
supposed to work. They administered, hunted and fought. And what was
the situation of the members of the second estate, monks and nuns? Their
vocation in life was to worship God. However, it was recognized that
doing so to the exclusion of everything else was unhealthy for both body
and mind. A few ascetics apart, there are limits as to how many hours
people can spend praying or meditating without losing their minds. In any
case, the days when prophets lived in the desert and commanded ravens to
feed them were gone. Many monasteries were large and complex
organizations. Hence the rule, first instituted by St. Benedict early in the
6
th century, that monks and nuns should work — laborare et orare, as the
saying went — as well as pray.[277]
Later the idea that work is a positive thing in itself was taken up by the
lay community, specifically the Protestants. As Martin Luther put it in the
first of his 95 Theses, for Protestants “the whole of life [was] penance.”
Protestantism also did away with prayer, the sacraments and good works
as the path to salvation. Faith apart, perhaps the principal way to get to
heaven was by means of productive labor. It was performed in the hope
that it would lead to riches and prove to the owner that he or she was one
of God’s chosen ones.[278] The implication was that work as such was
hard and unpleasant, and the temptation to abandon it both constant and
great. Hence the numerous warnings against idleness that have formed the
stock-in trade of Protestant culture from the 16th century to this very day.
[279]
Between about 1600 and 1800, the idea that work was good for the
soul permeated society at large, as is also shown by the workhouses that
began to be established in Amsterdam, London and elsewhere.[280] The
next stage was to extend the system to the prisons. Taking the place of
other forms of punishment, such as exile, fines, flogging, mutilation and
death, prisons began dotting the European countryside from about 1780
on. Once prisons existed, it was not long before work began to be used in
society’s efforts to reform its criminals. To prevent prisoners from
engaging in unfair competition with those toiling outside, often the work
they did was completely inane, as with digging holes and then filling them
again. However, even in its most inane forms work was supposed to instill
such habits as order, regularity and discipline.[281] Incidentally, the same
claims were made by the “Arbeit macht frei” signs that stand at the
entrance to Auschwitz, Dachau and other Nazi concentration camps.
In summary, during most of history and in places as far apart as
Western Europe, India and China, labor was commonly viewed as
something unpleasant, difficult and demeaning. As a result, it was often
inflicted as punishment. To be sure, Protestant attitudes were different.
Even in this case, though, it was not so much labor that was glorified, as
idleness that was denounced. Indeed, it would hardly be too much to say
that Protestantism glorified work precisely because it was unpleasant and,
therefore, well-suited to doing “penance.” It was only during the
20thcentury that attitudes changed and work began to be seen as something
positive in and of itself. Even so, that view did not always extend among
the lower classes (or “working classes,” as they are alternatively known).
For them work remained a harsh necessity to be avoided whenever
possible and with good reason, as anybody who has ever visited a mine
or foundry knows.
2. Men’s Work, Women’s Work
Given these attitudes toward work, some of them purely subjective but
others rooted in the hard reality of physical labor, it would seem
appropriate to ask how exactly that physical labor has been divided
between men and women. Perhaps the earliest answer to the question is
provided by the Bible: when God drove the first human couple out of
Eden, it was Adam and not Eve whom he punished by decreeing that “by
the sweat of thy brow shalt thou eat bread.”[282] Why He did so is a
matter for conjecture. It may have been because men are stronger and
more suitable for physical labor; but it may also have been because God
felt that, in this respect, women should not be treated as harshly as men.
The story of Sisyphus may have been governed by a similar logic.
Sisyphus had successfully tricked the gods and was punished by being
made to push heavy stones up a hill. However, no sooner did he reach the
top then they rolled down, forcing him to start all over. Provided the stones
were lighter, there was no reason why a woman should not have been
given similar punishment. Now, Greek mythology has plenty of wicked
women who committed sins, and who were made to suffer various
punishments, from madness to being turned into a spider. None, however,
was made to labor as hard as Sisyphus was.
To the extent that mythological women were made to labor, their work
was rather light. Several Greek goddesses spun and weaved. So did Greek
nymphs; the Odyssey has an idyllic picture of the nymph Circe singing
merrily while working the loom.[283] The tales of other peoples, notably
German and Russian ones, are similar. Wodan’s wife Freya engaged in
embroidery. Many fairy tales present us with male heroes sent on
impossible missions from which they were not expected to return. By
contrast, women’s work, even such as was forced, consisted of
housekeeping (Cinderella), spinning or sorting various small objects. Such
work might be tedious, unpleasant and even impossible, as in the case of
the girl who was ordered to spin hay into gold. If the work was not
performed on time dire punishment may have been threatened, but rarely
did the work itself involve real hardship.
If etymology proves that work has historically been regarded as a
burden rather than a privilege, it also shows that men always did the
heaviest labor. Thus, the Biblical term eved, “slave,” only has a male form.
The terms for “female slave,” shifcha and ama, are related to the Semitic
words for “female” and “family.”[284] This reflects the fact that female
slaves often served as concubines. Clearly, neither term connotes anything
to do with labor. Similarly in Germanic languages, Arbeiter (laborer) was
originally male and only acquired its female form after 1800. A second
word, schaffen, is said to be derived from the Old German scaffan, “bent
double.”[285] In addition to its primary meaning of “to create,” it also
mean “to succeed by hard work,” “to toil,” or “to slog.” The derivative
term for “worker,” Schaffer, is male and often used as a surname. As such,
it has no female equivalent.
Reality reflected legends and language, or perhaps things worked the
other way around. Proceeding in rough chronological order, in ancient
Egypt the 100,000 persons conscripted each year to build the
pyramids who, as pictures show, were soundly whipped when they did
not pull their weight were not women, but men. Men, whether prisoners
of war or those enlisted by press-gangs, constructed roads, dug canals,
erected fortresses and built temples all over the ancient Middle East.[286]
According to the Bible, King Solomon used tens of thousands of male
slaves to obtain the materials for building the Lord’s Temple.[287] Men,
not women, built the Great Wall of China, dying by the thousands in the
process. Countless male slaves, but very few female ones, worked in the
silver mines of Laurion from which classical Athens derived much of its
wealth.[288]
Men, not women, sometimes took the place of beasts of burden in
turning industrial-scale mills where corn was ground. Much like modern
prisons, the places where such work was done were normally considered
too unsavory to attract visits by members of polite society. During the
second century A.D, however, one of them was inspected by the Roman
writer Apuleius, who reported that:[289]
Merciful gods, what wretched manikins did I see there, their
entire skin covered with bluish welts, their backs torn into
bloody strips, barely covered with rags, some having only
their genitals covered with a piece of cloth, all of them
showing everything through their tatters. Their foreheads
were branded with letters, their heads half shorn, their feet
stuck in rings. They were hideously pale, the dank of the
stinking hole had consumed their eyelashes and diminished
their sight. Like wrestlers, who are sprinkled with a fine
powder as they fight their bouts, they were blanched with a
layer of dirty-white flour.
Being a female slave, to be sure, was hardly all fun and games, both
because of the nature of their labor and because they were sexually at the
mercy of their owners. However, a scrawny prostitute, or one dressed in
tatters, or one too frightened to properly play her role, would have
commanded a much lower price, if any. Hence workers in the oldest
profession are usually well fed, reasonably clothed and tolerably housed.
They are also unlikely to undergo physical punishment so severe as to
permanently damage their charms. In any case, as references in Petronius,
Horace and Seneca show, male slaves were also open to sexual
exploitation.[290]
Male manpower, some of it conscripted and some consisting of
prisoners of war, built the Roman roads and erected the Coliseum. When
the Spaniards in Mexico and Peru instituted the repartimiento, or “forced
labor,” system as a method for working their silver mines, it was once
again men and not women who were sent down the shafts.[291] This
system itself was based on the Aztec and Inca ones for conscripting men,
not women, to build temples, construct roads and act as beasts of burden in
societies that neither possessed large domestic animals nor had invented
the wheel. In fact, all pre-monetary economies used forced male labor to
carry out large-scale public works. Even in Western Europe, corvées,
which Adam Smith called “one of the principal forms of Tyranny,”[292]
persisted until the end of the 18th century. In Eastern Europe, where men
were made to work for free on two, three, even four days of the week, it
lasted into the 1860s.[293] To the extent that women participated, they
worked shorter hours and performed lighter tasks.[294]
In none of these societies was the social and legal position of women
equal to that of men. To the extent that attempts were made to balance
matters, however, the differences were still maintained when it came to
work. In the Republic Plato created a society that was, sexually speaking,
perhaps more integrated than any in history. To enable women to
participate fully in the life of the polis, families were abolished and
newborns taken from their mothers to be raised communally. Men and
women trained together in the gymnasium, and ran the city together. And
yet, Plato nonetheless has Socrates state that “lighter tasks must be
assigned to the women than to the men because of their weakness as a
class.”[295] Had Plato been alive today, this sentence would undoubtedly
have had him labeled a woman-hater. The same could be said of Thomas
More, Thomas Campanella, Charles Fourier and countless other utopian
writers. Why women have always been assigned the lighter tasks is quite
clear.
Thanks largely to the attempts to integrate women into the armed
forces of many modern countries, the physical differences between the
sexes have been precisely measured.[296] One study found the average
U.S. Army female recruit to be 12 centimeters shorter and 14.3 kilograms
lighter than her male brethren. Compared to the average male recruit,
females had 16.9 fewer kilograms of muscle and 2.6 more kilograms of
fat, as well as 55 percent of the upper body strength and 72 percent of the
lower body strength. Fat mass is inversely related to aerobic capacity and
heat tolerance, hence women are also at a disadvantage when performing
activities such as carrying heavy loads, working in the heat and running.
Even when the samples were controlled for height, women possessed only
80 percent of the overall strength of men. Only the upper 20 percent of
women could do as well physically as the lower 20 percent of men. Had
the 100 strongest individuals out of a random group consisting of 100 men
and 100 women been selected, 93 would be male and only seven female.
[297] Yet another study showed gthat only the upper 5 percent of women
are as strong as the median male.[298]
Another definition of women’s work was that it did not take those
engaged in it very far from their homes or into unexplored territory. In
part, the reason why women seldom undertook long travel, a term itself
linked to the French word for work, travaille, was because once married
they would spend much of their time either pregnant, breastfeeding or
looking after their children. In part, however, it was because such travel
was dangerous. The dangers might come either from the elements, or from
people, or from both. Dangers posed by the elements explain why women
did not normally join deep-sea fishing expeditions. Nor, except as
passengers, did they embark on vessels engaged in maritime commerce.
Dangers posed by both the elements and by people explain why they did
not often embark on long journeys on land. It was not every ruler who, like
Egyptian Pharaoh Ramses III, could boast that women were able to travel
safely throughout his kingdom.[299] And even that boast was almost
certainly spurious.
Women’s physical weakness and their reluctance to move far from
home have always dictated the nature of female work.[300] Men hunted
big game and were sometimes killed while so engaged; women, by
contrast, went for smaller and less dangerous creatures.[301] Men covered
long distances running, whereas women proceeded at a leisurely pace,
taking breaks whenever it suited them, gathering roots and berries. Men
dived for pearls, while women stayed ashore, went for shallow-water
clams or processed the catch.[302] Men herded the larger and harder-tohandle animals, such as camels, horses and cattle. Women’s charges were
smaller domestic animals and poultry.
In the 1830s the French political scientist Alexis de Tocqueville toured
the United States gathering material for his celebrated Democracy in
America. American women, he wrote, were never “compelled to perform
the rough labor of the fields, or to make any of those laborious exertions
which demand the exertion of physical strength.” “No families,” he added,
“are so poor as to form an exception to this rule.”[303] Another visitor was
Harriet Martineau, the most famous female economist of her age. One
modern female researcher says that she “made more trenchant
observations about women than de Tocqueville ever imagined.”[304] One
thing she observed was that the hair of American husbands “stands on end
at the idea of his wife working, and he toils to provide her with
money.”[305]
In 19th
-century America, it was cowboys, not cowgirls, who spent
weeks on the trail, sleeping in the open air, unable to wash, shave or
change clothes, while driving cattle from grazing ground to market and
from market to railhead. In other societies, too, the less pleasant, the more
demanding and the more dangerous a job, the more likely it was to be done
by men.[306] In China, both the dominant Confucian ideology and the
prevailing unsafe conditions resulted in women being expected to work in
or near the home; indeed, one word for wife is neiren, “inside
person.”[307] As a result, they only carried out between 5 percent and 38
percent of all agricultural work. Well into the present century, to see them
wielding a hoe was considered shocking.[308] When Communist officials
tried to change the system and get women to work with men in the fields
during the 1950s, people of both sexes did what they could to resist their
demands.
What was true in agriculture was also true in other work. Ancient
Egyptian didactic texts describe all the trades which men could enter,
except that of scribe, as arduous by definition.[309] Men erected houses,
while women gathered straw and thatched roofs. (When roofs began to be
made up of wood or stone, however, women disappeared from building
sites). Women may have baked in the home, but the heavy, hot work of
kneading dough and baking bread on a commercial scale was almost
always done by men. Women may have spun and combed and carded, but
the heavier work of operating looms to produce cloth for sale was done by
men.[310] Though it is true that women were everywhere responsible for
household work, with most people living at or near the subsistence level,
the burden was minimal. Among both hunter-gatherer societies as well as
nomadic cattle-herding peoples, housework in our sense barely existed. In
most other societies, whether rural or urban, the vast majority of the
population ate simple, easy-to-prepare food. Possessing no more than a
few pieces of rough furniture, often they looked at personal hygiene more
as a nuisance than as a pleasure.[311]
Women’s physical weakness and their need to stay in or near the home
apart, a third reason why men and women did different kinds of work was
the way work affected health. Long before modern science was born, the
4
th
-century B.C Hippocratic text known as Diseases of Women warned
against making women who had given birth work too hard. The 2
nd
-
century A.D. Greek physician Soranus was fully aware that heavy labor
would lead to the loss of a woman’s period and, if it lasted too long, her
fertility as well.[312] Women were also more vulnerable to the effects of
heat and noxious chemicals, and efforts were made to keep them away
from trades involving such exposure. In ancient Babylon, female slaves
wove and male ones bleached.[313] When Joshua Wedgewood started
manufacturing pottery, it was men who were responsible for the dirtier
parts of the process, such as handling and firing the clay, whereas women
added the decoration.[314]
How justified such concerns are is evident from the fact that, in early
20th
-century Japan, during the years that women were allowed to work in
mining, 20 percent of those so engaged contracted diseases of the
urogenital organs.[315] The greater susceptibility of women to infection
explains why it has always been men who were made to do all kinds of
dirty work, particularly outside the home. Good examples are charcoal
burning, slaughtering large animals and cleaning public sewers. In fact,
even though doctors were aware that sweeping chimneys could cause
cancer of the scrotum, doing so was made a man’s job. To this day in the
United States, garbage collection and removal is said to be “the most male
of all male jobs.”[316]
Not only did women usually do the lighter, less exhausting and more
salubrious kinds of work, but their working lives differed from those of
men in that they were likely to be both part-time and intermittent. Some
societies regarded the menstrual period as “a pleasant interlude.”[317]
Regardless of what American novelist Pearl Buck wrote about Chinese
women returning to work within hours of having given birth, the fact that
pregnant women or women who had recently delivered could only do light
work has always been recognized.[318] Until the introduction of
kindergartens, a late-19th
-century innovation, women with young children
could not work full-time either. In short, whereas men throughout their life
worked full-time, or were expected to do so, in the case of women this
applied only to the young and unmarried and to widows.[319] Economic
laws and regulations often reflected this reality. For example, in 17th
-
century England, day-rates for women were only quoted on a seasonal
basis.[320]
The aforementioned principles appear to have applied to practically all
societies at almost all times and places. This, of course, did not preclude
considerable variation, both among different societies and within the same
society at different times. Whereas nowadays knitting is seen almost
exclusively as a female job, before roughly 1800 it was often shared by
people of both sexes. In Tibet, weaving carpets was men’s work.
Particularly during the busy agricultural season, urgent tasks were often
carried out jointly by people of both sexes. But even at such times, a
division of labor prevailed: normally the heavy work, such as loading the
product on wagons, was done by men. Except when the men were absent
— whether permanently, as emigrants, or temporarily, as soldiers —
women rarely performed the hardest tasks of all, such as plowing. When
circumstances did force them to undertake such work, the outcome was a
sharp drop in productivity, as in Germany during World War I. In other
cases the land would lay fallow, as happened in the Soviet Union during
the 1920s.[321] In China during the Great Leap Forward, the attempt to
make women do agricultural work while men produced iron in back-yard
furnaces led to mass starvation.[322]
The Israeli kibbutzim provide another illustration of what happens
when the physical differences between men and women are overridden or
ignored. Partly because they were short of capital, and partly for
ideological reasons, the earliest settlements tried to support themselves
almost entirely by agriculture. Partly because of their socialist outlook,
partly because the harsh conditions in a new and unknown country made it
imperative to use every pair of hands, they carried the doctrine of equality
between the sexes to extremes rarely seen before or since. Pictures of that
time often show women, with scarves around their heads, wielding the
shovel or the hoe, though even then they tended to be assigned the lighter
tasks.
To make equality possible, they were largely relieved of housework.
That included cooking (meals were taken in common), laundering (done
by the kibbutz laundry) and looking after children (who lived in their own
homes and only saw their parents for several hours each day). The
difference consisted in that mothers, but not fathers, were given an hour
off work each day.[323] Even so, within a few years most women could no
longer keep up. Those who tried paid the price by aging very fast; the
figure of the kibbutz woman who looks as if she could have been her
husband’s mother used to be a familiar one in Israel. The rest started
withdrawing into the kitchen, kindergarten, school, laundry, communal
sewing plant, secretariat and clinic, causing those occupations to become
standard for kibbutz women for decades to come.
In summary, women have always been privileged with respect to work.
Partly this was because of their relative physical weakness. Partly it was
because they had children to carry or look after, and partly because the
risks to their health were understood. Partly, too, it was because, being less
able to defend themselves, they tended to stay nearer the home.
Conversely, the participation of women in male activities could itself be
one sign that those occupations were no longer dangerous. A good
example is provided by medieval and renaissance ladies who went
hunting, either shooting specially-made small crossbows or flying the
falcon. A more modern example can be found in the recent fashion for
cowgirls. With few exceptions, the fact that women were privileged in
respect to work was as true when women were free as when they were
slaves or serfs, when they worked without pay, when they assisted their
relatives or when they labored for strangers in return for wages.
Lest there be any misunderstanding, this is not to say that women’s
lives were necessarily easy, or that they had much leisure time, or that the
work they did was always pleasant, or even that they did not have to do
certain kinds of work considered degrading. Nor does it mean that
women’s work was not important. In subsistence economies that did little
or no trading, the distinction between the paid work of men and the unpaid
work of women was itself unknown.
What it does mean, however, is that the really heavy labor — the
ponos — was always and everywhere reserved almost exclusively for men.
3. Industrialization and Its Impact
Whereas women have always done less and lighter work closer to home
than men, the effect of the industrial revolution was to make many of them
stop working entirely. Behind the change was the mechanization of two
processes, production and transport. Mechanical manufacturing resulted in
a massive shift from numerous small businesses to a far smaller number of
large factories. Mechanical transport, meanwhile, assisted the change by
permitting far more people and goods to travel with unprecedented ease
and speed, to unprecedented distances, at unprecedentedly low prices.
The separation of the workplace from the home affected men and
women in different ways. Men started to commute, leaving the home in the
morning and returning only after the day’s labor was done. Women, having
a household and children to look after, were left behind. Previously most
women had done at least some productive work at some time during their
lives. It was around this time that the category of the full-time mother and
housewife was invented. This development took place at a time when
domestic servants were both cheap and regarded as an indispensable part
of life, even in lower middle class households. As urbanization spread,
fertility began to decline, making the lives of married women easier still.
[324] The higher their social status, the less likely they were to earn their
keep, either before marriage or after it.
Not all women, it ought to be noted, ceased working at the same time,
and some never did. That was especially true on the farm. The first laborsaving devices, such as steam engines to haul plows, were meant to ease
the hard labor of men. Women’s work was both lighter and, since it did not
involve bulk commodities, harder to mechanize. Inventing a grain
harvester is much easier, relatively speaking, than inventing a machine for
picking tomatoes. Indeed, another century would pass before machinery
started affecting the traditional tasks of women, such as gardening and
looking after livestock.[325] Cultural factors also played a role. Dutch
women stopped working earlier than most; conversely, women were
associated with dairy work long after they had left other agricultural
occupations.[326] The really heavy work, as well as that involving long
journeys away from home, continued to be all but monopolized by men.
Most employed women worked in domestic service, an area of
employment in which they greatly outnumbered men. In the mid-19th
century, 18 percent of the women in London over the age of 20 worked in
domestic service. Such workers accounted for 43 percent of all women in
London listed as having an occupation. In the United States, they
accounted for half of the female labor force as late as 1940.[327] In part
this was because they were unqualified to do anything else. In part,
however, it was because the work had its attractions. Then as now, some
people saw factory work as being irreconcilable with femininity. Work in a
household was considered both more pleasant and less impersonal.[328] It
also tended to be steadier, leading to low unemployment.
Another advantage was that a working woman’s basic needs, including
lodging and at least some of her clothing, were provided by others. The
same was true with food; domestic servants ate better than other workers
did. It has been calculated that in no other type of employment could
unskilled women of the lower classes earn as much. The hours were long
and free time was scarce, but this made saving one’s wages easier. Most
women only served for a relatively short time before leaving their
positions and getting married. Those who did elect to make service into a
career were very likely to gain promotion. In Hamburg, for example, only
1 percent of women in domestic service stayed at the lowest rungs. The
great majority became skilled housekeepers, companions and cooks,
among other more advanced positions.[329]
As the nineteenth century progressed, in the towns at any rate it was
only the wives of the very poor who worked. Even more than today, for a
man to be supported by his wife was considered incompatible with his
pride. Friedrich Engels’ maudlin description of “poor Jack” sitting at home
and shedding tears of humiliation while trying to mend his wife’s
stockings is a true period piece.[330] Even that great advocate of women’s
rights, John Stuart Mill, thought that “it is not... a desirable custom that the
wife should contribute by her labor to the income of the family.”[331] At
most, such labor was seen as a reserve to be called upon in extreme need.
Married women only took casual employment, returning home just as soon
as they could.[332] Over time, this even applied to the wives of unskilled
workers and immigrants.[333]
Among industrial workers, women comprised only a small minority. In
England, the most industrialized country by far, female workers numbered
just 8,879 in 1841. In the Dutch city of Tilburg, young male factory
workers outnumbered female ones five to one.[334] Women comprised
between 3 percent and 4 percent of the workforce in mining, a field they
had started leaving as early as the 1780s. And the women that did work in
mining rarely went into the tunnels, instead toiling above ground, sorting
coal and preparing it for transport.[335] As a French proverb had it,[336]
mining areas were hell on horses which went down the shafts and never
got out. They were purgatory for the men who made the journey every day,
and paradise for the women whose only contact with the dust and grime
was to help wash it off the bodies of their male relatives.
Even these minuscule numbers led to an outcry about the “corrupting”
effects of industrial work on women. In 1844, the first Factory Laws were
passed in England. Later they spread to other countries including Belgium,
France, Germany and the United States. Step by step, working women
were provided protection. It included limits on the trades in which they
could be employed, the hours they could be required to work, the
conditions under which they could be employed, and the shift work they
could, or could not, be made to do. By 1908, future justice Louis Brandeis
was able present the United States Supreme Court, in Muller v. Oregon,
with more than 100 studies on the need to protect women against
overwork. The strategy worked, and state regulation of women’s work was
declared to be constitutional. Yet notably, just three years earlier another
court had rejected similar regulation of an industry in which men bore
among the heaviest burdens, namely baking.[337] At any rate, by 1917 no
less than 40 states in America had passed some kind of protective
legislation for women.[338] It would only be much later that men, which
included male children aged 11 or older, were given similar protection.
When legislation for men did finally pass, it was modeled on the existing
regulations for women.[339]
By the 1880s, clean gas and electricity were beginning to take the
place of coal as the main source of energy. As a result, at least some
branches of industry shed off some of the dirt and grime that had
characterized Dickens’ “Coketown” at its worst. Large corporations
expanded their internal administration, creating an insatiable demand for
secretaries and receptionists. More white-collar positions were created by
the expansion of government, including social insurance, healthcare and
compulsory universal education.[340] Others owed their existence to
technological advances, such as the telegraph, telephone and teleprinter.
Previously work in household service or in factories had been below the
dignity of the typical middle class young woman, who spent her years
before marriage learning how to sing, embroider or paint. Now they
flocked to take up temporary employment in jobs which, if often
unexciting, were at least clean, safe and not too demanding in terms of
effort or skill. Thus it came to be that in 1887, three-quarters of female
workers in large American cities were under 25 years old. No fewer than
96 percent of them were single; in Berlin the situation was similar.[341]
Wherever easy, clean work was available, vast numbers of women
flocked to it. In the United States, women comprised 4 percent of clerks in
1880. A decade later, the figure had risen five times over, to 21 percent.
The overall number of office workers jumped from 504,000 to 750,000.
[342] In Germany between 1882 and 1907, the number of female white
collar workers in commerce, transport, the civil service and the professions
tripled.[343] The prevailing 19th
-century wisdom was that women were
weak, delicate souls. The further away from home they were, the greater
the danger that they might be corrupted by men, losing their manners if
they were lucky and their virginity if they were not. Most employers
shared these concerns. Even if they did not, to attract female workers they
had to protect them. Pictures often show halls filled by young, neatly
dressed women working at their desks with hardly a man in sight.[344]
These attempts to make the lives of working women easier
notwithstanding, they only entered the labor force to a limited extent. In
1851, about one-quarter of English women worked. Sixty years later, the
figure was still the same.[345] Whereas 83.7 percent of men aged 10 or
older were in the labor force, the same only applied to 31.6 percent of
women.[346] And that figure does not tell the whole picture, because
many women who did enter the workforce did so because, given the
demographic imbalance that emigration had created, they were unable to
find men. The situation in Continental Europe resembled that in Britain.
[347] In the United States, where there was a surplus of marriable men,
only one in 20 married women took up paid work.[348] And even that
figure does not fully reflect the reality at that time. A turn of the century
survey of “married” working women in Philadelphia revealed that of the
728 women polled, 237 were in fact widows, 146 had been deserted by
their husbands and 12 were divorcées. Just 333 of the 728 women actually
had a husband at home.[349]
When World War I broke out, it was at first thought that the disruption
of economic life would lead to unemployment among people of both
sexes. This, indeed, was what happened during the first few months.
Industries in which women were active, particularly those manufacturing
luxury articles, suffered from reduced demand or were forced to close.
[350] As a result, nearly half of British working women experienced
unemployment at some point in 1914.[351] However, as early as the
winter of 1914-1915, the situation reversed itself. As millions of men left
for the fronts, they had to be kept supplied with millions of tons of
materiel of every kind. Before the war the authorities had believed that
their main job would be to provide for the unemployed. Instead, they soon
found themselves screaming for labor — male or female — to take up
positions that had been left vacant or had been newly created.
As usual, women were concentrated in industries where the work was
comparatively light and clean. The most important ones manufactured
shoes, boots, hosiery, uniforms, webbing, kitbags, harnesses and other
such articles.[352] Next, women started taking men’s places in jobs that
brought them into contact with the public, and in which, again because of
their supposedly delicate souls, they had previously engaged seldom, if at
all. Women staffed counters at post offices and in banks. Women collected
bus and tram tickets, and drove taxis and even vans. In 1916, some
women, attracted by high wages, started entering munitions factories as
well. Still, even at the peak of the war in April 1918, when Britain’s armies
were reeling under the most powerful offensive ever launched by any army
in history up to that point, the workforce remained almost two-thirds male.
At that time, notwithstanding the fact that three and a half years had
passed since the outbreak of the war, the total number of British working
women only went up from 3,276,000 to 4,808,000.[353]
Other countries resembled Britain in this respect. By 1916-1917,
female workers in several countries — Germany, Italy, France and Britain
itself — were earning such excellent wages in the munitions factories that
men accused them of turning the war into a grand old time,[354] at a time
when men were dying by the hundreds of thousands. Even so, the really
heavy work in mining, forestry and transportation, among other fields,
continued to be done almost entirely by men. Such men were either
unqualified for military service because of age or health, or had been
released from service because their jobs could not be performed by
women. For example, at Wigan Pier, later to be made famous by George
Orwell, women formed just 5.5 percent of the work force. Of them, not a
single one worked underground.[355]
The war over, most women happily returned home. Normally the
question was not whether a married woman would stop working, but how
soon. Working men, influenced by left-wing ideologies, often considered
the question from the point of view of the class struggle. They felt proud
that capitalism, though it had succeeded in enslaving them, had failed to
lay its hands on their wives. Conversely, those whose wives worked tended
to be looked down upon.[356] In the United States, only 15 percent of
married women worked and only 20 percent people of either sex even
thought women should work. By 1939, the latter figure had dropped to 10
percent.[357] As one company vice president wrote at the time, freedom
from work was “God’s greatest gift to woman and her natural birthright.”
In all countries except the Soviet Union, both the proportion of working
women and their share in the labor force stagnated. In 1929, 40 percent of
all married women in the United States had never worked outside the
home.[358] At no time, and in no country, did they comprise more than
36.1 percent of the labor force.[359] To the limited extent that women did
take up work, they continued to hold the less strenuous and less unhealthy
jobs.
When the Great Depression struck, men bore the brunt of it. The net
effect of the Depression was to make it much harder for both men and
women to find work. However, it did not hit the two sexes equally.
Focusing on the United States, since fewer women worked, and since they
generally earned less, proportionally fewer women lost their jobs than did
men. As the decade wore on, the labor market rebounded faster for women
— in clerical work, in services and in light industries — than it did for
men, who found themselves undercut by women.[360]
The impact of unemployment on the two sexes also differed. For
women it often meant deprivation, while for men it meant both deprivation
and emasculation. As youths they were prevented from becoming men.
Particularly if their families could not afford to keep them in school, they
might end up becoming bums or hobos. As adults they stayed at home or
left it in search of work, only to return empty-handed. Their social
connections were cut, their status was reduced, their self-esteem was
undermined, and their marriages were destabilized.[361] All of this applied
to women, if at all, only to a much smaller extent. Photographs show
thousands of men lining up, three or four abreast, in front of soup kitchens.
As was noticed at the time,[362] bread lines did not contain any women.
Few women wound up in flophouses or slept in the park. However bad
their suffering, somehow women always managed to find a meal and a
roof over their heads.
World War II was a repetition of its predecessor. Once again, millions
upon millions of men were conscripted. Once again, governments called
upon women to fill the gap, first in services and white-collar work, then in
light industries, and finally in heavy industry. Still, with the exception of
the Soviet Union, women continued to enjoy many privileges. It is true
that Britain and the United States employed large numbers of married
women, but even in those countries women usually did the easier work.
For example in Britain, even at the peak of the war in 1943, 10 million
women did not work. On average, these women had less than one child
each to care for. At no time during the war did women comprise more than
38.8 percent of the labor force. Thus, after 5,000,000 men, as compared to
just 450,000 women, had been put into uniform, working men still
outnumbered women almost two to one. Only toward the end of 1943 did
the authorities finally start “directing” women with no children under the
age of 14 toward war-related work. As it was, fear that the scheme might
lead to rebellion by women and men alike caused it to be applied quite
cautiously.[363]
In 1945, out of 52 million American adult women only 19.5 million
held jobs. Among married women, only a quarter did.[364] Though the
image of Rosie the Riveter dominated propaganda, its link to reality was
tenuous. In metal-working plants of all types, male workers outnumbered
female ones more than three to one.[365] A 1945 poll sheds light on
women’s decision as to which jobs to fill and which ones to avoid. It
turned out that three quarters of employed women expected to go on
working after the war. If possible, they hoped to do so without leaving
their chosen fields. Only in war industry was the figure much lower. Yet it
was there that women obtained the highest pay of all, the difference
between them and female workers in other fields being around 50 percent.
[366]
So why did women want to leave precisely those industries that paid
best of all? Another series of statistics provides an answer. The largest
concentrations of women were found in industries with the smallest
number of accidents. In such industries, women outnumbered men nearly
four to one. Conversely, in the most dangerous places, there were hardly
any women at all.[367] Overall, the injury rate experienced by male
industrial workers was more than double that of their female counterparts.
[368] No wonder women disliked the male-dominated branches of
industry. In spite of the exceptionally high wages paid, most planned to
leave such work as soon as they could. To wit, most did so as soon as their
menfolk returned and resumed the burden of supporting them.[369]
In summary, the separation of the workplace from the home that
started during the 19th century had a profound impact on the working lives
of women. Only on the farms did women continue working as before.
Elsewhere the effect was to cause very large numbers of women, married
ones in particular, to cease working altogether. Partly because they did not
want to do heavy or dangerous work, partly because the law increasingly
prohibited them from doing so, those who remained in the urban work
force generally did the easier and safer work. The resulting pattern
prevailed during most of the first half of the 20th century, and in some
countries, such as the Netherlands, all the way into the 1960s.[370]
Whether because governments tried to protect women or because of
opposition from women themselves, that pattern not even two world wars
could change.
4. The Great Transformation
As was noted earlier in this chapter, during most of history workwas seen
as a burden imposed on man as a punishment one which, monks and
Protestants apart, most people tried to avoid as much as they could. During
the 19th and 20th centuries, this view began to die out. The change can be
traced back to the late 17th
-century English philosopher John Locke.
Locke’s argument was that, in the state of nature, everybody had as much
right to everything as anybody else. The origins of private property were to
be found in labor; if some owned much more of it than others, then
ultimately this was because they or their ancestors had worked harder and
done more to transform raw nature into products consumable by man.[371]
To the young Marx, productive work was the cardinal difference between
man and other animals.[372] In the hands, or rather mouths, of subsequent
socialist leaders, work became the foundation of the social order. Going
further still, Soviet biologists declared the hand, rather than the brain, to be
the prime human characteristic. Thus, not only did work form the essence
of man, it had actually caused his evolution.
Previously most men had preened themselves on their wealth, social
status and education. Most women, incidentally, had also preened
themselves on their husbands’ qualities. But now capitalists and socialists
alike were starting to praise work. As a result, being a man of leisure
became socially unacceptable, so that even those who did not need to work
began doing so, or at any rate pretended to do so. Gradually they came to
regard work as the essence of their lives. Once work had ceased to be seen
— on the declaratory level, at any rate — as a burden and started to be
regarded as a privilege, it was not long before men, claiming to speak on
behalf of women, started suggesting that women share in it.
As the writings of John Stuart Mill show, the problem of emancipating
women from their husbands’ economic despotism was very much in the
air. The most important author to suggest that the instrument of
emancipation should be work was Friedrich Engels. The way he put it in
The Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State, under
“primitive communism” men and women had been equal, sharing the
fruits of the earth in common. However, technical progress and the
invention of herding and subsequently agriculture led to private ownership
over the means of production. Economically speaking, the shift made
men’s work much more important than women’s. Worse still for women, it
led to a situation in which property, which was no longer owned in
common, had to be passed to a man’s sons. The combination of inheritance
and private property proved deadly to the position of women in society.
The one way to break women’s economic, and therefore social,
dependence was for them “to take part in production on a large, social
scale.” By this Engels meant paid work outside the home. The unpaid
work they had previously done was, in his view, unproductive by
definition.[373]
Partly out of a genuine concern for women, partly in the hope that
women would join the movement or persuade their husbands to do so,
other socialist leaders endorsed these ideas. The most detailed program
was put forward by the founder of the German Social Democratic Party,
August Bebel.[374] In Bebel’s telling, women’s history was a sorry tale of
subjection and degradation made possible by women’s lack of economic
independence. Under socialism, he proclaimed, women would be
liberated. In fact, the right to participate in productive labor and be
remunerated accordingly was the essence of liberty. Women’s economic
dependence having ended, people of both sexes would be free — for the
first time in history — to choose their partners for love alone.
In many ways, Bebel’s work formed the basis for the policies adopted
by the Soviet Union from 1918 onward. Having seized power in a country
ruined by war and revolution, the Bolsheviks’ most immediate concern
was to restore production. They believed that the fastest way to achieve
this goal was to draw upon what they saw as the country’s chief untapped
source of manpower: the vast number of unemployed women. It was
primarily in order to enable, not to say compel, them to do so that the
nascent Communist state carried out some of the most thorough reforms in
women’s history.[375] The nature of the reforms was outlined by two
women, Alexandra Kollontai and Lenin’s wife Nadezha Krupskaya, both
of whom echoed Bebel without giving him due credit.
For Kollontai in particular, labor on behalf of society was the most
important thing in life so important, in fact, that she was barely
prepared to grant women the time needed to deliver another “unit of
labor.” To enable women to work, “the kitchen was to be separated from
marriage.” Women’s traditional chores, such as cleaning, cooking,
laundering, mending clothes and even child-raising would be
communized. In her more radical moments, Kollontai even predicted that
one-family housing would disappear. Its place would be taken by huge
dormitories. Indeed, plans for such dormitories were still being produced
by architects during the late 1920s.[376]
Had these plans been realized, they would have turned the Soviet
Union into a vast, impersonal kibbutz. If only because women refused to
have their children taken from them as the Communist Party wished, little
came of such ideas. In the end, the most thorough reforms were the ones
introduced into family law. Men’s position as the heads of households was
officially terminated, and with it went the distinction between legitimate
and illegitimate children. Expecting women to work for a living on equal
terms with men, the government made divorce so easy that the family
itself was all but abolished. With it went alimony, now understood as the
lynchpin of the old system. It was believed at the time that such monetary
payments robbed women both of their economic independence and their
pride.
The results, not least a skyrocketing divorce rate, quickly revealed
themselves. The number of deserted wives and children desperately trying
to survive without male support — that is, in the main, without any
support at all — rose into the millions.[377]Poverty bred crime. A
generation of youngsters was thrown into the street, forced to live by theft
or prostitution. In the late 1920s, the authorities performed an about-turn.
The family was restored to its place of honor as the basic unit of
Communist society. The prewar provisions that had subordinated women
to men were left off the books, but alimony was restored to the law to
make sure divorced men continued to support their wives and children.
Kollontai’s works disappeared from the libraries, and several of the men
responsible for drafting the earlier laws were shot. In the end, perhaps the
most important part of the original program to be realized was precisely
the one that concerns us here namely, the effort to push women into
paid work.
Before the Revolution, the vast majority of people in the countries that
would comprise the Soviet Union made their living by agriculture, which
meant that women had always worked both in the home and around it.
That was to change by the late 1920s, when a vast effort to draw women
out of agriculture and into other professions was underway. The share of
women in the labor force rose. It reached 24 percent in 1928, 26.7 percent
in 1930, 31 percent in 1934, and 35 percent in 1937. As in other countries,
the first women to be hired were those without a man to support them. As
late as 1936, by which time the Communist regime was firmly entrenched,
fewer than half of married women worked.[378]
At first, nearly the entire increase took place in sectors that had
traditionally employed women. These included light industry — food,
tobacco, textiles, leather and paper — as well as services such as teaching
and commerce. Beginning in 1930, however, a determined drive was
launched to push women to work in nontraditional fields. By 1930-33, 44
percent of recently-added construction workers, and as many as 80 percent
of industrial ones, were female. The share of women among all workers in
large-scale industry jumped from 28 percent in 1930 to 40 percent in 1937.
In the largest industrial cities, such as Leningrad, the figure was higher
still.[379] A select few women who succeeded in their new fields became
the foci of extensive propaganda campaigns. Some even earned the
greatest prize of all, a meeting with the Father of the Peoples himself.
Others were driven by draconian labor laws. Still, even in this brave new
world, the leaders’ own wives did not work.
Millions of other women entered Soviet universities and obtained a
professional education. Often they did so in fields previously reserved for
men, such as engineering,[380] though not to the extent that the state
would have liked. However, no more than their male comrades were
women able to overcome the intolerable rigidities of the regime and its
tendency to stifle any initiative, economic or otherwise. In the end, the
Communist hierarchy of labor — including, after 1945, that which
prevailed in satellite countries such as East Germany and Czechoslovakia
— came to resemble that of all other countries. Most women worked in a
handful of occupations that had few men. The most important ones were
teaching, low-level administration, personal services and retail.[381]
Soviet women were concentrated in the less prestigious, low-paying
positions. Women may have been well represented in medicine and law,
but that is in large part a reflection of the mediocre income and prestige of
professionals in those fields. In the economy as a whole, the higher up one
went the fewer the women one encountered.[382]
Cramped housing, the need to spend hours queuing for the simplest
consumer goods, and the continued burden of housework made the lives of
many women intolerable. And from the 1930s onward, they responded by
having fewer children. In the Soviet Union, contraceptives were always of
doubtful quality, in short supply and, at times, officially discouraged or
even prohibited. Hence the main method of birth control consisted of
abortions, both legal and illegal. It has been estimated that, during the last
years of the regime, two-thirds of all fetuses were aborted.[383] Even
under the best of circumstances, abortion is a traumatic experience. In the
Soviet Union, where it was often carried out under difficult conditions and
with little or no anesthetics, it was more so still.[384] It would scarcely be
too much to say that, over the 70 years Communism lasted, its attempt to
emancipate women by making them work on equal terms with men caused
their very will to live and give life to be extinguished.
It was only around 1980 or so that the regime understood it had a
problem on its hands.[385] Seeking a solution, it began by closing 450 of
the harder and more hazardous occupations to female workers. Next,
women got permission to work part time. Other women were allowed to
do certain kinds of work at home so as to combine work with child care.
This was followed by longer periods of paid and unpaid parental leaves.
[386] Finally, Mikhail Gorbachev launched a “back to the home”
campaign that would have made the fathers and mothers of socialism spin
in their graves.[387] Soviet women had learned their lesson, refusing point
blank to enter manual trades.[388] Some women swore at feminism, which
they held responsible for forcing them to work. But it was too little, too
late. By the time Communism collapsed, so hard had women’s lives
become that Russia’s population was declining by 1 million each year.
During the 1990s alone, the population of St. Petersburg contracted by 10
percent.
In the 1960s, the idea that work was both a privilege and an
indispensable tool for woman’s emancipation reached the capitalist West.
Ideologically speaking, this was a revolution. In 1930, Sigmund Freud
declared that the “natural” human propensity was to shy away from work.
[389] Well into the 1950s, the expression “wage slave” continued to be
used. It described the kind of man who spent his entire life working for
corporations that not only controlled him but seldom hesitated to fire him
at a moment’s notice. Women made clear they had no intention of
participating in such servitude any longer than necessary. In 1945 and
1946 alone, 3 million American women stopped working and returned
home.[390] In Britain after World War II, the platforms of all three major
parties called on women to continue working. Women, however, had other
ideas. Far from enjoying “their new independence,” as one researcher
found, women, and married women in particular, had been “made
miserable by the wartime interruptions of family life” and “fervently
wish[ed] themselves back into their prewar home routine.”[391] The
outcome was a short-lived baby boom. Meanwhile, to take the place of
those who had left the labor force, foreign workers had to be imported.
[392]
In the ensuing decades, the situation steadily changed. The first factor
behind the transition was longer life expectancy, which meant that the
average woman would spend a greater part of her life without having
children to look after. A second cause was the reestablishment of the longterm trend toward declining fertility, which led to the same result as
greater life expectancy. Yet another reason was better education
opportunities for women, which made many of them wonder if being a
housewife was not, in fact, a colossal waste of their knowledge and skills.
The result was what Betty Friedan called “the problem without a name.”
Women, she claimed, were confined to the mind-numbing routine of the
home. They spent their time cleaning floors, dusting cupboards and, by
way of supreme achievement, baking cookies. Bored and isolated, they
became mentally ill, or took to the bottle, or found a lover.
Encouraged by Friedan’s message, legions of married women in all
Western countries started leaving home to take up paid work. By the last
decade of the 20th century, in most developed countries the percentage of
women who were in the labor force was beginning to approach that of
men.[393] Most middle class women — by this time, the majority of
Americans in particular described themselves as middle class — sought
work that would be light, pleasant, clean and not too demanding in terms
of time. Thanks to the fact that working hours had fallen by nearly onethird (from 59 to 40), millions of them were able to find precisely such
work. An important role was played by the rise of the service sector. To a
large extent, the process became self-reinforcing. Most women continued
to do housework and mind their children as well as do their jobs. The
solution was to contract out domestic functions they had previously
performed with their own hands. Such tasks including minding small
children and cleaning the house, as well making, mending and laundering
clothes. It also included a growing reliance on prepared food for
consumption both in the home and outside it.
The needs of working women led to the rise of an entire new branch of
the economy known as “household services.”[394] Almost all of those
performing the services were themselves women. Women, in effect,
created work for other women, who in turn created work for yet more
women. For example, in Britain between 1985 and 1996, the sums spent
on domestic service doubled, making it the fastest-growing part of the
entire economy.[395] In the United States during the early 1990s, women
accounted for 97 percent of all nurses, 97 percent of childcare workers, 73
percent of teachers, 84 percent of elementary school teachers, 97.8 percent
of pre-kindergarten teachers, and 68 percent of social workers. The
division of labor in many other services has been equally slanted.[396]
Thus, in a great many cases, the effect of women going out to work has
been not so much to change the nature of their tasks as to make them do
for strangers, and outside the home, what they had always done for
themselves and their relatives inside it.
Insofar as the vast majority of women entered work that neither
demanded heavy physical labor, nor required long distance travel, nor
involved risk or danger, women still remained the privileged sex. Insofar
as pressure by feminist organizations has caused most of the previous
restrictions on female labor to be dropped, women have become doubly
privileged, being literally able to have their cake and eat it too. Meanwhile,
in all developed countries almost all the really hard work continues to be
done by men. Just as was the case a century ago, women in such fields as
mining, construction, utilities and transport constitute a very small
minority.[397] Just as it was a century ago, it is almost exclusively men
who work in forestry and heavy industry. Men plow the fields, dig the
canals, lay the tracks, build the roads, and move heavy loads (hence those
twin expressions, “manhaul” and “manhandle”). They also construct
buildings, operate and maintain large pieces of machinery,[398] put out
fires and hunt violent criminals. In most countries it is almost exclusively
men who drive trains, trucks, vans and taxis, to say nothing of piloting
sailing ships and, until recently, commercial aircraft.
The reason why men do these and other hard jobs is, of course,
because for them they are not as hard as they are for women. When
women do enter men’s work, it is usually only a question of time before
they get out again.[399] Thus much of the training they receive is wasted.
If these problems are to be avoided, then men’s work must first be made
easier, as happened when the introduction of computers turned printing
from a dirty, messy job into a clean and efficient one.[400] The
combination of modern anti-discrimination laws, on the one hand, and
women’s reluctance to pull up their sleeves, on the other, can lead to
strange results. Thus, whereas 80 percent of all clerks in the United States
are women, the one “clerical” job that involves substantial outdoor
walking — mail delivery — is done almost entirely by men.[401] Even in
all-female prisons run by women for women, construction and
maintenance work is done exclusively by men.[402] Finally, to the extent
that any occupations are still reserved for men, without exception they are
those which involve the heavier, less salubrious, work.
In all developed countries, without exception, women spend fewer
hours working. In the United States, female doctors work fewer hours than
their male counterparts; the same is true for female lawyers.[403] In Japan,
nearly one-third of the increase in the labor force between 1960 and 1986
was accounted for by female part-time workers. Since then the figure has
continued to grow.[404] In Germany, only one-quarter of mothers of
young children work, and only half of those do so full time; fathers of any
age who hold part-time jobs, by contrast, hardly exist at all.[405] Young
Swedish women work fewer hours than their male peers; the same goes for
older Swedish women. The same also goes for married Swedish women,
as well as cohabiting ones. Swedish women with children work fewer
hours than Swedish fathers; so, too, do Swedish women without children.
[406] And fewer than half of Swedish women with preschool or schoolage children work full time.[407] Not for nothing is the Swedish welfare
state said to be “women-friendly.”
The usual reason given for women’s shorter hours is the famous
double burden. However, upon closer inspection, this well-worn argument
falls apart.[408] To be sure, women who do not hold a job spend more
time doing housework than do their spouses, but this is only part of the
story. Contrary to conventional wisdom, it is simply not true that working
mothers devote much more time to childcare than do working fathers.
Since many children from the age of 6 months up spend much of their time
outside the home, looking after them only takes up a tiny fraction of a
woman’s adult life. The smaller the family, the truer this is. Depending on
whether they work part time or full time, mothers in developed countries
are said to devote 1-4 percent of total available time to childcare,
compared to 2-3 percent for fathers. So limited is the time academic
mothers spend raising their children that they actually outperform their
colleagues who have never given birth.[409]
Furthermore, work can be defined as any task that one person can
entrust to another to do for him or her. Using this approach, a United
Nations survey in 13 different countries found that men spent nearly twice
as much of their total time working than women, 66 percent to 34 percent.
[410] As a result, women have more time than men to look after their
personal needs, such as eating, dressing, socializing, watching TV and
sleeping.[411] If they “value a well-rounded life,”[412] then this is
because they have leisure to do so. Women who work part time also enjoy
other advantages. They are much less likely to work overtime or at night.
They pay proportionally far less taxes,[413] which means that, on an
hourly basis, they can earn much more than men holding similar but fulltime jobs.[414] Possibly as a result, part-time workers tend to be much
more satisfied with their jobs than full-time ones. Part-time female
workers with children also enjoy better health than their fully-employed
sisters.[415] No wonder only 10 percent of British part-time female
workers expressed in an interest in working full time.[416]
One might conclude that, in everything pertaining to work, it is only
full-time working women who really measure up to male standards. But
even that is not correct. Even when people of both sexes hold full-time,
year-round jobs, men work longer hours than women do. In both Europe
and the United States, “full time” means 10 percent more for men than it
does for women.[417] In Britain, whereas 28 percent of male full-time
employees regularly spend more than 48 hours on the job each week, half
of female ones work fewer than 40 hours.[418] Factoring in overtime, the
difference is greater still. For example, no sooner did large numbers of
women enter the American automobile factories in the late 1960s than they
and their representatives demanded that the old system of mandatory
overtime be abolished. When that demand was granted and voluntary
overtime substituted, they were still not satisfied. They declared that since
men were more prepared to do overtime, the right to do so discriminated
against women. By 1973, women workers’ contradictory demands had
driven the Union of Auto Workers almost to distraction. As part of its
attempts to bring the matter to a close and move on with business, the
union endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment. That legislation, however,
ended up being rejected by most women.[419]
Since 1970 or so, depending on the country in question, working
women have demanded, and often obtained, the following benefits: shorter
hours, shorter weeks, flexible hours, flexible weeks, flexible career
tracks which, in the professions, can mean working 35 hours per week
instead of 60 [420] menstrual leave, breastfeeding breaks,[421]
hormone breaks,[422] paid maternity leave and unpaid maternity leave
with a job guaranteed upon return after months or even years of absence.
In Germany, women also have the right to deduct the cost of household
help from taxes, similar to American women’s right to deduct childcare
services. And in Britain, women are guaranteed the right not to do
unhealthy work or be moved from one location to another,[423] not to
mention employer-supported kindergartens and vouchers to pay for those
kindergartens. They are also granted time off for childcare, emergency
childcare, care for sick children and care for the elderly.[424] Britain also
has special training opportunities, known as mentor programs, to help
women climb the corporate ladder.
So numerous and varied are the programs offered by many
corporations that keeping track of them has become a job in and of itself.
Specially-developed software is utilized to assist women in applying for
such programs. To ensure that such benefits do not go unutilized, women
demanded, and in many cases obtained, obligatory representation on
corporate boards.[425] European corporations call these programs “total
E-quality.” However, since many of them are open to women only, it is
hardly equality in the literal sense of the word. In some cases the language
of the law permits men to take equal advantage of such programs, but this
rarely occurs in practice. When men enter female-typed occupations, they
still tend to work full time.[426] Even in Sweden, only 8 percent of
eligible men made use of their right to work part time after the birth of a
child.[427]
By contrast, so rarely are women expected to work like men that many
of the women officially in the labor force are actually at home enjoying
their privileges. Again, this is particularly true in Sweden, arguably the
most advanced welfare state of all. Parental leave is granted in Sweden at
90 percent pay for as long as 15 months. In addition, parents are entitled to
as much as 60 days of leave per year to look after each sick child.
Assuming a working year of approximately 220 days, a woman with two
children can take off work more than half the time without suffering any
kind of disadvantage. Scant wonder that most of them tend to work for the
public sector, where profit is far less of a priority and where productivity is
hard if not impossible to measure. Scant wonder, too, that a survey found
that only one in seven working mothers of young children were present on
the job.[428] So inclusive is Sweden’s definition of woman’s paid work, in
fact, that it distorts the country’s entire labor statistics. Adjust the data, and
much of the increased participation of Swedish women in the labor force
since roughly 1950 is exposed for what it is: a myth.[429]
What applies to developed countries also applies, in a different way, to
developing ones. Since their economies were based largely on agriculture,
until recently the division of labor in these countries was, as one would
expect, as it has always been. In all of them, men did the heavy work as
well as that which involved journeys away from home. On an annual basis,
women spent fewer days working than men. When they did work, they
usually undertook the lighter tasks close to the home so as to be able to
keep an eye on their children.[430] On the other hand, even in these
countries there were at least some comfortable jobs available in
administration or the professions. Such jobs tended to be disproportionally
held by women.[431]
Industrialization reached developing countries in the 1960s. Often it
took the form of foreign-owned plants designed to manufacture items such
as textiles, and later on electronics, using locally-available, cheap, mainly
female labor. In other cases it was a question of processing data for
companies, such as airlines, which were located elsewhere. Such work was
repetitive and boring, and as was the case in some industries, the need to
spend days poring through a microscope or in the presence of noxious
chemicals occasionally made it injurious to health. Still, as the women
themselves were the first to admit,[432] it was a lot better than slogging
away in the mud, the more so because it paid up to 25 times as much.[433]
No wonder it often became the subject of fierce competition. Compared to
the work of most men, whether in agriculture or in urban trades like
construction and transportation, it was safe, easy and clean.
The outcome was that in countries including South Korea, Taiwan, the
Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and Mexico,
women began entering the plants by the hundreds of thousands. As in 19th
-
century Europe, most of those who stitched sport shoes, or assembled
computer circuits, were young and unmarried. Very often they lived with
their families and were supported by them while contributing little or
nothing to household income. Instead, they spent their wages on luxuries
such as clothes and cosmetics. Others saved as much as 50 percent of their
income.[434] Once the women married and left the labor force, as most
did,[435] they continued to be supported, this time by their husbands. Pace
Western feminists, they refused to “recognize that they are exploited or
organize to challenge the sources of that exploitation.”[436]
Not only in these countries, but in all countries since the industrial
revolution, a disproportionate number of working women were single or
widowed. Later on, owing in part to the spread of feminism, these two
groups of women were joined by the growing army of divorcees. Married
women — both those who do work outside the home and, even more so,
those who do not — for the most part still expect their basic economic
needs to be provided by men. Recent works on, and by, career women
describe the joys of being in the labor force as well as its disappointments.
The latter include the need to please one’s boss, moving from one location
to another, sudden reversal of fortune owing to corporate restructuring, or
simply the loss of personal freedom and leisure time to devote to family
and friends.[437]Those disappointments and those joys, it would seem safe
to assume, affect men just as much as women. Having set out to take the
male world of work by storm, sooner or later women were bound to
discover its disadvantages as well. When they do discover those
disadvantages, however, many women are permitted to do something that
men are only rarely able to namely, stop working and return home.
Periods of unemployment apart, men normally stay in the labor force
throughout their working lives. Not so women, two-thirds of whom are
constantly drifting in and out of employment. As a result, in most
industrialized countries late-twentieth century women were actually less
likely to work continuously throughout their lives than their sisters before
them. In Britain, just 10 percent of women in 1980 remained continuously
employed, a drop from 15 percent in 1965.[438] In the United States,
working mothers put in slightly more than half as many hours as working
fathers into their jobs.[439] Whether or not they are married, over a
lifetime career women are likely to work 40 percent fewer hours than men.
That is arguably the single biggest reason why their work experience does
not, on average, match that of men.[440] In sum, for most women the old
pattern whereby they only participate in the economy to a limited extent
persists. Perhaps the most important change has been a very sharp drop in
the birth rate. Even the few remaining children are likely to spend so much
time at day care centers or school that they hardly know their parents;
leaving women with less to do than at any other time in history.
As for men, their pattern of employment reflects the fact that they
continue to bear the prime responsibility for feeding their families.
Lacking a socially acceptable alternative, it is usually the only choice they
have.[441] Few people will object if a married woman decides to leave the
workforce to spend the rest of her days, say, watering her plants or
resolving her internal conflicts. On the contrary: Her “reluctance to forfeit
her entire self for the sake of her career” may earn praise as “particularly
thoughtful and intelligent.”[442] A man who makes the same choice will
be devalued by men and women. Very often this is true even if his
economic future is secure. If his wife continues to work, then this is likely
to be doubly true. At some point, the man’s wife will begin to wonder why
she should carry the entire burden on her own. Once she starts doing so,
divorce is usually on its way.[443]
Today, as before, for men to earn their bread by the sweat of their brow
remains a duty that the vast majority of them can escape, if at all, only if
they are unmarried, childless or both. Today, as before, women who follow
a similar path are mainly those who do not have a man to support them. In
addition, married women, and to a lesser extent unmarried ones, tend to do
easier work, work fewer hours and drop out of the labor force earlier than
men. What happens when women are not granted these privileges is
illustrated by the fate of both kibbutzim and the Soviet Union. In the latter,
it literally led to the country’s collapse. As the number of Russians
stagnated and started to decline, Moscow lost its grip over its remaining
population. Many of them were Muslim, meaning that women were less
likely to be employed and that their fertility remained high.[444] To a
lesser but still significant extent, the same was also true elsewhere in the
former Eastern Bloc. Such were the consequences of women’s
emancipation, communist style.
5. Conclusions
When it comes to work, women have always enjoyed many privileges over
men. To a considerable extent, these privileges can be traced back to the
biological facts that limited the labor women could perform. Certainly if
they had children, and to a lesser extent even if they did not, women were
also prevented from traveling far from home. Even in the United States
during World War II, out of 106,000 women who worked for the railways,
only 250 — less than one-quarter of 1 percent — were active in
railroading proper.[445] If it is true, as some say, that “it is far easier… to
switch from being a wage worker to occupying a domestic role than to do
the reverse,”[446] then perhaps one reason for this is because men’s work
is often hard.
Women’s privileges changed over time. Each time a technological and
economic revolution took place, such as the shift from agriculture to
industry, or from industry to services, it affected the work of people of
both sexes. Women began working in the fields, and then in the factories.
They also began working at home, in offices, and in sales outlet. Wherever
men and women worked, however, a clear division of labor always
prevailed. Most women were concentrated in a relatively small handful of
occupations. Here and there a societal emergency, such as the busy
agricultural season or a war, might cause women to join in men’s work.
However, over time the customary division of labor always reasserted
itself. As long as work was considered a burden, women, like men, did
their best to avoid it. Much more than men, women were sheltered from
work, either by their male relatives, prevailing social attitudes, or both.
Sometimes the work of men of earlier generations became the hobby of
women, as with horseback riding and pottery. In this sense, too, women
represent the leisure class.
Over the past century and a half, first socialist and then feminist
writers have declared work to be a right and a privilege. Yet throughout,
the situation has remained fundamentally unchanged. Understandably,
most women compelled to work by economic circumstance continue to see
their jobs as a burden. As turnover statistics show, often they take the first
opportunity to escape from their jobs. This, incidentally, is one reason why
feminism has only enjoyed limited success among working-class women.
As to those women who took up work even though they did not have to,
they, too, for the most part have retained their privileges. This includes
doing less, and lighter, work; the right to leave their jobs when they so
choose; an earlier retirement age; and, as the plum in the pudding, the right
to strike a self-righteous attitude toward work by claiming that, unlike
men, they are in it not for the money but for the “interest” and
“opportunities for self-development” it offers.[447]Now as ever, the higher
the class to which women belong thanks in large part to the work of
their menfolk the truer this all becomes. Among all of Adam’s
descendants, it is to these women that his curse still does not apply.
Chapter 4: From Dowries to Social Security
1. The Great Riddle
If it is true that the origin of all wealth is work, as the philosophers of the
Enlightenment in particular believed, and if it is true that women have
always done less and lighter work than men, then how did women manage
to survive and, quite often, prosper? The answer is simple and well known:
to a large extent, the reason why women could survive is because they
were fed, clothed, housed and looked after by men. To quote the most
important female anthropologist of all time, Margaret Mead: “Somewhere
in the dawn of human history, some social invention was made under
which males started nurturing females and their young... In every known
human society… the young male learns that… one of the things which he
must do in order to be a full member of society is to provide food for some
female and her young... The division of labor may be made in a thousand
ways… but the core remains. Man, the heir of tradition, provides for
women and children.”[448]
In this chapter, the mechanisms society has devised to make men
support women will be explored in some detail. Ignoring childhood as the
time when people of both sexes cannot look after themselves, the chapter
begins with an examination of the arrangements made to ensure that
women should be provided for within the family. That examination is
followed by a look at the ways various societies have sought to help
women who for one reason or another did not have husbands or male
relatives willing and able to take care of them. Next, this chapter examines
the way many of these arrangements were taken over, or adapted, by the
modern welfare state. From all this it will quickly become evident that the
great riddle is not, in fact, a riddle at all. Women have always been
supported by men, and a society in which this was not the case has yet to
be discovered.
2. The Economics of Marriage
In the eyes of the German philosopher Georg Friedrich Hegel, the defining
characteristic of the family is that it is based on altruism and love. In this
respect it differs from civil society, which is the province of egoism and
economic competition. It also distinguished the family from the state,
which polices both the family and civil society and allegiance to which
provides the spiritual significance of human life.[449] The idea certainly
has much to recommend it. Nevertheless, there is no question that no
family is, or ever has been, based solely on love.
Among other things, the family is an economic institution. As such, its
purpose is to guarantee that the woman or women will be provided for.
Cases in which the situation is reversed are rare. Where and when they do
exist they are expected to be temporary, as when wives see their husbands
through school or so-called cougars spend part of their lives with younger
men. The ways society makes men look after their female relatives vary.
Many societies have long had, and some still have, the levirate, an
arrangement that permits and often obliges a dead man’s brother to marry
his widow. If the Koran allows a man to take several wives, it does so not
in order that he may have fun, but as a way of providing for widows. In a
society without clear territorial borders or any kind of police force, women
were very vulnerable. Not accidentally, the Arabic term qawwamun, which
describes the position of men vis-à-vis women, can mean either
“defenders” or “maintainers.”[450] In Reformation Europe, the first thing
the authorities did when confronted with nuns who had left the convent
was to find men to look after them. One of those who was helped in this
way was the wife of Martin Luther.
Very often, before a man can marry he must work and pay, and after
joining hands in matrimony he must continue to work and pay. For
example, Germanic men in Tacitus’ day had to pay a dos as a condition for
marriage.[451] During the late Roman Empire, men betrothed their wives
by means of gifts. An entire body of literature developed around the
question of whether or not the would-be groom was entitled, if the woman
did not take the man’s hand in marriage, to receive his gifts back.[452] For
a Muslim youth to earn the brides-wealth or mahr often means having to
put in several years of hard work while living away from his native
village. No wonder that, when Ibn Battuta visited the Maldives, one of the
things he liked best was that the mahr demanded of him was small.[453]
Normally the money went to the woman’s relatives, usually the father
but occasionally the mother. However, the bride-to-be often benefited as
well. The dos a prospective Germanic son-in-law paid to the bride’s father
had to be handed over to the bride herself. In 18th
-century England,
prospective spouses gave presents to each other. A woman whose wedding
was canceled was entitled to receive back everything she had given but
a man only obtained half back.[454] In strict Islamic law, a woman is
entitled to the whole of the brides-wealth. Until recently in Palestinian
villages, a bride-to-be obtained roughly one-third of it. Normally she
would invest the wealth in jewelry that she then wore, thus putting her
husband’s love on show. Now that patriarchal power is no longer what it
used to be, she once again gets the entire sum.[455] If the wedding does
not take place, she is still entitled to part of the mahr.
Yet another form of direct payment was the so-called “morning-after
gift.” Depending on the time period and the man’s circumstances, it could
range from a small sum all the way to an entire district, complete with its
inhabitants and the income it generated. A French royal decree of 1214
gave a wife the rights to half her husbands’ property, both that which he
owned at the time of the wedding and that which he subsequently
acquired.[456] Likewise in India, such gifts ranged from a trinket to a
landed estate.[457] Often it was disguised as a “love gift.” In practice it
was an obligation that men, and high-class men in particular, owed their
wives. Once the gift had been made, it became the woman’s inalienable
property; it came to be known as her dower.[458] In Germany and perhaps
elsewhere, the custom was still in full force during the 16th century.[459]
The precise arrangements varied from one society to the next,[460] but
what all had in common was that it was men, and not women, who were
made to pay.
Once he had been married, a man could expect to support his wife or
wives for the rest of his life. This is one reason why, even in societies
which permitted men to marry more than one woman at a time, only a
small minority did so. Figures from Algiers during the 1860s are
indicative. Of the 18,289 married men in the city at the time, fewer than 5
percent had more than one wife, and only 0.4 percent had more than two.
[461]
This belief in man’s obligation to support his wife goes back to ancient
history. In ancient Egypt, the earliest literate society of all,[462] the words
of one man to his son make clear the husband-to-be’s responsibility:
If you are excellent, you shall establish your household
And love your wife according to her standard;
Fill her belly, clothe her back.
Perfume is a prescription for her limbs.
Make her happy, as long as you live!
She is a field, good for her lord.
You shall not pass judgment on her![463]
Arrangements also existed to ensure that women would continue to receive
support if they were widowed. One such example was permitting a widow
to continue occupying the house that had come with her late husband’s job.
Since daughters were expected to be supported by their husbands,
normally a man’s heirs were his sons. However, to provide for a childless
wife, a man could subvert the law by adopting her as his daughter.[464]
Much later, the Graeco-Macedonian and Roman occupations of Egypt
produced many important political, economic and social changes. What
did not change in occupied Egypt, however, was the husband’s obligation
to support his wife. A marriage contract dated 92 B.C. explains how it was
done at the time:[465]
Let Apollonia be the wife of Philiscus, having been persuaded
by him that it is fitting for her to be his wife, and let her have
mastery in common with him over all their possessions. And
let Philiscus provide for Apollonia all the things that she
needs and her clothing and the rest that it is suitable for a
married woman to have provided for her — and let him do
this wherever they live, according as their means allow.
The husband’s obligation to support his wife was also written into
subsequent Roman wedding charters.[466] Another example is the Jewish
ketubah, a standardized agreement which has remained unchanged for
centuries. In the document, the groom promises to provide the bride’s
“nutrition, clothing and sexual needs.” Should the couple divorce, then the
husband is obliged to compensate his wife with a sum specified in the
ktuba.
The duty of husbands to provide for their wives according to their
means is universal. It is can be enforced either by way of public opinion or
by that of the courts. Very often it was incorporated into sacred wisdom, as
in both the Vedic writings and Islam.[467] In England, the formula “with
all my worldly goods I endow thee” has persisted for almost a millennium,
in spite of all the changes in the laws that governed its application. To help
husbands support their wives, the latter were often given a dowry.
Returning to Philiscus and his sweetheart Apollonia, it is possible that she
herself provided the money. Normally, though, doing so was the duty of a
woman’s father; should he die, then it devolved on her brother or brothers.
In return for being allowed to administer the dowry, Philiscus had to
agree to several conditions. He was, according to the marriage contract:
“[T]o take no other wife but Apollonia, and no concubine, and
let him have no boyfriends or beget any children from any
woman as long as Apollonia is living, nor inhabit any other
household but the one over which Apollonia rules. Nor let
him repudiate her or do violence to her or treat her badly or
alienate any of their property in a way which is unfair to
Apollonia. If he is caught doing any of those things... then let
him pay back immediately to Apollonia her dowry... By the
same token, let Apollonia not be permitted to spend the day or
the night away from the house of Philiscus without his
knowledge. Nor may she sleep with another man, nor may she
squander their common household property, nor may she
disgrace Philiscus in the ways in which men get disgraced.
But if Apollonia willingly does any of these things, let her be
sent away from Philiscus, and let him repay to her the dowry
simply within ten days of her departure.”
The terms of divorce were striking. If a dissolution of the marriage came
about through some transgression of Philiscus, the dowry had to be
returned. If Apollonia was the party guilty of bringing about divorce, the
dowry also had to be returned.
In ancient Athens, as in all other societies, few fathers or other male
guardians would give their female wards to a man who could not support
her properly.[468] As in many other societies, the prospective husband
expected to receive a dowry to help him in his legal duty of supporting his
wife. But the dowry did not become his property. All he could do was
administer it on her behalf. If the couple divorced, the dowry had to be
returned. Men who failed to return their ex-wives’ dowries were penalized
a monstrous interest of 18 percent.[469] The relevant lawsuits were
handled by a special procedure, known as eisangelia, that was similar to
the one used for the most serious crimes, such as attempts to overthrow the
constitution. From the point of view of the woman and her male guardians,
eisangeliahad the advantage that a failed suit did not expose to penalties
those who had brought the case. Since Greek justice was
agonistic meaning that anybody seeking to impose a penalty on another
would have the same penalty visited on him in case he lost his suit this
was a great privilege indeed.
Dowries also served to regulate the transfer of wealth from one
generation to the next. To stay in ancient Greece, daughters received their
dowries upon marriage as a sort of “ante-mortem inheritance.”[470]
Dowries were a way of giving daughters their due even though their father
was still alive. Similar methods were used in Rome, where a prospective
bride might have property bestowed on her by her parents and by her
husband.[471]. Likewise, dowries were expected among the early
Germanic tribes, among Jews from at least the time of the Second Temple
onward, and also during the European Middle Ages.[472] By contrast, men
were compelled to postpone marriage until after they were able to support
families. Often that meant having to wait for their fathers’ death.
In Renaissance Italy, dowries were expected even in marriages among
the miserabili.[473] On average, marrying off a girl cost a father oneseventh of his wealth.[474] One 17th
-century English gentleman, Sir Roger
Wilbraham, complained that members of his class had to expect four
“casualties:” lawsuits, building costs, serving a prince and “marrying a
daughter.”[475] In late 19th
-century Europe, an entire family might pool its
resources in order to prevent a bourgeois woman from having to marry
below her station. The custom of giving daughters their inheritance years,
even decades, before their brothers received theirs remained common all
the way through the mid-20th
 century.
In all the aforementioned civilizations, it was assumed that married
women had limited, if any, ability to earn their keep. The idea, therefore,
was to help daughters attract husbands by having giving them dowries that
would act as an advance on their inheritances. Since it was husbands who
had to do the providing, they were given control over the property as long
as the marriages lasted. This did not necessarily mean they could do with it
as they pleased. If the dowry consisted of land, the husbands might not be
able to alienate it. If it consisted of cash, the prenuptial agreement might
stipulate that it be put into a bank where it would earn interest and from
where the husband could not withdraw it. If divorce came to pass, either
the dowry was used as a basis for calculating the amount of maintenance
due or else it had to be returned.[476] The same obligation also existed if
the husband predeceased his wife.[477]
In theory, the fact that women often received their inheritances in
advance should have prevented them from inheriting property. In practice,
women in early medieval Europe, Anglo-Saxon England and the Islamic
world were often able to get their dowries and inherit all or part of their
parents’ wealth.[478] Regardless of what the law might say, the same was
true in ancient Greece.[479] In Sparta, if Aristotle and after him Plutarch
may be believed,[480] so many men were killed in war that heiresses were
numerous and extremely powerful. By the 4
th century B.C women owned
two-fifths of all public land and a major proportion of private land as well.
When Spartan mothers demanded that their sons return from war, either
with their shields or on them, they may have been motivated by more than
pride alone.
Socially, and often legally as well, a man whose daughters were
married was supposed to leave his property to his sons, whose duty it was
to provide for their mother. By contrast, a woman was under no obligation
to leave her husband anything at all.[481] Provided her sons were no
longer dependent on her, she could often leave it to whomever she pleased.
This difference between the sexes emerges quite clearly from an
examination of the way women gave to charity[482] and also from studies
of French and English wills from the 11
th century to the 17th century. In
both France and England, women normally named a larger number of heirs
than did men. Particularly if they had no male offspring, but sometimes
even if they did, they were also more generous to other relatives,
especially female ones, as well as to servants, charities and the Church.
[483] The single biggest reason was that they could afford to: In early
modern England, over half of the widows in one sample bequeathed
wealth at least equal to the amount that had been left by their husbands.
Since men regularly earned more than women, it stands to reason that
the latter got more out of marriage than they put into it. British figures
from the period between 1780 and 1860 lend credence to this theory.[484]
A study of 1,350 working-class households from that era suggests that
husbands’ share in generating family income ranged between 55 percent
and 83 percent. Husbands, as long as they were employed, always earned
more than all other family members combined. At times they made nearly
five times as much. The low of 55 percent was reached in the mid-19th
century, during the so-called “hungry 40s.” Both before and after that
decade, the figure was considerably higher. Of the remaining family
income, more was generated by children than by wives. In fact, wives’
contributions never exceeded 12 percent, and in some years were as low as
5 percent. No wonder women were valued primarily for their fertility, and
derived what power they had from it. Only in families with unemployed
children did wives sometimes bring in as much as 41 percent of household
income. This exceptionally high figure refers to mining families during the
difficult period from 1787 to 1815. In other families, and at other times,
wives seldom contributed more than 25 percent.
As the domestic ideal established itself around 1850, the share of
household income generated by women declined.[485] The higher the
class to which the family belonged, the truer this became. By 1890,
women’s work in Europe and the United States contributed just 1.9 percent
to 3 percent of household income.[486] French women in 1914 contributed
a surprisingly high 11 percent to 30 percent. However, these figures only
apply to the lower middle class.[487] Even in our day, it is only the wives
with the most feckless husbands who do not get the better side of the
bargain. In Czechoslovakia shortly before its dissolution, women were
only responsible for 12 percent to 22 percent of household income.[488] In
the Soviet Union during the last decade before its collapse, only 15 percent
of women earned more than their husbands.[489] Swedish wives earn an
exceptionally high 39 percent of after-tax household income,[490] but as is
discussed later in this chapter, this figure can be attributed in part to the
fact that Swedish men pay far more in taxes. In other Western countries,
women’s contribution is much lower.[491]
In the United States, women who put out matrimonial ads are 10 times
more likely than men to look for money.[492] And with good reason: In
2010, women on average only contributed 38.5 percent to the income of
American families.[493] That figure is itself an improvement over 1940,
when it stood at 30 percent.[494] However, these figures refer to any given
moment during a couple’s life together. Women’s careers tend to be
interrupted more often than those of men, and normally they retire earlier
than men. Hence, over a lifetime the data grossly overestimate women’s
contribution to household finances. No wonder that in one survey, all the
employed homemakers interviewed believed “men should be responsible
for the financial support of families.” To make sure that men met their
obligations, 80 percent of people of both sexes said they would ostracize a
man who failed to provide for his family as he should.[495]
To earn money is one thing. To spend it, however, is another thing
entirely. At most times and places, most agricultural households were, in
the main, self-sufficient. If they were not, it was probably the men who
worked outside the home and earned money. Upon earning money, men
would then spend it on luxuries, often for their wives and daughters, as
well as on tools and implements that they could not manufacture by their
own efforts. They also spent their earnings on paying taxes. To the extent
that the household itself generated a surplus, going to the nearby market
and selling it was often the responsibility of women. This would enable
them to control the family economy, handling practically all the money
that the family possessed. To the present day, this arrangement still exists
in rural Cambodia.[496]
In urban contexts, the question as to which spouse would spend most
of the household income depended on whether shopping was a male job or
a female one. In ancient Greece, the former was usually the case. In Rome,
where some husbands praised their wives for being “thrifty with our
money,”[497] women probably controlled a considerable part of the family
income. Early in the industrial revolution, women’s purchasing power is
said to have stimulated demand in many industries ranging from textiles to
pottery.[498] By Victorian times, middle-class women were known as
“consuming angels.” Most advertisements targeted them, to the point that
men either are not shown at all or else are presented in a marginal way.
[499]
Further down the social ladder, most of the earnings of working-class
married men ended up in the hands of their wives. Many surrendered their
pay packet without even opening it, receiving back only what they needed
to buy their daily ration of wine and tobacco.[500] Today, too, women buy
80 percent of everything.[501] From the United States and Europe to
China and Japan, it is women who do most of the day-to-day shopping. By
contrast, major expenditures involving items such as a new house or car
tend to be decided upon by men and women jointly.[502] Possibly because
men work much longer hours, many of them walk around with only pocket
money.
Returning to 19th
-century Britain and America, whose legal system
derived from English common law married women could not own
property of any kind, at least in theory. In practice, however, things often
worked out quite differently. First, men were obliged to maintain their
wives both in this period and after the reforms of 1861, 1881, 1920 and
1964. Second, recognizing that wives were the main consumers, the law
permitted them to have and spend money for day-to-day use. In many,
perhaps most, cases, this meant practically all the money the couple
possessed. Third, many lower-class women, in England in particular, did
not bother to marry. Instead they lived in common-law marriages, which
enabled them to keep their property “separate from that of their husbands
from one generation to the next.”[503]
Finally, there were legal ways to ensure that a woman’s property
should not pass into her husband’s control, either during her life or after
her death. In the words of one female historian: “The concept of separate
marital property was firmly entrenched in the Anglo-American legal
tradition, far more so than that of a community of goods.”[504] Assisted
by specialized literature known as “conveyancing manuals,”[505] people
drew up prenuptial agreements. Alternatively they set up trusts. So
effective were trusts in protecting women’s assets that men used to
deliberately establish them in the names of their wives or daughters to
protect themselves against creditors in case they went bankrupt.[506] After
1880 the protections became even stronger, as several countries passed
laws absolving women of liability for their husbands’ debts. Meanwhile,
husbands’ liability for their wives’ debts remained universal and absolute.
Since it included debts contracted before the wedding, some women got
married specifically in order to shift the burden onto their husbands’
shoulders.[507]The obligation stayed in force even if the couple lived
apart, even if he did not have the foggiest idea of where she was and
even if she was sleeping with everybody except him.
So absolute was husbands’ liability that it even covered attorney’s fees
in divorce suits. In other words, women could file for divorce at their
husbands’ expense. As late as 1966, a New York court ruled that “legal
services rendered to a wife in a matrimonial action are necessaries and a
lawyer had a common law right to bring a plenary action against the
husband for having supplied such services.” A year later, another court in
the same state ruled that “the legislative intent seems to be to confine
obligations to pay the other party’s counsel fee to the husband or
father.”[508] In Kansas in 1984, according to one survey,[509] more than
half the men involved in divorce proceedings had to pay their wives’ legal
expenses as well as their own.
Since marriage is an arrangement by which men provide economic
support for women, logically that support should end if the marriage ends
in divorce. A man whose wife left or divorced him would, of course, lose
everything he had invested in her, both before the marriage and during the
time it had lasted. However, women expected to be supported even after
divorce. And at most times and places, they received that support. In
ancient Egypt, divorce entailed heavy financial penalties for the husband,
but none for the wife.[510] Both Hindu and Muslim law oblige husbands
to support their divorced wives. In other cases, she has the right to be
maintained by her children.[511] In Europe beginning in the Middle Ages,
divorce was very difficult to achieve for both men and women. As a result,
legally speaking a man might neverbe released from his duty to support his
wife even if the couple had long ceased to share a house and bed, even
if she had turned to prostitution, even if they had been formally separated
by an ecclesiastical court.[512] In this sense, if perhaps in no other, the
declaration “till death do us part” was quite literally true.
Between 1850 and 1920, many modern countries introduced
legislation aimed at facilitating divorce.[513] To do so, they introduced the
concept of “fault.” Though the reforms enabled either partner to sue, for
the suit to be successful he or she had to show that the other was to blame.
The economic bias behind the arrangement was evident from the
beginning. Throughout the second half of the 19th century, many wives
sued and won their cases because of their husbands’ alleged failure to
support them. At the lower end of the social ladder, a divorce might not
even be necessary. In Wales, a working-class woman whose husband did
not provide for her was regarded as free to marry another with or without
the formality of returning her ring.[514] As late as the 1960s, in most of
the United States a woman could obtain a divorce based on lack of
support. It hardly needs to be noted that that the reverse did not apply.
Since married women were not supposed to work, if she divorced him
she received alimony as a matter of course. If he divorced her, she also
received alimony, almost as a matter of course. Only if she had been
caught in flagrant adultery would an exception be made and even then,
not always. As far back as 1721, a certain Mrs. Centreville wrote that “a
wound in the reputation of an English woman... only lets in
Alimony.”[515] Afraid women might be left without support, judges and
juries treated adultery as “peculiarly a crime of darkness and secrecy.”
They demanded such high standards of proof as could rarely be met.[516]
As one New York court put it in 1974, the presumption of legitimacy of a
child born in wedlock was “one of the strongest and most persuasive in
law.”[517] Now that DNA tests allow paternity to be established beyond
doubt, some American courts still refuse to order them or accept their
results.[518] Thus not even the presence of children who are clearly
illegitimate necessarily infringes on a woman’s right to maintenance. No
wonder that, as long ago as the second half of the 19th century, American
women, realizing their power, filed about two-thirds of all divorce cases.
[519]
As the law was interpreted during much of the 20th century, a divorced
woman had the right to be maintained “at the level to which she had been
accustomed.” Often she was given up to 50 percent of her former
husband’s income for life. This even applied when the couple had no
children, even if she was perfectly capable of working, and even if this
meant a decade of guaranteed income for every year spent with him. But
whereas until the 1840s children stayed with their fathers, who remained
responsible for their economic welfare, later in the 19th century mothers
began to receive child custody almost automatically.[520] Since few
judges were so callous as to throw children into the streets, most also got
the couple’s home, if not permanently, then at least for as long as the
children remained minors.[521] None of this applied to divorced men. If,
as rarely happened, they asked for support, they were likely to earn both a
refusal and rebuke. As late as 1979, the United States Supreme Court had
to strike down an Alabama law that denied alimony to a person simply
because he was male.[522]
After 1975, the legal situation changed again. Largely at the insistence
of feminists, most modern countries did away with the “fault” clauses,
thereby allowing both parties to file for divorce without having to justify
doing so. As more married women entered the work force, the arrangement
whereby they received alimony but did not share in the couple’s joint
assets began to look unfair. Partly this was because those assets had been
accumulated by the labor of both spouses. Partly it was because alimony,
by assuming a woman was unable to fend for herself and perpetuating her
dependence on her former husband, was considered injurious to her
dignity. The new laws’ objective was to bring about “a clean break,”
meaning a situation whereby neither party would remain dependent on the
other.
Normally this was achieved by dividing the couple’s assets — other
than those which each party had brought into the marriage at the outset —
between husband and wife in proportion to the effort each had put into
their acquisition. With women now presumed to be as capable of working
as men, alimony went into decline.[523] Since men usually work more and
earn more, in case after case it turned out that the husband’s share in
accumulating the couple’s assets was much greater. As couples’ assets
were divided accordingly, and numerous divorcées received no payments
except support for any children they might have, many were forced to fend
for themselves. Even as feminists ranted against the “equality trap” they
themselves had helped create,[524] many divorced women were said to be
sinking into poverty.[525]
As has always been the case, and will surely remain the case until the
Day of Judgment, usually the divorced woman’s best way of avoiding
poverty was to marry another man. Compensating women for their lesser
earning capacity has always been among the most important purposes of
marriage. The arrangements instituted to accomplish that purpose ranged
from bride-service to dowries, from exhortation to the most stringent laws
and the penalties attached to them. Some arrangements benefited women
directly. Others did so indirectly by way of their male, and sometimes
female, relatives. Some were put in place before the wedding could take
place, while others were made following a divorce. All applied as long as
the marriage lasted. So deeply ingrained was the system that when
American couples asked the courts to release husbands from their duty to
support their wives, their requests were met with point-blank refusal.[526]
By insisting that women were just as able to make a living as men, the
Communists in the 1920s doomed millions of women to poverty. To a
lesser but apparently significant extent, the same has been happening in
Western countries from roughly the 1970s onward. By insisting, against all
experience, that women are as able to make a living as men, feminists
ended up destroying or threatening to destroy their sisters’ long-held
privileges. No wonder that, when the Equal Rights Amendment looked as
if it might make women liable for supporting their husbands, most women
preferred to keep the situation as it was.[527]
3. Women and Charity
The previous section examined how a woman who has a man to support
her is economically privileged. This section looks at how a woman who
does not have another person to support her is nonetheless privileged.
Rightly regarded as less able to earn a living, such a woman will usually
find it easier than a man to obtain assistance. This is especially true if she
does not have parents, especially if her morals are in danger; especially if
she is a widow, and especially if she has children. The mere fact that a
person is female may entitle her to benefits which, had she been male, she
could have only gotten if she were sick or incapacitated and thus prevented
from working.
In the book of Deuteronomy, the Lord designated widows, along with
orphans and strangers, as special objects for charity. In a series of curt,
sharp ordinances, He commanded the Israelites to take care of them and
“damned” those who failed to do so. Early Christianity continued where
Judaism left off. As at virtually all other times and places, in Roman
Palestine around the time of Christ, providing for women was the
responsibility either of their husbands or, in the latter’s absence, other male
relatives. Women who had joined the early Christian communities,
however, were often forced to severe their family ties. They were left
without support, which explains why the New Testament mentions them as
special objects for charity.[528]
Subsequent Christian societies continued the tradition. In medieval
Paris, Saint Louis donated 4,000 francs to set up the Filles de Dieu, a
refuge for ex-prostitutes he was trying to get off the streets in 1226. Two
centuries later, there were at least four other hotels that catered specifically
to women. Men could only get similar help if they were sick or leprous.
What was true of Paris was equally true of other medieval cities. In
Florence from roughly 1350 to 1500, the largest charitable organization
was that attached to the Orsanmichele Madonna.[529] Most of its clients
were women, particularly those who did not have a man to support them
and were either too old or too young to work. Single women comprised the
single largest group receiving such assistance, save for the elderly and the
widowed.
In early modern French prayer books, prayers on behalf of widows
outnumbered those on behalf of widowers four to three.[530] In day-today life there were certain forms of charity that only women could obtain.
The easiest way to help indigent women was always to hitch them to some
man. If necessary, this was done by providing them with a minimum
dowry so as to enhance their charms. The Talmud around 200 A.D
recommended that orphan girls be given fifty zuz out of the public
treasury. That was not exactly a fortune, but enough to buy two tunics and
a cloak, the minimum outfit every person had to possess if he or she were
not to go about naked. Among Orthodox Jews, the commandment known
as hachnassat kalah, literally “helping a bride enter her wedding canopy,”
is still practiced. It can involve spending tens if not hundreds of thousands
of dollars. The practice was also taken up by Christian Europe. Of the 50
earliest known English wills, several contain clauses providing for girls to
be given dowries.[531] Both in medieval Paris and in Byzantium, people
who donated or bequeathed money to charity often made specific mention
of unmarried girls.[532]
In 14
th
-century Florence, finding dowries was the task of the Monte di
Pieta, a sort of charitable pawnshop which used its profits for that exact
purpose.[533] In Bologna, the regulations of the Barracano Conservatory
specifically referred to “physically unattractive” girls who were given an
opportunity to earn their — quite substantial — dowries by staying in the
institution for seven years.[534] In Venice at the beginning of the 17th
century, the so-called Scuole grandi, or charitable foundations, spent
between one-quarter and three-quarters of their budgets on dowries. They
gave away 75,000 ducats a year, not including clothing and furniture.[535]
A century later, the Santissima Annunziata della Minerva annually
distributed dowries to 400 Roman girls. In theory it determined recipients
by first examining their means, but in practice few questions were asked.
The charity extended to young persons tended to be differentiated by sex.
Both boys and girls were placed in household work, the former in order to
become apprentices and learn a trade, the latter to work as servants and
accumulate a dowry. However, girls were much more likely than boys to
get their money in the form of an outright gift.
At all times and places, a special emphasis was placed on female
sexual purity. Finding a halfway respectable man to assume responsibility
for an orphan girl was one thing, but to do the same for a woman who had
worked as a prostitute or given birth out of wedlock was quite another.
Whether to prevent women from losing their virtue or to help those who
had done so already, a variety of relevant arrangements existed across
history. They started with shelters for the wives of abusive men, proceeded
through attempts to redeem prostitutes, and ended with houses where
unmarried but pregnant girls could give birth in secrecy and under halfway
decent circumstances. Between 1600 and 1800 some Italian cities even
developed their “conservatories” into interlocking municipal systems.
They transferred girls from one institution to another, as dictated by the
requirements of the moment and the resources available.
Women who could not support themselves but did not wish to marry
could be turned into nuns. During the Middle Ages some nunneries were
specifically designed as homes for noble but penniless females.
Throughout Europe until the Reformation, and in Catholic countries until
the French Revolution and beyond, individuals and societies which
provided dowries were often equally prepared to help girls take up the veil.
The number of women who were assisted in this way may have been
considerable indeed. For example, out of 38 nuns in one 18th
-century
French institute, only 21 had been endowed by their parents. Of the rest,
three had benefited from charitable donations and 14 were admitted free of
charge.[536]
Another way to help women was to give them a monopoly over trade
in certain commodities. A shortage of wool in Norwich in 1532 offers a
telling example. To enable spinsters to survive until the next sheepshearing season, butchers were ordered to sell skins exclusively to women.
[537] Towns and cities might permit women to trade even though they did
not possess the privileges of free citizens, thus enabling them to buy and
sell such items as eggs, cheese and beer.[538] For example, in 1708 the
city of Edinburgh licensed Anny Sempley, Mary McCallum, Jean Murray
and Anna Burnet, all unmarried women, to trade “for the space of seven
years gratis.”[539] Similar arrangements existed in places as far apart as
Kingston upon Thames and Geneva.[540]
Finally, in Europe as well as in colonial America,[541] arrangements
existed to assist widows and other female relatives of deceased craftsmen.
One way of doing this was by means of mutual insurance. Thus, in 18th
-
century Amsterdam the surgeons’ guild spent one-half of all available
funds — and fully two-thirds of those set aside for relief — for this
purpose alone. Other guilds had similar arrangements, so that the number
of women they assisted always exceeded that of persons of all other
categories several times over.[542] Another method was to permit them to
carry on the trade of the deceased even though they had not served an
apprenticeship and even though they were not guild members. Trades that
allowed this included “white” ironsmiths, glaziers, candle-makers, saddlemakers and surgeons, among others.[543] Elsewhere similar regulations
applied to printers, goldsmiths and many other trades.
Then as now, teaching a youngster a trade and registering him in a
guild was expensive. Then as now, exempting a person of either sex from
having to bear that expense was a great privilege. The professional status
that men could only attain by investing a great deal of sweat and money,
women could obtain simply by marrying. If, having outlived their first
husbands, they married another of the same guild, then so much the better.
When it came to the rights of women to engage in trade, the law of almost
all cities was prepared to turn some strange somersaults. For some
purposes the authorities treated one and the same woman as married and
unable to contract debts, but for others as independent and answerable for
her deeds.[544]
In 17th
-century England, widows (other than relatives) were
disproportionally likely to be remembered in the wills of other widows, as
were single women.[545] In 18th
-century Ansbach, a disproportionate
number of old widows were the beneficiaries of pious endowments.[546]
In Paris during the same period, the all-female hospital of La Salpetrière
sheltered three times as many people as did Bicêtre, its all-male
counterpart.[547] In the Oslo Parish of Gronland, widows who received
assistance outnumbered widowers three to one.[548] In Copenhagen, the
Brondstraedes Hospital took in five times as many women as men.[549]
Women’s greater ability to receive aid may explain why, in early modern
towns, male beggars regularly outnumbered female ones by as many as 4
to 1.[550] Another reason for this figure, it ought to be noted, may have
been that early modern parents cut boys off financially at an earlier age
than girls, and as a result more boys ended up without a livelihood.[551]
One of the first attempts to create a countrywide “welfare system” was
made by the French National Assembly in 1794. A resolution was passed
to introduce a “Livre de bienfaisance nationale,” which was a list of those
entitled to pensions from the state. Since statistics covering the entire
country were unavailable, each département was given a quota and told to
fill it as those in charge saw fit. Women, particularly single mothers,
occupied an important place in the scheme. They were put on par with
wounded or disabled war veterans. For example, in Montpellier the
intention was to assist 1,000 individuals. They were divided into four
classes: former soldiers, aged or infirm farmers and artisans, aged widows,
and mothers and widows deemed to be overburdened with children. Of the
1,000 who eventually registered, 253 were aged widows, and another 150
were among those overburdened with children. The total, therefore, was
403 women. In practice, however, women’s share of the pensions was
substantially higher, because few artisans met the stringent preconditions
and because far more women than expected applied.[552]
As the National Assembly’s inability to obtain the necessary data
shows, the Livre de bienfaisance was ahead of its time. As a result, during
much of the 19th century the old methods remained in use. Especially
during the first half of the century, the emphasis on female sexual purity
remained. Its importance may even have increased. One outcome was the
rise of many charitable societies aimed at protecting single women from
the advances of men. They did so by offering them lodging when they
moved into a new town in search of work, by setting up clubs where they
could spend their leisure, and the like. In Copenhagen, where such
arrangements dated to the mid-1870s, it took another 40 years before they
were extended to men.[553] A typical club engaged the women in
needlework. It also provided a small library, brought speakers, acted as a
labor exchange, and offered free coffee and tea. Others acted as temporary
homes for prostitutes who had mended their ways, or had promised to. The
numbers of women who were, or were claimed to have been, “saved”
reached into the tens of thousands. Occasionally a talented ex-prostitute
joined her saviors, writing, preaching and visiting her former comrades
with the best.[554]
Toward the end of the 19thcentury the definition of a “deserving”
woman began to change. Previously a woman was considered deserving
only if she had led a “blameless” life in other words, if she had not
entered into illicit love affairs and if her children were legitimate. After
1880 or so, this requirement tended to be watered down or eliminated. The
outcome was that women were more able to obtain charity even if their
children had been born out of wedlock.[555] Moreover, the spread of the
domestic ideal meant that divorced and deserted women could receive
assistance even if they did not have any children at all. In short, a poor
man received assistance if he had a woman, while a poor woman received
assistance if she did not have a man.
Given these privileges, it is not surprising that, among recipients of
relief, women continued to outnumber men. Thus, mid-19th century
Gothenburg, Sweden, had several charitable societies. Like those of New
York, most of them were run by women. They specifically targeted poor
women, either by distributing goods to them or else by teaching them the
principles of “tender and moral motherly care.”[556] Copenhagen during
the same period witnessed the construction of so many shelters for fallen
women, pregnant women, postpartum women, lactating women, women
with children and elderly women that they began “affecting the city’s
architectural profile.” By 1876, out of 56 housing projects for the poor, 20
specifically targeted single women and did not admit any men.[557] In
Stockholm, too, more women than men received subsidized housing.[558]
Nor did men have to reach adulthood to discover that, in respect to charity,
they were discriminated against. Thus, in Denmark and Sweden,
arrangements existed whereby middle-class families provided workingclass children with free vacations by inviting them to their summer homes.
Whether because boys found it harder to leave their jobs or because
families disliked having them, in both countries far more girls benefited
from this perk than boys.[559]
In Turin, Italy, in 1885 so many benefactors were prepared to donate
money to newly-delivered mothers that raising money for the scheme
proved easier than finding women who, in return for a paltry sum, agreed
to participate.[560] In late 19
th
-century Britain, far more women than men
received assistance.[561] Across the Atlantic, New York City around 1820
had a whole series for relief organizations specifically designed to assist
women. Needless to say, there were no similar organizations for men; even
the largest “coed” charitable organization, the Association for Improving
the Condition of the Poor, aided 27 percent more women than men.[562]
In the 1880s the Charity Organization Society, which had become the
largest of its kind in New York and which, like the rest, was run mainly by
women, assisted four times as many women as men. Some of the
difference can be accounted for by the fact that women were more likely to
be burdened with children. On the other hand, one post-Civil War inquiry
showed that, of all single women receiving aid in New York State, fewer
than one-quarter had more than one child. Of the remaining three-quarters,
many had no children at all.[563]
One method for helping needy women was to reserve certain
professions for them, a practice still widespread today. At the bottom of
the social ladder this applied to domestic service. So thoroughly feminized
did it become that male indoor servants all but disappeared. The same was
true of teaching. Like domestic service, teaching was safe, clean and only
moderately demanding physically. Like domestic service, it was often
regarded as the continuation of women’s traditional role in the home. To
be sure, one reason why women were preferred to men in both occupations
was because they only earned one-half to two-thirds as much as their male
colleagues. On the other hand, that very fact protected the women in
question against the encroachment of men. Such work was arguably
treated almost as a form of welfare for women.
As one female editor of a 19th
-century American women’s magazine
wrote, female teachers could not look forward to amassing a fortune.
Neither were they “obliged to give from [their] earnings support to the
state or government.”[564] The tendency to see certain professions as
sinecures for women, especially unmarried ones, may help explain why
women tended to suffer from unemployment less than men did. Even at
the height of the Great Depression, black American female college
graduates had what almost amounted to a guaranteed job waiting for them
in segregated schools.[565] It also explains the ban on married female
teachers. Far from being meant to discriminate against women, the ban’s
strongest supporters were single female teachers. The last thing they
wanted was competition from their married sisters. The latter, they
claimed, had a man to look after them.[566]
Today forms of relief that favor women over men are alive and well.
Whether in the form of homes for unmarried mothers, or of shelters for
abused wives, or of legal aid to divorcees, women receive considerable
societal attention and funding. By contrast, there are no public institutions
open to men only. Indeed any attempt to set up a government-backed
male-only institution would surely be squashed by the courts, if not by
society at large. In many countries, religious organizations continue to
provide women with dowries so that they may marry. Whereas women are
almost always entitled to share in any form of charity provided to men,
men are not permitted to share in many forms of charity provided to
women. This is true even if they are single, even if they are divorced,
deserted or widowed, and even if they have a brood of young children to
look after.
Even under the best of circumstances, for people to depend on charity
or receive relief is no great pleasure. That said, even under the worst of
circumstances, for a woman to obtain assistance has always been easier
and less humiliating than for a man. Assuming the Pentateuch was
compiled around 500 B.C and describes, as it claims to do, the social
situation as it existed several centuries earlier, this difference between the
sexes existed as far back into history as we are able to look. It still exists
today, and presumably will continue to do so as long as there are men and
women.
4. Inside the Welfare State
To assist needy people is one thing. To create a countrywide class of
persons who, having met certain requirements, are entitled to receive it, is
another. The former, known as charity or philanthropy or “poor relief,”
existed in all societies up through the end of the 19th century. Its offshoots,
though dwarfed by the welfare state and often supported by it, still exist.
The latter is characteristic of the modern welfare state. The one depends on
personalities and goodwill, the other on the supposedly impersonal
provisions of the law and the rights and obligations it creates.
The ultimate cause behind the shift from charity to welfare state was
the industrial revolution. As vast numbers of people migrated to towns in
search of work, those among them who did not find it, or lost it, or were
unable to do it, swamped the ability of private organizations to cope. The
contemporary switch from outdoor to indoor relief made the situation
worse still. To protect against impostors — in 1838, one writer estimated
that in London alone 1,000 false applications for aid were written every
day[567] — and cut costs, conditions in the new workhouses were made
fairly daunting. Those who lived in them were compelled to work.
However, when it came to women that requirement was sometimes
waived. No wonder that, particularly in the summer, when work might be
available elsewhere, workhouses were populated almost exclusively by
women.[568]
In socialist and capitalist states alike, sooner or later the government
was compelled to step in so as to alleviate the plight of the poor. In the
United States, for example, women were already a favored group by the
turn of the 20th century.[569] Some of the first steps were taken in 1906,
when several counties in California started providing aid to “deserving”
women with children in their own homes. Between 1908 and 1911,
Oklahoma, New Jersey and Michigan started providing mothers with
financial aid. By that time the idea of “mothers’ pensions” was in the air,
and spreading rapidly. Like other pensions, those provided to mothers
were intended to be continuous and permanent. Unlike other pensions,
they neither required an investment of capital nor depended on
contributions; instead, the pension was disbursed based on need. In 1911
Missouri became the first state to institute mothers’ pensions. By 1935, all
but two states had them on the books.
The schemes rested on the belief that the mother was the best guardian
of her children and that, to look after them, she should stay at home. As
late as 1968, Charles Schottland, president of the National Association of
Social Workers, claimed that for a mother of young children to work ran
against “a universally-held conviction.”[570] That was true even if she
was perfectly fit and able to do so but avoided work out of her own free
will. Worse still, often she passed the same attitude to her offspring, thus
opening the way for generations of welfare recipients. Initially in most
states, only widows were eligible for the program. As had also happened in
the case of charity, however, the provisions were progressively relaxed.
By 1921, the programs, in all but six of the states which had them,
were also open to divorced women, deserted women, single married
women, and the wives of men were incarcerated. Initially, to qualify a
woman had to prove her “fitness” by means of a demonstrable effort to
provide her children with clean, orderly homes. Over time, however, that
requirement tended to be dropped as well. As long as there was no
evidence of mental illness or abuse, benefits were provided to practically
all mothers under a certain income level. To receive benefits, all a woman
had to do was to have unprotected sex, conceive and have a child.
In 1935, Congress was asked to consolidate the various state schemes
and underwrite their cost in the Aid to Dependent Children program. There
was limited interest on Capitol Hill, however, for the simple reason that
children cannot vote. Only after it was explained to members of Congress
that the program was actually another form of granting mothers’ pensions
did the nation’s lawmakers see the program’s political usefulness and pass
the relevant legislation. The real purpose of Aid to Dependent Children
was to attract women’s votes. Had Congress really been concerned with
the plight of underprivileged children, it could have assisted them directly
by providing free school meals or vouchers to pay for their medical
expenses. At the time the program was launched, millions of men were
jobless. Since eligibility depended on a woman not having a man to
support her, it was clear to more than a few men and women that some
wives might be better off without a husband. Some women looked forward
to the day their husbands would expire so that they could collect widows’
benefits. Indeed, if only to oblige their wives, some husbands left home
and disappeared.[571]
Over time Aid to Dependent Children became the principal vehicle by
which millions of American women who could not, or would not, work
were saved from starvation. Needless to say, divorced fathers, or fathers
whose wives had deserted them, or whose wives were dead or in prison,
did not get anything. In fact, in the entire United States, the only one state
which did not discriminate against men in such situations was Colorado.
Other states compounded the injustice by permitting female relatives, but
not male ones, to receive the benefits if the mother was unable to. Under
some circumstances this could create a situation in which fathers were
compelled to surrender their children to grandmothers, aunts or sisters.
Only in 1975 did the courts finally make men eligible to obtain benefits as
well. However, even this victory proved short-lived. In 1980 Ronald
Reagan swept the Republicans back into power. Seeking to cut costs by
forcing beneficiaries of the Aid to Families with Dependent Children, as
the program was known by then, into gainful employment, the
administration began raising eligibility standards and cutting payments.
Apparently the fact that men had become eligible for a welfare program
was enough to put it on the cutting block.
The other important program created in 1935 was Social Security. Like
Aid to Dependent Children, Social Security favored women right from the
beginning. In part this was because of its contributory nature. Men only
got benefits if they worked and contributed. However, married women —
forming the vast majority of adult women — received benefits irrespective
of work. Also like Aid to Dependent Children, Social Security was built on
the assumption that the man in the family was its main breadwinner.
Consequently, a widow past retirement age would be entitled to receive
benefits. On the other hand, a man past retirement age whose wife had
died would get exactly nothing.
Given that the system discriminated against men, one might expect
that it would have been men who turned to Congress for help. As it turned
out, it was in fact women who fought to change the original structure of
Social Security benefits. Their reasoning was that even though some
women made more than their husbands, they would, if their spouses died,
only receive the benefits deriving from their husbands’ contributions. And
within three years of the establishment of Social Security, the rules were
changed so as to favor women even more. Widows who, as long as their
marriages had lasted, had worked and contributed to the system were now
able to obtain benefits in accordance to either their own contributions or
those of their husbands, whichever was higher. As so often, women were
able to have their cake and eat it too. The higher their income relative to
their husbands, the more likely this was to be the case. Widowers, as usual,
got nothing.[572]
In 1950 another change was made. The rules that discriminated against
male breadwinners were relaxed to some extent, but only if a husband
could pass a special “support test” that proved his financial dependence on
his employed wife. To do so he had to show that, in the year before his
wife’s death, his income had amounted to no more than one-quarter that of
his wife. The bar was set so high that it effectively excluded all but a few
men. Needless to say, no thought was given to the possibility of subjecting
women to a similar test. Unless they had been divorced, women continued
to enjoy automatic and unrestricted rights to any benefits that had been
earned by their late husbands. Having supported their wives during their
entire lives, those husbands were expected to continue doing so after their
deaths as well.
It was only in 1975, 40 years after Social Security was first instituted,
that the Supreme Court finally abolished all these forms of discrimination
in favor of women. But as in the case of Aid to Families with Dependent
Children, the victory proved hollow. Accidentally or not, 1975 was also
the year in which Title XX of the Social SecurityAct was enacted. The
legislation consolidated a vast number of programs and marked the apex of
the American welfare state, such as it was. A few short years later,
however, the Reagan administration was already at work rolling back
those benefits. As with Aid to Families with Dependent Children, an
invisible hand seemed to be at work. As soon women’s benefits were
extended to men, those benefits came to be regarded as unnecessary yet
more proof, if such be needed, that men are truly history’s beasts of
burden.
Space does not permit for a full examination of the way other 20th
-
century welfare states have favored women over men. A short survey,
however, gives a rather clear picture of how things have developed. In
Norway the Sickness Insurance Act of 1909 began to grant maternity
benefits as well as benefits to the wives of insured men. Six years later, the
state began to provide financial assistance to single mothers, too. In Italy,
the very first effective national welfare scheme was the Maternity
Insurance Act of 1910. In France, maternity benefits were instituted in
1913, 15 years before the introduction of the first comprehensive social
insurance scheme. In all cases, women started receiving benefits years,
often decades, before men did. Some of the early schemes were designed
to help women who had lost their husbands, while others were aimed at
women who had never had one. Over time, however, these distinctions
tended to disappear.[573]
Today most modern countries have child allowances, the United States
being one of the few major exceptions. Insofar as the declared purpose of
child allowances is not to indulge parents but to help them invest more in
their children, it is accepted that the system which gives them to mothers
and not to fathers is clearly discriminatory.[574] In some countries, and
under some circumstances, it can be doubly discriminatory. For example,
widowers who bring up their children can be denied benefits. It may even
be possible for a divorced mother to continue to receive benefits while her
former husband, having been granted custody, raises the children and pays
for their upkeep. These and similar inequalities are leftovers from the
period between roughly 1900 and 1980, a time when most people in most
countries still took it for granted that women were better suited to act as
parents than fathers.
The tendency of modern welfare states to give preferential treatment to
women over men is reflected in their own official accounts. Take the case
of Sweden. A study submitted to the Ministry of Labor in 1997 showed
that, from 1975 to 1994, Swedish women increased both their earnings and
the allowances they received from the state. During the same two decades,
men, who carried the financial burden, saw their work-derived income
decline by 14,000 Swedish kronor ($2,000) a year on average.[575]
Although in Sweden almost as many women are officially in the labor
force as men, in the mid-1990s men paid 61.5 percent of taxes, compared
to 38.5 percent by women.[576] As a result, in 1994, as in 1975, men were
paying more into the system than they got out of it.
In 1994, Swedish women received three-quarters of all advance
maintenance allowances, parental allowances, housing allowances and
study grants paid by the state. Even though women worked fewer hours
per year than men, they still managed to receive more sickness allowances.
Women received four times as much in parental allowances and seven
times as much in advance maintenance allowances. Taking all familyrelated allowances into account, the difference was two to one. Women
received 29 percent of their income as welfare payments from the state,
men 19 percent. Though women only paid two-thirds as much in taxes as
men did, they received 23.5 percent more tax-exempt allowances.[577] No
wonder that the taxable wealth of Swedish women was more than one and
half times that of Swedish men.[578] In Sweden, as in most other modern
countries, feminist pressures caused the relevant laws to be rewritten in
gender-free language. And in Sweden, as in most other modern countries,
this has not changed the fact that men pay for women.
It is impossible to list all the ways in which the modern welfare state
has favored women, is favoring women, and will presumably continue to
favor women. Some of the benefits are very minor or even symbolic, as
when women are assigned reserved parking spaces, spaces that might just
as justifiably go to senior citizens of either sex. Sometimes they are
substantial indeed, as when women receive the lion’s share of all transfer
payments, or when entire bureaucracies are set up to both provide
employment mainly to women and to look after their interests almost
exclusively. What all have in common is the fact that, should public and
even private money be used to extend similar advantages to men, the
resulting outrage can only be imagined.
5. Conclusions
The number and variety of mechanisms that society has invented to ensure
that women are provided for by men is nothing less than astounding. Many
were of an informal nature, but often they were written into formal law.
Whether or not legal structures were put in place, these mechanisms were
often reflected in sanctions ranging from neighborly censure to
imprisonment. Both today as in the past, the only way to avoid such
sanctions may well be to give up everything and leave the country.
However, even this may either be prohibited or fail to work.
Most of the time it was a question of each man being obliged to look
after his female relatives, mainly but not exclusively his wife or wives.
Very often women were married off, or chose to marry, specifically in
order that they might be supported. Very often some form of economic
support was provided, or was supposed to be provided, even after a
marriage ended in divorce. Such was the situation in some of the earliest
known societies, and today it still prevails in many societies.
At most times and places, women who did not have male relatives to
look after them depended on charity. Like men, women might be required
to work before becoming eligible for charity. Alternatively, to obtain such
assistance, they had to prove that they were unable to work. Still, on the
whole they had an easier time of it than men did. This was especially, but
by no means only, true if they had children and if they avoided being
promiscuous. Sometimes women could obtain charity even if they were fit
to work, even if they were promiscuous, and even if they did not have
children. For the most part, by contrast, men could only obtain charity if
they had women to support.
With the rise of modern welfare systems, many forms of support that
used to be the responsibility of husbands, male relatives or charitable
organizations were taken over by the state. As before, women have found
it easier to get benefits, especially women without a man and with
children. Many schemes, in fact, are deliberately designed to benefit
women exclusively, or almost so. Meanwhile, men’s role as living ATMs
has remained unchanged. However, the conditions under which they are
made to pay have, in some ways, worsened. As long as the family served
as the main mechanism to help women, it was men who called the shots,
and it was their own female relatives who benefited from the arrangement.
When it was a question of charitable giving men were still able to choose
whether to pay and who should receive support.
The advent of the welfare state caused any pretense of voluntarism to
disappear. The treasury took over, raking in the necessary money in taxes
or as tax-like “contributions” to social security. As a result, today many of
the recipients are women of whom men did not know, and perhaps did not
want to know, anything. The less careful about birth control an unattached
woman is, the more benefits she will get. On the face of it, a husband, a
charitable institution and a modern welfare system are entirely different. In
fact, though the details differ, the principle is the same: All are designed
partly and some would say primarily to transfer resources from men,
seen as more capable of earning their living, to women, who are seen as,
and very often claim to be, less so. Historically, the price women were
made to pay, or at any rate asked to pay, was avoiding promiscuity on the
one hand and raising their children properly on the other. Now that the
welfare state has taken over, very often they are not even asked to do that.
Even little girls playing with their Barbie dolls readily grasp who
consumes and who pays.[579] No wonder that “many women in the U.S.
today do not understand the feminist position.” Contrary to the pretensions
of some, these women are neither weak nor foolish. Upper-class women
know, and resent, the fact that their and their husbands’ tax money is used
mainly for the benefit of other women. Women on the receiving end of
welfare know who is picking up the bill. Both groups understand that the
arrangement under which they themselves are looked after economically,
in return for performing the role of mother and homemaker, is often
“inequitable”[580] inequitable, that is, from the point of view of many
men.
Chapter 5: Facing the Law
1. The Weaker Vessel
Physically speaking, women have always been, as the Gospel of Peter put
it, the weaker vessel. And precisely because women are the weaker vessel,
when it comes to the law they have seldom been treated in the same way
as men, or held accountable to the same extent. The first section of this
chapter presents a very brief survey of the way the difference between the
sexes was legally handled at various times and places in history. The
second, moving to the 20th century, examines how the justice systems of
modern countries have systematically and consistently favored women
over men at every stage. The third takes a look at the way those same
justice systems treat conflicts that arise between men and women.
2. Historical Overview
As far as can be determined, as far back as ancient Egypt women occupied
a favored position under the laws of the land, or at any rate under the
procedures that were customary in court. A verse from the wisdom
literature exhorts a man “not to tell lies against your mother because the
magistrates abhor it.”[581] Apparently women were also exempt from the
most ferocious punishments, including mutilation and impalement.[582]
The tendency to hand down lighter punishments to women is also
evident in Greek mythology. The story of Sisyphus, and its lack of a
female equivalent, was already noted here. Tantalus, another male who
offended the gods by killing a youth and then offering them the victim’s
flesh, was sentenced to eternal hunger and thirst. Prometheus’ punishment
for stealing the Olympic fire and giving it to humankind was even worse.
Chained to a rock, his liver was eaten by an eagle. The organ kept
regenerating itself, so that the torture could restart each day. For
accidentally seeing Athene naked, Theresias was struck blind. He could
count himself lucky. Having committed the same offense with respect to
Artemis, Acteon was turned into a stag and torn to pieces by his own
hounds.
No woman ever suffered a comparable fate. What punishments women
did undergo seldom involved pain or endangered their health. The most
notorious case was that of Medea. First, to help her husband Jason escape,
she cut her younger brother to pieces and scattered his limbs at sea in order
to elude her relatives, who were pursuing them. Then, using false
pretenses, she boiled her father-in-law alive. Then, in an uncontrollable
outburst of jealousy, she killed her own two children, as well as her
husband’s second wife and the latter’s father, the king of Corinth. And
what wrath awaited this woman who had killed all those closest to her in
cold blood? None, as it turns out. Medea escaped punishment in a chariot
kindly put at her disposal by no less a person than the Sun God, Helios.
Shifting from mythology to history, we known of a case in ancient
Mesopotamia in which the attorneys of a woman involved in conspiracy to
murder tried to get her acquitted by pleading the weakness of her sex.[583]
From Greece comes the story of Phryne, a famous courtesan in 4
th
-century
B.C Athens. At one point she was accused of impiety, a very serious crime
and one listed among those for which Socrates was executed. She, too,
would have been condemned, except that during her trial her lawyer, at
just the right moment, tore the clothes off her body and asked the all-male
jury whether they really wished to end the life of such a beautiful woman.
Needless to say, she was acquitted.
Some six centuries later, Zenobia, queen of Palmyra, rebelled against
Rome. Defeated and taken prisoner, she begged Emperor Aurelian for her
life as “a mere woman.” Instead of being executed in one of the many
unpleasant ways reserved for enemies of Rome, she was spared. Zenobia’s
male adviser, the philosopher Cassius Longinus, took the blame and
suffered the consequences. She herself ended as a grande dame in a villa
near Rome. This good fortune was almost certainly connected to the fact
that she was said to possess a beautiful voice and “incredible sex
appeal.”[584] That is not necessarily to say that the emperor, a tough
soldier and capable statesman, fell for her charms. Like many other rulers
before and since, he must have realized that executing a woman, especially
a good-looking one, makes for bad publicity. Conversely, one reason why
early Christian propaganda abounds with stories, real or invented, of
women being tortured and put to death[585] is to put the pagans in the
worst possible light. From the point of view of the propagandist, whether
or not the stories were true was immaterial.
The tradition of treating women better than men was continued under
Salic law. Originally issued by Frankish King Clovis between 507 and
511, it was later developed by his successors. For example, for merely
touching “the hand or the finger of a freewoman or any other woman” a
man could be fined 15 solidi. The more intimate the touch, the higher the
penalty.[586] Cutting off the hair of a boy “without the consent of his
relatives” cost he who was found guilty of it 1,800 solidi. Doing the same
to a girl cost 4,000. Though minors of both sexes were under the control of
their adult relatives, obviously a woman’s person was considered more
precious. The fine for blocking the road of a free woman or striking her
was also three times the sum due for the same offense committed against a
man. The penalty for killing a freeman was 600 solidi; for killing a
freewoman, 1,800. Another clause says that the penalty for killing a
freewoman was the same as the one for killing a male count. Other
traditional societies maintained similar distinctions. For example, in
Yemen the blood money demanded for the death of a woman was 11 times
that demanded for a man. In the eyes of one modern female writer, this
rule was part of a “chauvinistic code of chivalry.”[587]
To oblige women, many medieval rulers were even prepared to forego
the usual penalty reserved for rebels, namely the confiscation of property.
[588] In 1333-1347 Joan, countess of March, was able to keep her Irish
estates even though her husband, Robert Mortimer, had been executed for
not only committing treason against King Edward III, but also for being
the queen’s lover. In 1399-1402, Elizabeth Fitzalan, widow of the duke of
Norfolk, persuaded King Henry IV to allow her to keep her property.
Three years later, Constance Holland, the widow of another duke of
Norfolk who had ended his life on the scaffold it was a time of civil war,
unhealthy for dukes persuaded the same Henry, who was her uncle, to
allow her to retain her dower. Each of these cases marked a conflict
between the desire to uphold the law and enrich the treasury and the
political imperative to avoid treating women too harshly. In each of these
cases, it was politics that won out.
Conversely, when a woman bit into the proverbial unripe fruit, it was
the teeth of her husband or other male relatives that broke. A good
example of the way things worked, this time at the bottom of the social
ladder, is provided by the English village of Alweras in Staffordshire.[589]
In Alweras, and presumably in many other villages as well, most of those
active in illegal brewing were women. But in Alweras, and presumably in
other villages as well, most of those fined for illegally selling ale were
men. The explanation is simple: Those who committed the offense were
actually female. Most females, however, were either the daughters of
males or married to them, and consequently it was they who were made to
bear the consequences.
In 1634 another English court spelled out the reasoning behind this
arrangement. The case in question was that of one Thomas Hellyard. He
and his wife Elizabeth were brought before the dreaded Star Chamber to
answer for having sold saltpeter — an ingredient of gunpowder — without
a license. The charges were serious indeed, comparable in today’s terms to
a crime like assisting terrorists. Convicted, Hellyard was sentenced to pay
the enormous sum of 1,000 pounds sterling, and was subjected to pillory,
whipping and imprisonment. Not so his wife and partner, who had sold
over 1,000 pounds of saltpeter. Though “the courte was fully satisfyed
with sufficient matter whereupon to ground a sentence against the
defendant... shee being a wyfe and subject to obey her husband theyr Lord
ships did forbeare to sentence her.”[590]
In Edinburgh and perhaps other places as well, the practice of saddling
merchants with their wives’ transgressions continued into the 18th century.
[591] Husbands whose wives used dirty language in public were also held
accountable.[592] The practice of remanding offending women to their
husbands may be one reason why, in France during that period, the vast
majority of those subjected to judical torture were men. So small was the
number of women involved that the necessary techniques were all but
forgotten. When one such case arose in 1778, those responsible for
carrying out the unpleasant business had to confront the fact that in the 40
previous years, no woman had been questioned under duress. To learn
what to do, they had to consult the archives.[593]
Nor has the practice of punishing husbands for their wives’ sins yet
come to an end. Here is a verbatim description by an American woman of
what happened to her following an illegal abortion she had had:[594]
“After I got home [from the clinic], I developed a high fever. I was so sick
I was delirious with the pain and fever. My mother took me to the
emergency ward. The doctors asked her who had done the abortion. When
she didn’t tell them, they refused to treat me. They said that they would let
me die if she didn’t tell them the name and address of the abortionist.
Frightened, she gave them a false name and then they started treatment for
me. When the police... found out that my mother had given false
information, they went to my house and arrested my husband.” A case of
male chauvinism at work, no doubt.
Pace modern feminist authors, the most cursory research shows that
women sometimes held a privileged position even in respect to the laws
governing the most intimate aspects of life. Thus, as long ago as ancient
Athens it is possible to find cases in which men, but not women, were put
on trial and punished for adultery.[595] In Republican Rome, the law
permitted a husband to kill his wife’s lover but not the woman herself.
Later, when punishment was taken out of the hands of the husband and put
into those of the courts, this difference still existed.[596] Many centuries
later, Salic law applied a similar standard, prescribing a hefty fine for a
man “who secretly had intercourse with a free girl with the consent of
both.” But while the law clearly described the offense as one committed
with the consent of “both,” no similar fine was prescribed for the female
partner.[597]
Some of the most interesting evidence on this matter comes from
Byzantium.[598] Under imperial law as formulated by Constantine I, a
man guilty of fornication was heavily fined or, if he could not pay,
mutilated. However, the woman with whom he had fornicated only shared
in the same punishment if she was a nun. The underlying logic was that
such a woman was not her own mistress, and stood under the guardianship
of her relatives. This fact made the woman incapable of giving her
consent, a fact of which the man should have been aware and which he
ought to have respected. Whether because she was deemed incapable of
giving her consent, being under her relatives’ guardianship, or because
fornication (stuprum) was wrong in itself, for an unmarried woman to have
sex was an offense. Nevertheless, there was no thought of punishing her.
Instead, she benefited from the fine which her paramour had to pay, and
which was paid to her and not to the fisc. In other words, under this legal
system a man would be punished for seducing a woman. By contrast, a
woman could actually be rewarded for seducing a man.
Early medieval European statute books were largely silent on the
question of adultery. When penalties began to be prescribed early in the
14th century, they applied first to men and only then to women.[599] Nor
was the rule that adultery was considered a worse offense in men than in
women limited to Christendom. For example, in 1342-1343 Ibn Battuta
found himself doing duty as a kadi, or religious judge, in the Maldives.
Trying a concubine and a slave who had been caught sleeping together, he
“chastised” them both but had only the man locked up. When a local ruler
interceded on the man’s behalf, Battuta grew indignant. He had the man
fetched and ordered him “beaten with bamboo rods which are more painful
than whips, and I had him paraded through the island with a rope around
his neck.”[600] In parts of 17
th
-century Germany, a conviction for
fornication also led to much smaller penalties for women than for men.
The latter, on top of being made to pay, were also forced to surrender any
public offices they might hold.[601]
Women’s position with respect to other sexual offenses was even more
privileged, going back as far as biblical times. Leviticus 20.13 and 17 rules
that, in cases of incest between brother and sister, “he shall bear his
iniquity;” as if cases in which older sisters abused their younger brothers
did not exist. The penalty prescribed for male homosexuality is death.
Leviticus has served as Judaism’s primary guide on sexual behavior for
more than 2,000 years, and to this day, some rabbis still demand that gay
males be severely punished or at least ostracized. Throughout this time,
lesbianism was seldom mentioned. The Talmud at one point says that
women who “tangle”—later interpreted as “those who rub their genitals
together” — should be prevented from marrying the high priest.[602]
Another rabbi did not agree, claiming that the activity was just an
obscenity and expressly permitting such a marriage to take place.[603] A
millennium later, Maimonides condemned lesbianism as “an Egyptian
deed.” But he did not prescribe any penalties for it.[604]
Roman attitudes toward male homosexuality were relatively relaxed.
Later, though, the advent of Christianity caused matters to change. St. Paul
in Romans 1.27 speaks of homosexuality among men. He says that
“working that which is unseemly, they receive in themselves that
recompense of their error which was meet.” In the previous sentence he
mentions the “vile affections” of women; however, he does not say
anything about the need to punish them. The Christian emperors
Constantine, Constans, Theodosius II and Justinian took him at his word.
All four passed ferocious laws against male homosexuality, but lesbians
remained exempt.
St. John Chrysostom explained around 390 AD that lesbianism was the
devil’s work. Roughly three centuries later, Theodore of Canterbury and
Bede denounced it as a sin. So did St. Anselm and Abelard in the 12th
century. Gratian’s Decretum of 1140 mentions it as “contrary to nature.”
This work, incidentally, remained the standard one on canon law until
1917. In 1267-1273 Thomas Aquinas in Summa Theologica called
lesbianism “an unnatural vice.” Though love between women was
abhorred, not one of these sources said it should be punished. One monk
advised that, when it came to sexual behavior such as lesbianism,
masturbation, bestiality, incest and contraception, women should be
questioned “mildly and gently.” Female sexual offenses merited purgatory,
not hell.[605]
A law published in 1265 by the king of Castile, Alfonso X, prohibited
both male and female homosexuality. In 1314 Cino da Pistoia, a friend of
Dante’s, published a Commentary on the Code of Justinian in which he
reinterpreted an imperial edict of 587 A.D. as referring to lesbianism.
Whether or not his interpretation was correct, it became part of Roman law
as studied in Italy, Spain, France, Germany and Scotland. Seeking to
disprove the “myth” of lesbian immunity to prosecution, one modern
scholar claims to have identified 400 cases of female homosexuals being
executed during the late Middle Ages and early modern period. Even
according to his count, though, very few victims were women, and most of
them met their fate for other reasons. Their main crime was to have
dressed as men — sometimes, repeatedly and in spite of several warnings
— and to have married other women. One such case took place in
Halberstadt, Saxony, in 1721. It involved a woman who had repeatedly
dressed as a man to attract women; in the end she married one and used a
dildo to have sex with her.[606]
In 1791 the French National Assembly abolished homosexuality as an
offense for both men and women. But this was hardly the end of the story
in Europe. In English law, anal intercourse had long been a capital crime.
[607] Toward the end of the 19th century, the issue became mixed up with
contemporary fear of “decadence.” As a result, the law against anal
intercourse was tightened even further. Since females could not commit
buggery, the only victims were males. Nor was England the only country
to follow this policy. In 1911 the Netherlands passed a law criminalizing
relations between men. The German Empire, for its part, had on the books
the notorious “Paragraph 175.” The police used it to open “pink files” on
known homosexuals.[608] Later the Nazis locked up some 10,000 gay
men in concentration camps.[609] Singled out for maltreatment at the
hands of both guards and other inmates, they suffered from exceptionally
high death rates. Others were subjected to medical experiments designed
to “cure” them, including castration and the implantation of artificial
glands.[610] There were many attempts to extend the law to women as
well. All were rejected by the Ministry of Justice, which argued that the
matter would have to wait until the end of the war.
In Stalin’s Soviet Union, male homosexuals were severely punished.
[611] The same laws, however, were not applied to lesbians. Later Mao
Tze Dong in China took a similar line.[612] To this day in American
prisons, homosexual relations between female inmates — and sometimes
between them and female guards — are tolerated. One contemporary
female scholar suggests that this is because “many of the lesbian
relationships reported in prison are based more on affection with a sexual
connotation than on actual sexual activity.”[613] As so often, a crime is a
crime only as long as those who commit it are men. As of 1993, 22 states
in America had laws against male gays having intercourse. But lesbian sex
was not prohibited by even one of them.[614] Historically, so great has the
difference been between the way lesbians and male homosexuals are
treated by society that it has given rise to an entire body of literature.
Females accused of spiritual transgressions such as blasphemy and
apostasy were also leniently treated. Normally they were remitted to their
male relatives. For example, when the German noblewoman Argula von
Grumbach wrote on behalf of the Reformation during the 1520s, the
authorities, instead of arresting her as they would have done if she were a
man, told her husband to take her home and shut her up.[615] The custom
of remitting female offenders to their male relatives may be one reason
why single women and widows are said to be over-represented among
accused witches. In other words, the reason why these women were put on
trial was because they had no man to which the law could entrust them, as
in the case of von Grumbach and other married women. By way of another
example of how women accused of "spiritual" offenses were treated, the
English Reformation under Henry VIII cost the lives of eight men but only
one woman. Later the situation was reversed and it was Protestantism
which became a crime. Some 230 men, but only 50 women, died at the
hand of “Bloody Mary;” a percentage one modern authority calls
“surprisingly high.”[616]
What was true of offenses connected with religion was equally true of
secular ones. Figures from 18th
-century London show that women standing
trial were more likely than men to be acquitted. What is more, given the
extreme severity of the law, juries often committed “pious perjury” so as to
save people from the worst consequences of their crimes. Apparently twice
as many women as men were spared in this way. Pregnant women in
danger of being condemned to execution even had the right to be tried by a
female jury, rather than a male one. This was known as “pleading the
belly.”[617]Of the 1,242 people who were hanged in London between
1703 and 1784, only 92 7.5 percent were women.[618] In other
countries, too, women often received lighter punishments. This was
particularly true if they were virgins, particularly true if they were about to
give birth, and particularly true if they had young children[619] in other
words, during a substantial portion of their lives.
Medieval German even had a special term, Frauenfrevel, or “women’s
trifle,” for reducing the penalty levied against women. It amounted to 50
percent of the fines imposed on men. Both then and in later centuries, there
existed a whole class of sanctions which, regarded as relatively light, were
known as “women’s punishments.” They involved discomfort or
humiliation, but not actual pain.[620] To the extent that pain was inflicted
on them, women also tended to get off lightly. For example, 18
th
-century
female American beggars who returned to towns from which they had
been driven away received 25 lashes. Males got 39. Men, not women,
were sent to the galleys. In the 1790s, Emperor Joseph II ordered male, but
not female, convicts to haul barges along the banks of the Danube. So
harsh were conditions that the convicts died like flies.[621]
Finally, to the extent that imprisonment was used to punish and deter,
women also suffered less than men. To focus on England, early on prisons
normally incarcerated men and women together. Their fates, however,
were entirely different. Visiting a 16th
-century male inmate, a friend found
him “wasted to a skeleton and in a state of exhaustion from grinding at the
treadmill, a most pitiful sight. There was nothing left of him except skin
and bones and I cannot remember having seen anything like it — lice
swarmed on him like ants on a molehill.” Other male prisoners might be
employed to dig streets and clean sewers. By contrast, female prisoners
were made to perform otherwise routine feminine duties, such as cooking,
cleaning, operating spinning wheels or, if they worked outside the prison,
picking rags. Some women engaged in prostitution within the prison walls.
Living like queens, they “were feasted with varieties of wines and delicate
meates.”[622]
When prison reform started early in the 19th century, again it was men
who bore the brunt. The reforms made some improvements in that they
imposed strict controls on the arbitrary behavior of guards. They also
replaced the old ramshackle structures with new, custom-designed, more
sanitary buildings. People’s ideas concerning the purpose of the system
also changed. Instead of being used merely to punish and deter criminals,
it was now supposed to reform them as well. The first step was to isolate
each inmate in his own cell. They were only permitted to leave those cells
to do hard, but sometimes entirely senseless, work, such as walking the
treadwheel or turning the crank. To prevent them from communicating
with other prisoners, a rule of strict silence, sometimes lasting for years,
was imposed. The outcome was to turn prisons into tombs for the living.
For women, the results were entirely different. Beginning in late 18th
-
century America, spreading middle-class ideas concerning female modesty
caused women to be segregated. Next it was decided that only women
were fit to supervise women. As one New York reformer put it, no female
prisoner should so much as suffer a male guard approaching her. Instead,
they required “the shield of a pure woman’s presence — one who could
bring to bear a force often found more potent than muscular
strength.”[623]
Whereas male prisons were strictly regimented, in female ones
benevolence and compassion were supposed to prevail. Whereas men were
to be reformed by isolation and silence, women were to be educated by
living together in groups and talking with each other, and with the female
staff, to their hearts’ contents. Whereas male prisoners were often made to
do backbreaking labor both within prison and outside of its walls,
employing women in chain-gangs was prohibited. Incidentally, in 1995 a
prison commissioner in Alabama included female prisoners in gangs that
picked trash from state highways; he was quickly forced to abandon the
plan and resign.[624]
By the end of the 19th century women’s prisons began to look almost
like country clubs. They consisted of cottage-like structures, each housing
a group of women, usually in a bucolic setting. The fortress-like
compounds that typically housed male prisoners were avoided. Instead of
cells, female prisoners were given rooms. Often they had more privacy
than male ones, were given greater leeway in decorating their rooms, and
lived under much less security.[625] “Good linen and china” completed
the picture. Some women’s prisons provided considerable liberty in taking
trips outside the facilities. Others allowed inmates to wear their own
clothes, and others even provided what could almost be called a pleasant
lifestyle, complete with outings, dances, picnics and light agricultural
work. By 1900, special facilities “suitable for... feminine
temperaments”[626] existed in several American states.
On the other side of the Atlantic male guards in female prisons were
also gradually replaced by women. In Britain, too, making female
prisoners do work that would be both punitive and productive proved
difficult and taxed the imagination of those responsible. In Britain, too,
punishments regarded as appropriate for male prisoners, such as being put
in irons, or forbidden to talk, or whipped, or put on short rations, were
considered too severe for women.[627]Conversely, female prisoners
received much more education than their male counterparts. Female
guards were often left powerless as prisoners wore what they pleased, used
the presence of their children whom they were permitted to have with
them to avoid work, or even vented their anger by emptying chamber
pots on them.[628] The incomparably easier regime imposed on female
prisoners may explain why, in comparison to men, far fewer of them were
first offenders and why far more of them were rearrested following release.
[629]
In both Britain and the United States, people were prepared to see
women as a priori less culpable. In both countries, the prevailing view was
that “women are more often the accomplices of crime, its aiders and
abettors.”[630] Whereas men were held “strictly accountable,” women
were assumed to be endowed with an “almost paralytic passivity”[631]
and were judged accordingly. To the extent that they participated in crime
at all, it was believed at the time, was not on their own initiative, but
because of the corrupting influence of vicious men. Whether by making
false promises of marriage or by other means, those men had somehow
succeeded in robbing women of their independent will. However flawed
the logic, the privileges to which it led were very real. In the words of one
British journalist, “very properly the law makes merciful allowance in
dealing with the female offender when it can be apparent that she has been
impelled to commit breaches of the law under masculine influence.”[632]
Like Medea, some women were literally able to get away with murder.
In late 19th
-century Britain, less than one-quarter of those tried for the
crime were women. On the other hand, then as now women made up
almost all of those tried for infanticide. British juries regarded these
women as victims of “puerperal mania.” The latter was a fashionable
disease that was also believed to cause “extraordinary obscenity in thought
and language.” Very often, juries would simply refuse to convict.
Parliament responded by changing the law so as to separate infanticide
from murder and place it in a category of its own. Yet even so prosecutors
still found it all but impossible to obtain convictions. Normally they could
do so, if at all, only if they agreed that light sentences should be imposed.
Even so, rarely did infanticidal women serve out their complete term. This
was because, among all those declared to be criminally insane, it was they
who stood the greatest chance of being granted an early release.[633]
At practically all times and places, women who ran afoul of the law
had an easier time of it than did men. This was as true in mythology as in
real life, in ancient Egypt as in late Victorian Britain. To quote one prison
inspector in the latter, “women [were] punished more lightly than men for
a similar offence and... the public and police [were] less disposed to charge
them.”[634] Sometimes laws and regulations were changed or watered
down specifically in order to prevent women from being treated as
severely as men. No sooner did women form a considerable percentage of
those who committed any given offense or crime then that crime and that
offense started to lose their gravity. This, incidentally, may explain
people’s fascination with the witch-hunting episode. It is perhaps the only
time in history when more women than men were charged with a serious
crime and executed for it.
Far from serving to enforce patriarchy, very often the law was used
specifically to provide women with extra protection. Often it prevented the
harsh attitudes that governed relations between men from being applied to
women. In other cases it was actually designed to punish men in lieu of
women. Among those who benefited from the lax arm of the law was the
American suffragette Susan B. Anthony. Along with 50 other women, she
was arrested in 1872 for casting her vote illegally in that year’s elections.
Put on trial, she harangued the judge in a way that would have earned a
lesser mortal a charge of contempt. Instead of spending a possible three
years in jail, she was let off with a fine. In the end, she did not even have
to pay that.[635] A contemporary of hers, the famous English physician
Henry Maudsley, once remarked that the feminist movement owes what
successes it had less to widespread female discontent than to men’s
reluctance to suppress it.[636] Had Ms. Anthony heard him, perhaps she
would have agreed.
3. The 20th
 Century
An overwhelming absence of data dooms any real attempt to quantify the
different ways in which the justice system has treated the two sexes over
the course of history. As regards our own time, however, a vast amount of
statistics is available to prove the degree to which women are favored.
This analysis is limited mainly to the Britain and the United States, as
recounting the relevant statistics country by country would be
unnecessarily repetitive.
In the words of one female legal scholar:
Women certainly do not fit the stereotype of a criminal. Such
preconceptions might enable the criminal justice system to take
their crimes less seriously, helping them avoid arrest and severe
punishment. These attitudes... are likely to receive support from
the wider public, who are less fearful of women criminals.
Moreover, due to their traditional roles as wives and mothers,
the ‘weaker sex’ might not only evoke the sympathy of officials
but avoid suspicion altogether... [This may explain why]
women maintain low levels of criminal involvement, and even
return to non-deviant lives more easily.[637]
Even today, “attitudes toward women have not changed drastically.”[638]
For this, one supposes, women can only thank their stars — or men.
Do “preconceptions” about criminality still cause men and women to
be treated differently? Most experts believe the answer to this question is a
decided yes. As one American scholar put it, “Police officers dislike to
arrest [women], district attorneys to prosecute them, judges and juries to
find them guilty.”[639] “A large body of research exists which at least
suggests that women receive more lenient treatment than men at various
stages of the criminal justice process.”[640] As one scholar has noted, “for
each category of offense women received shorter average maximum
sentences.”[641] And another one: “The most persistent findings about the
treatment of men and women are that women are given more lenient
treatment than are men in decisions about sentencing, especially in
response to serious offenses.”[642] The list of quotations could be
extended at will. Many come from female investigators.[643] Each year
there are tens, perhaps hundreds, of thousands of women who are given
privileges. And there are tens, possibly hundreds, of thousands of men who
are discriminated against merely because they are not women.
An examination of the process by which the justice system operates is
instructive here. First, having responded to a call, a policeman or
policewoman on the spot will have to determine whether what he or she
saw or heard is sufficiently serious to warrant an arrest. Already at this
stage women are treated “paternalistically” — read, less harshly and more
kindly — than are their male counterparts.[644] For example, in England
and Wales, for every single offense, in every single age category, in every
single year, women are much more likely to be let off with a warning than
are men.[645] The same is true in the United States.[646] This is true even
when factors other than sex, such as age, race and prior arrest records, are
controlled for.[647]
Once the decision to arrest has been made, women are considerably
more likely to receive bail.[648] There is, however, a tendency to
discriminate between married women and single ones. Unmarried women
are presumed to be in difficult financial circumstances, and not
surprisingly are 43 percent more likely to be let off without bail. Married
women are presumed to have somebody who can shoulder the burden —
in other words, a man. Consequently, they are 69 percent more likely to
pay.[649] Some countries exercise even more blatant discrimination by
prohibiting persons accused of certain serious crimes from receiving bail
at all. Once arrested, they will be remanded in custody for months or
years. However, the system only applies to men; women, as usual, are
exempt.[650]
Assuming a decision has been made to press charges, a woman whose
case comes before a court can continue to expect preferential treatment.
This is especially true if her crime has been directed against a man who
has been close to her, and especially if it is very serious. In assault or
murder cases, we are told, “the prosecutor must work against the sympathy
she may arouse in the jury, while the defense attorney must work within
the criminal law of excuse and responsibility.”[651] As the case of Medea
demonstrates, women who have killed their children also tend to be treated
with sympathy. The presumption is that women naturally love their
children and that they must have been deranged.[652]
Thus, a woman who has committed certain types of crimes is likely to
be regarded as suffering from diminished capacity and treated accordingly.
A woman who has broken the law at certain times is also likely to be so
regarded. This is particularly true if she did so in Britain, and particularly
if she had the good sense to do so after the publication of a best-selling
volume entitled Once a Month (1969). The author, Katherine Dalton,
argued that menstruation turns women into raging maniacs, predisposing
them to suicide, homicide and child abuse. This got her invited to act as a
star witness at several murder trials. In one of the cases, a woman used her
car to smash her former lover into a telephone pole. Tried for murder; the
so-called “Pre-Menstrual Syndrome Defense” got her off with a
conditional discharge from prison and a permanent driving ban. In another
case, a barmaid who had killed a male co-worker in a fit of jealousy
escaped punishment altogether. One might almost conclude that the lives
of men do not count provided, of course, they are killed by the right
woman at the right time.[653]
A woman standing trial along with a man is doubly privileged. In the
19th century, Britain even had a famous case when the jury was asked to
consider whether a crippled and bedridden husband should be held
responsible for a murder his wife committed in his presence.[654] Even
today one can still find the presumption that, if a man and a woman
commit a crime together, the woman should be held less responsible, or
not responsible at all. So strong is that presumption that it has acquired a
name, the “Svengali Defense,” after a famous novel in which the wicked
hero corrupts an innocent girl. Among the beneficiaries were several
female Nazi doctors and nurses who participated in the euthanasia
program, administering lethal injections to handicapped people. As a
German court put it, a woman’s “feminine character” and “shy love” for
her murderous male superior can justify or at least mitigate any deed,
however horrible.[655]
Since 1980 or so, a great deal of attention has been paid to sexual
abuse of children. Yet even in regard to this particularly heinous crime,
society treats men and women differently. According to Simone de
Beauvoir,[656] breastfeeding mothers often maintain an “intimate animal
relationship” with their babies. Some women’s magazines even
recommend that they should be aware of their sexual feelings and enjoy
them.[657] What would happen to a man who is caught, or alleged to be,
sexually aroused while washing his daughter need not be spelled out here.
Though some surveys indicate that one out of six people who sexually
abuse children is female,[658] the public is almost completely ignorant of
this fact. So strong is the presumption that this just does not happen that
when a boy complains about the problem, the first question he is likely to
be asked is whether he is sure the perpetrator was not his father.[659]
So manifest is the tendency to treat women more leniently than men
that it has been the subject of several detailed studies. One reason behind
the phenomenon seems to be that, at a time when the principal penalty
society has at its disposal is imprisonment, the social and economic costs
of punishing women with families are considered to be too high. The
prosecutor who will charge a single mother with a crime likely to cause
her to be locked up is hard to find.[660] Another may be that the
psychiatrists called upon to assist the court regard women differently from
men. A female defendant is much more likely to have such adjectives as
“deprived,” “damaged,” “victimized” and “insecure” applied to her.
Researching the cases brought before British courts between 1950 and
1983, one investigator found that men are discriminated against not once
but twice. First, a woman, having had one of the above adjectives applied
to her, is much more likely to be referred to treatment than to punishment.
And once she has reached that stage, she is more likely to be diagnosed as
mentally sound. That applies even if she has been charged with a serious
crime, and even if she has a decade-long history of violent assault.[661]
With men, things work the other way around. Once they have been
diagnosed as mentally disturbed, any possibility that they will be let off
lightly is gone. Such men are more likely to receive punishment in
addition to, or instead of, treatment. In other words, a man who is mentally
sound is punished, while a man who is mentally disturbed is alsolikely to
be punished at any rate, more so than a woman.
The idea that women are less responsible for their actions may explain
why, in Britain between 1984 and 1992, proportionally six times more
women who were accused of manslaughter were acquitted.[662] Between
1982 and 1989, 50 percent of females in Britain tried for murder
succeeded in convincing juries that they had acted on “provocation,” as
compared to just 30 percent of males. As a result, proportionally almost
twice as many men as women accused of this crime were convicted.
[663]When it comes to sentencing, the difference between the sexes is
greater still. In California between 1978 and 1980, out of 1,164 defendants
convicted of first- or second-degree murder, 5.5 percent were female.
However, of the 98 defendants sentenced to death, all without
exception were male.[664] For the United States as a whole, women
comprised only 1.5 percent of those sentenced to death for murder, despite
the fact that 12.5 percent of those convicted of the crime were women. Of
the roughly 16,000 “lawful executions” that took place in America before
the turn of the millennium, just 2.5 percent involved women.[665]
The same trend repeats itself with respect to other serious crimes. In
the United States in 1979, 21.8 percent of those arrested for murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape,robbery, aggravated assault,
burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, arson and other such serious
crimes were women 377,108 women, as compared to 1,351,416 men.
That same year, women comprised 14.6 percent of those arrested for less
serious crimes, 1,076,310 women to 7,343,045 men. It would thus appear
that, contrary to the common belief that women’s transgressions tend to be
less grave, members of the female sex were actually over-represented
among those arrested for the worst crimes of all. Nevertheless, as of 1977
only 3.9 percent of convicted criminals in American jails, 11,044 out of
278,141, were female.[666] Today, women arrested for serious crimes are
only half as likely as men to end up in jail. In federal prison, the gap is
larger still.[667] Compared with imprisoned men, and controlling for the
type of offense and previous arrest records, American prisons only contain
about one-half to one-quarter as many women as there should have been
had they been treated on a par with men.[668]
When women are sent to jail, their terms tend to be much shorter than
those of men. Among those convicted of property offenses, the mean
difference was found to be 42 months. The difference for drug offenders
was 18 months, while that of violent offenders was 39 months.[669] Even
if one calculates the severity of the punishment based not on the number of
months, but instead in terms of the sentences imposed as a proportion of
the maximum prescribed for any given offense, the same difference
emerges. One author used a sample of convicted male and female
offenders incarcerated between 1983 and 1988 and matched for race,
offense, prior criminal record and several other demographic and
socioeconomic variables. He found that, taking all offenses into account,
men were sentenced to 24 percent of the maximum prison time permissible
by law. The figure for women was just 9 percent. As he says, “the primary
conclusion” is that women get much lighter sentences than do matched
samples of men convicted of the same crimes.[670]
Once criminals of the two sexes are sent to prison, men continue to be
discriminated against. During most of the 20th century, one female
researcher explains, “women’s prisons [were] much less forbidding and
physically oppressive than the fortress-like... dungeons” used to hold male
criminals.[671] “In terms of physical facilities and the general prison
environment," a male one says, most women receive[d] better treatment
than their male counterparts.” No wonder, he adds, “females are... more
favorable toward confinement than males.”[672] One survey found that
over 75 percent of incarcerated women thought institutional life was not as
bad as they had anticipated; 65 percent found doing time easy. Female
adolescents in particular were encouraged, and rewarded for, engaging in
behavior such as acting maternal, being affectionate, showing sensitivity
and crying.[673] Looking back, they tended to see their time in the
institution less negatively than males did. As long ago as the second half of
the 19
th century, some women regarded the experience positively and listed
the advantages it brought them.[674] And no wonder: In Canada, at any
rate, female prisons are intended not for punishment but for
“empowerment.”[675]
One result of female convicts’ under-representation among the prison
population was that prisons for women were few and far between. In the
1970s, this state of affairs came under feminist-directed fire. It was
claimed that the prisons in question did not allow inmates’ relatives to visit
them as often as they would like and as the inmates’ own welfare
demanded. Female prisons were also smaller than male facilities, with the
result that educational opportunities inside them tended to be limited
because of cost. The solution was to reverse the existing system — itself
introduced at the behest of 19th
-century feminists — and reinstitute coed
prisons. Only in this way, it was argued, could the women’s liberation
movement reach criminal women as well as honest ones.
As in coed prisons during the early 19th century, concern for female
prisoners prevented them from being locked up with all but the least
serious male offenders. And as in the early 19th century, this created a
situation in which all women were given privileges enjoyed by only a
handful of men. Indeed, it has been argued that “the major drawback [of
coed prisons] is that there is a perceived double standard of treatment for
male and female inmates.” But that was not the end of the story. No sooner
had the coed prison been restored to its former glory than the demand was
raised that women, seeking equal opportunity employment, should be
permitted to guard men.[676] American courts, it is worth noting, have
consistently upheld the idea that to allow male guards to routinely watch
female prison inmates engage in personal activities means violating their
constitutional right to privacy. With the shoe on the other foot, however,
the courts saw otherwise. In Grummet v. Rushen, the Ninth Circuit Court
for Appeals allowed female guards to conduct pat-down searches of male
inmates, including the groin. “[These] searches,” the court ruled, “do not
involve intimate contact with an inmate’s body.”
Similarly, in Johnson v. Phelan, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals
did not prohibit female guards from watching naked male inmates as they
washed or used the toilet in their cells. In the clash between equal-
employment opportunities for women and male modesty, the court
explicitly privileged the former. To quote one female expert: “Female
guards can view male prisoners in various stages of undress, but male
guards cannot view female prisoners similarly disrobed. Women in
custody are afforded more privacy than men. Simmering under the surface
are assumptions about the motivations of the viewer. Women guards would
not view men as sex objects, but male guards might be inclined to leer.”
In such an environment, it should come as no surprise that probation
officers are guided by the same preconceived notions that policemen,
prosecutors, psychiatrists, judges, juries and wardens bring to the job
namely, that the female offenders under their supervision suffer from
psychological or emotional difficulties, or were victims of family
problems, or escaped from bad husbands or dependent relationships.
Entering the process long after everybody else has had his or her say,
prison guards are likely to be derive practically everything they know
about the person under consideration from evidence collected by their
predecessors. Controlling for other factors, the result is that a male
offender stands a 25 percent greater chance of being re-incarcerated than a
female one.[677]
In summary, the evidence that modern justice systems discriminate
against men is overwhelming. This is as true at the beginning of the
process as at its end, as true at the point where a police officer has to
decide whether or not to make an arrest as at the point where probation
officers have to decide whether or not to re-commit a prisoner. And the
fact that women can expect superior treatment has hardly been a secret
from female offenders or the lawyers who represent them. Some have used
pre-menstrual syndrome in order to receive better treatment. Others have
resorted to the Svengali Defense, pretending to be “dependent,” “misled”
or “influenced” and blaming their male acquaintances for crimes they
themselves committed.
Provided the perpetrator is a woman, even the most malicious of
crimes are capable of being diminished or dismissed as acts of devotion.
This is made evident by the aforementioned case of acquitted female Nazi
doctors and nurses. In places where women are locked up together with
men, they enjoy privileges. And in places where they are locked up
separately, women also enjoy privileges. All this applies to retributive
justice, i.e. situations in which men and women are accused of having
committed crimes and are facing trial and punishment. As we shall
presently see, though, it is even truer when men and women are confronted
not by the justice system but by each other.
4. Women vs. Men
Cases in which men find themselves accused by women have a long and
dishonorable history. Already in the Old Testament the normal rules of
evidence — which required that, to establish a fact, two witnesses were
needed — were suspended in rape cases. Provided only that the alleged act
took place “in the country” and not in a town, it was presumed that a
betrothed woman had cried out but that there had been nobody around to
come to her aid.[678] The same was also true of Byzantine law.[679]
Similarly, during the late middle and early Modern Ages, wife-beaters
were frowned upon by the community.[680] Conversely, men whose wives
beat them might be humiliated in a festival known as charivari.[681] In
medieval England, proportionally more than three times as many men as
women 50 percent, compared to 15 percent convicted for killing
people of the other sex were executed.[682] A famous 18th
-century English
law ordained that a husband beating his wife should use a rod or switch no
thicker than the base of his right thumb. This law is often quoted as an
example of what some wicked men permitted other wicked men to do to
their wives. Yet its purpose was just the opposite namely, to impose a
limit on those things. The proof of this particular pudding is in the eating.
In rural England, a husband convicted of beating his wife and breaking the
peace was fined. If, on the other hand, it was the wife who was found
guilty, he would also be fined, this time for having failed to restrain her.
[683] Meanwhile, wives’ right to resort to any instrument to beat their
husbands was taken for granted. Islamic tradition is governed by a similar
logic.[684]
In cases involving violence between men and women, the rationale for
treating men more harshly than women was their superior physical
strength. In cases involving sexual acts, the rationale was men’s supposed
greater sexual aggressiveness, including their ability to commit rape, as
well as their greater physical strength. Being rooted in biology, physical
strength cannot be historically constructed, and hence it should come as no
surprise that most present-day courts see things much as their predecessors
did. He we shall proceed in three stages. First we shall examine cases
involving sexual harassment, assault (committed against adults, not
children), and rape. Second we shall take a look at cases involving
domestic violence. Third we shall deal with divorce, the assumption being
that it often results from the aforementioned two offenses.
Over the past several decades, sexual harassment has turned into a
growth industry. Right from the beginning, it was regarded as self-evident
that practically all harassers are male and practically all victims female.
Indeed, the Equal Opportunity Commission, wishing “to avoid
cumbersome use of both masculine and feminine pronouns,” decided it
would “refer to harassers as males and victims as females” in the
documents that it published.[685] Today the United States has strict laws
prohibiting the use of anything but gender-neutral language in job
advertisements and the like. Clearly, therefore, discrimination is only a
problem as long as it is directed against women.
Since almost anything and the absence of almost anything can
constitute harassment, ascertaining exactly how many women have been
victimized is very difficult. Likewise, since reports about men being
harassed are said to have “a ‘man bites dog’ ring to
them,”[686]ascertaining exactly how many men have been victimized is
even more difficult. Whatever the latter figure and the estimates range
from 15 percent to 60 percent it is clear that men claiming to have
suffered from so-called reverse sexual harassment stand a very small
chance of being vindicated in court. Homosexuality aside, in practice
sexual harassment is an offense only to the extent that it is committed by
men against women.
The fact that a man who complains about sexual assault is more likely
to be laughed out of court than to win his case is probably a major reason
why such cases are also extremely rare. Until the 1970s, sexual assault as a
legal category barely existed. Introduced specifically in order to deal with
cases when penetration was not achieved,[687] it has since achieved star
status. Contemporary women are constantly being exhorted to report any
sexual assaults to which they have been subjected. As a result, those who
do so are very likely to be believed. The reception most women receive
stands in stark contrast to what men, including young men, encounter. As
one female researcher put it, their complaints are said to be “guffaw
engendering” and likely to be mocked “to the hilt.”[688] For example,
when filmwriter Lara Flynn-Boyl wanted to do a film about a female
psychiatrist who had turned her male patients into sex slaves, she could not
find a producer.[689]
Everything said about sexual harassment and sexual assault applies a
fortiori to rape. Rape is usually defined as sexual assault itself defined
as a sexual act committed against the victim’s will with penetration
achieved. The result is that a woman, not having a penis, can hardly be
accused of rape to begin with. So biased in favor of women is the law of
most countries that, until recently, it did not even admit the possibility that
a man might be raped by another man.[690] Again, the conclusion is clear:
In our Western society, and by no means only in our Western society, rape
is considered a crime exclusively, or almost exclusively, when it is
committed by a man against a woman.
The tendency to ignore all forms of rape except those committed by
men against women is rooted in prevalent stereotypes as to what
constitutes a woman and what constitutes a man. First, women continue to
be seen as gentle, inoffensive creatures. Second, very often it is assumed
that abuse, as long as it is committed against men — even, some would
say, young men — is not abuse at all. Third, since men cannot become
pregnant, the consequences both to the victim and to society at large are
supposed to be less serious. Concerning the validity of the first two
explanations, no words need be wasted. Concerning the third, it is worth
noting that, even when the victim is a woman, the severity of the
consequences can vary substantially. A woman who is sexually
experienced, or who does not resist the attack (thereby reducing the
likelihood of the rapist using violence and minimizing her own chances of
being injured), will suffer less than some others. Another variable is
community support — the more it supports a woman who has been raped,
the lesser her sufferings will be. Yet society still treats such cases much
more gravely than those committed against men.[691]
Discrimination against men is even more blatant in cases involving socalled date rape. Any discussion of the topic ought to begin by noting that,
by some definitions and for some age groups, date rape comprises roughly
97 percent of all alleged rapes.[692] Beginning in the 1970s, feminists
began claiming that rape is a crime involving not sex but violence.[693]
By the same logic, since date rape hardly ever involves violence, properly
speaking most cases are not rape at all.
In the days when the Inquisition hunted witches, an underlying
assumption was that the latter had it in their power to harm witnesses and
judges who, accordingly, had to be protected from them.[694] At a time
when men are being accused of sexual assault and rape, it is often assumed
that those men have the power to influence their accusers. Apparently they
have such a compelling presence that, by merely attending the court
proceedings in which their fate will be decided, they can drive the woman
who accuses them of sexual assault or rape to relive her experience, burst
into tears and become distracted. To prevent such an unfortunate
experience, but also because distracted people make bad witnesses and
may fail to convince juries, the accusers have to be protected from the
accused. This is true even if the latter has never set his eyes on the victim
since the alleged act; and even if he was remanded in prison until his trial.
Indeed, one reason why he may be so remanded is precisely to protect her.
Needless to say, this reading of the law is based, once again, on the
assumption that even while women demand equality, they remain weak
and helpless in relation to men.
Too often, the need to protect victims means that the woman who
makes the accusation cannot be subjected to the kind of cross-examination
normally considered necessary in court. Depending on the country in
which a trial takes place, the requirement for corroboration may also be
dropped. In such cases, therefore, the issue is decided solely on the basis
of the victim’s own testimony.[695] To make it even easier for a woman to
accuse men with impunity, inquiries concerning her prior sexual behavior
— whether, for example, she likes to drink before having sex, or whether
she likes to walk about half-naked — have been ruled out of order.
Sometimes the determination not to see what women are doing is taken to
the point of absurdity. For example, in Britain the law does not even
recognize the possibility that she may commit indecent exposure.[696] Are
we to understand that only men’s private parts are indecent?
Historically speaking, a good way to rebut the cry of rape was to
accuse a woman of promiscuity. It is therefore ironic that, at the same time
the so-called sexual revolution was supposedly making women behave
more promiscuously than ever, the forward march of history was turned
back. Courts were prevented from looking into the sexual history of
women who accused men of sexually assaulting or raping them. The law’s
treatment of women who engage in group sex is illustrative. The very fact
that more than one man was present when the alleged sexual assault or
rape took place is now taken as evidence that she was intimidated. In other
words, the woman was able to make her complaint heard because she had
been promiscuous; should the accusation stick, then it may well lead to a
verdict for gang rape.
Whereas inquiring into a woman’s sexual behavior — even her sexual
behavior during the alleged incident — is decreed humiliating, irrelevant,
or both, the situation of the man or men being accused is exactly the
opposite. Precisely because rape and sexual assault usually take place in
private, the first thing prosecutors do is to look into the history of the
accused and establish a “pattern.” As might be expected, this method will
often lead to some interesting detective work. As might be expected, too, it
can cause women to step forward years and even decades after an alleged
incident and claim to have been assaulted or raped. Once such a woman
has been located, armies of psychologists, social workers and police
officers, many of them female, will coax, cajole and convince her to gather
her courage and complain. Once enough women — the minimum number
needed seems to be three — have done so, obtaining a conviction is child’s
play. Thus men are expected to behave according to a pattern; but women
may do what they please.
In some societies, ancient Rome in particular, a man who had been
accused of rape but found innocent was allowed to retaliate by bringing a
suit for defamation.[697] Not so in most modern countries, where women
are often considered the only persons with a reputation to lose. As a result,
whereas the identity of the victim is concealed either by court order or by
law, that of the accused is published. Once this happens, his good name is
gone, and it will never be completely restored, even should he live to 100.
This is true even if, after months and perhaps years of judicial torture, he is
acquitted. When Judge Clarence Thomas said that he would “rather die”
than admit to having harassed Anita Hill, he knew what he was talking
about.[698] Some pundits argue that modern societies should penalize
women who have failed to prove their case.[699] As such a development is
rather unlikely, the parade of accusations can be expected to continue.
Like sexual harassment and sexual abuse, the legal offense known as
domestic violence is largely a creation of the past several decades. As with
sexual harassment and sexual abuse, the charge of domestic violence has
the potential to enable women to get at men. To help women in so doing,
some police departments in the United States specifically prohibit
policemen called upon to deal with such cases from fully investigating the
facts, as they would with any other allegation. Groups of self-styled
battered women have even won court cases against police officers who did
not arrest their alleged batterers.[700] Simply by saying she
feelsthreatened, a woman can have any man arrested even if she later
admits that the threat was not meant seriously, and or that the claim was
false. Another word on her part, this time in court, and a restraining order
is issued. Needless to say, a man who has lost his home in this way is still
obliged to support the woman who threw him out. Worse still, the court
that issues the order is not the same as the one responsible for visitation.
Therefore, from then on, merely to be allowed to see his children may well
cost a man a small fortune.[701]
Like sexual assault and rape, domestic violence is usually perceived as
something men perpetrate against women. However, this assumption is not
borne out by the facts. In a sample of 55,000 U.S. Army soldiers, between
39 percent and 40 percent of the women reported having been involved in
domestic violence at one point or another. The figure for men was between
29 percent and 43 percent. The most common pattern — some two-thirds
of all cases — was for people of both sexes to hit each other reciprocally.
Interestingly, however, almost twiceas many female soldiers admitted to
being sole aggressors that is, to hitting without being hit back than
did male ones. This was quite possibly so, it must be acknowledged,
because the women knew that, for them, the admission would not carry
any consequences.[702]
What is true of the military is equally true for society at large. In 1975,
and again in 1985, the National Institute of Mental Health studied a
national sample of 2,143 married and cohabiting couples. In both years,
the number of attacks which spouses of either sex directed at the other was
practically equal.[703] Another study discovered that, each year, American
wives were one-fifth more likely to “severely attack” their husbands than
vice versa.[704] In Canada, according to yet another study, the discrepancy
is greater still. Of the women interviewed, 6.2 percent admitted to having
beaten up their partners during the preceding year, as compared to 2.5
percent of men. In the same study, more women than men admitted to
having used “severe” violence, and more women than men admitted to
having used a knife or a gun.[705] And the more severe the violence, the
more likely it is to be directed by women against men. One study of police
records found that women were three times more likely to threaten or use
weapons, such as knives and guns, against their spouses than men.[706]
So-called reverse spouse abuse — note the terminology, which makes
clear that the real thing refers to men abusing women — is the most underreported form of all domestic violence.[707] Some of the reasons for this
may be methodological. It stands to reason that at least some men are
being hit or pushed, have things thrown at them or are kicked or whipped,
just as some women are. But this does not prevent most investigators from
ignoring that possibility. They assume that men’s “accounts of the violence
cannot be taken at face value,” while registering what women say as if it
were gospel truth.[708] For example, 30 percent of women questioned in
one emergency room between 1976 and 1979 blamed their injuries on
domestic abuse. Since men were not questioned on the matter, they could
not have reported it even if it had taken place.[709] Conversely, when one
study did compare the percentage of people of both sexes admitted to
hospital emergency rooms as a result of injuries allegedly caused by
domestic violence, it turned out that there was little difference between
men and women.[710]
Another reason why female-on-male domestic violence is underreported is the lenient way such cases are treated. In the movies, women
who commit violence against men are often applauded by the audience.
The reverse happens rarely, if ever.[711] In real life, men who dare to
complain are likely to be despised, derided, or both. One does not have to
be a criminologist or sociologist to know that, as long as it is perpetrated
by a woman against a man, domestic violence “tends to be... victim
precipitated.”[712] Stripped of jargon, this means that a woman is much
more likely to be regarded as having acted in self-defense. This applies
even when, as happens in no fewer than 70 percent of all known cases,
[713] the violence is applied at a time when the man is helpless. Lorena
Bobbitt was not the only woman whose male partner was asleep at the
time of the attack. Other men were drunk or bound.
As former New York governor Mario Cuomo, the father of current
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, said when he decided to pardon a
woman who shot her estranged husband after driving several hundred
miles, when it comes to women who kills “there are no rules.”[714] In a
single act of clemency in 1990, the governor of Ohio, Richard Celeste,
pardoned no fewer than 27 women convicted of murdering their husbands.
The leniency exercised toward women who have killed their relatives may
explain why 15.9 percent of imprisoned female killers, but only 9.6
percent of male ones, are where they are for that offense.[715] It may also
explain why adult women are 24 percent more likely to kill their children
than are men, and why under-age women are 32 percent more likely to kill
relatives, small children included, than are under-age men.[716]
So strong is the presumption that “mothers don’t kill” that it has even
formed the basis for a legal defense strategy. One offender who resorted to
such a defense, a Virginia female convicted in 2000 of cooking her baby in
a microwave oven, got off with a mere five years in jail.[717] With good
behavior, she could have gotten off in three. Later she was joined by
several more microwave-mothers, all of whom cited various psychological
symptoms in the hope of receiving similarly lenient treatment.[718]
Thus, when a woman accuses a man to whom she is not married of
using violence against her, or of sexual harassment, or sexual assault, or
rape, then the man in question is disproportionally likely to suffer
punishment. When a woman accuses a man of domestic abuse, then the
outcome is likely be divorce as well as punishment. And with divorce
come issues related to child custody, several of which deserve further
examination here.
Debate over which sex deserves custody of children in divorce cases is
probably just as old as the institution of marriageitself. Sometimes children
were entrusted to the parent of their sex in other words, boys went with
their father and girls with their mother. In other cases, the father got
custody of both boys and girls above a certain age, the reason being that he
and not the mother would be responsible for feeding them. As noted
previously, some societies, including Christian ones, regarded adultery as
the only grounds on which men could divorce their wives. In those
societies, in other words, a divorced woman was adulterous by definition.
Being adulterous, she was considered unfit to raise her children and often
even to see them.[719] On the other hand, illegitimate children always
belonged to their mother. That, in turn, meant that the father was not
responsible for feeding them.[720]
Until 1800 or so, it was believed that the thing children needed most
was economic support and an education to enable them to stand on their
own feet. Beginning in the early 19th century, however, the emphasis was
put on a child’s need for “love.” To separate children from their mothers
began to be constructed as “cruel” behavior. In England,[721] from 1839
onward a separated mother could petition for access to her children. If they
were under 8 years old, she could ask for custody. In 1873, the Infant
Custody Act raised the age to 16 and the rule that denied custody and
access to adulterous mothers was abolished. As fathers lost ground before
the onslaught of motherly love, clearly the day when women would claim,
and obtain, almost automatic custody over young children in particular
could not be far off. This, in fact, was what happened. Beginning around
1890, notwithstanding evidence that mothers were much more likely to
abuse and kill babies than fathers, the idea that the bond between mother
and child was the strongest of all asserted itself.
The result was that, both in Britain and the United States, women
began to obtain custody in practically all cases. Almost a full century
would pass before the United States moved to rectify the imbalance, with
the Supreme Court declaring in 1979 that discrimination against fathers
involved in custody cases was unconstitutional. It was, however, to no
avail; to this day, most courts still use the idea of “primary caretaker” to
grant custody to women. Taking care of a child’s economic needs, which is
what most fathers do, simply does not carry a corresponding amount of
weight in court. Fathers who ask for custody are often interrogated about
their involvement with the child, but the same line of questioning is rarely
applied to mothers.[722] Apparently even to ask a mother whether she
knows the name of her child’s teacher is considered, if not technically out
of order, at least reprehensible.
The results, not surprisingly, point to an overwhelming bias against
entrusting children to their fathers. In California, for example, more than
10 times as many mothers as fathers receive sole custody.[723] In the
words of one expert, “[fathers] asking for joint custody is like asking for
the sun and the moon.”[724] As a result, men who separate from their
children’s mother almost always face loss of custody. Since each partner
can now obtain a divorce even without the other’s consent, fatherhood has
been made conditional. On pain of losing their children, many men have
been trapped in their marriages even if it was the wife who was violent,
and even if she lost her mind not just once a month but all the time.
If the men were separated from their wives, and if the children were
taken away from them, then who would pay for those children’s upkeep?
Before 1840, divorced men usually obtained custody. In return they were
obliged to support their children. Once motherly love had triumphed and
men no longer stood a chance of obtaining custody, they were still obliged
to do so. No was that the end of the matter. In the 1960s, growing numbers
of men and women started living together without being officially married.
The result was a very steep rise in the number of children who, by the
standards applied during most of history until then, were illegitimate and
thus not entitled to be supported by their fathers in case the couple broke
up. Driven partly by concern for the children, and partly by pressure
brought about by feminist groups, the state soon rose to the occasion. The
traditional distinction between legitimate and illegitimate children was all
but abolished. On the one hand, fathers were obliged to pay regardless of
whether or not they had been married to the mothers. On the other, women
retained an almost absolute right to custody over the children in question.
As so often, women could have their cake and eat it too.
As has been said, the new laws turned men into “divorceable sperm
donors and disposable cheque-signing machines.”[725] Is it any wonder
that, discriminated against in every possible way, many men try to evade
their financial responsibilities? This is particularly true if they are denied
the right to visit their children, as more than one-third of divorced men in
the United States are.[726] No wonder that, over time, most divorced men
lose contact with their children, to say nothing of the effect on the children
themselves.[727] Women, in turn, did, as they always have done, what
they could to obtain payments. In this they had the law on their side, even
if its enforcement was not always effective. However, women who for one
reason or another could not compel fathers to pay did not have to unduly
worry. In most modern countries, the Social Security system has picked up
where deadbeat fathers left off. Even in the United States, where the
welfare state is not nearly as developed as it is in its European
counterparts, such a woman could always sign up for Aid to Families with
Dependent Children or its successor program, Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families.
In short, there is no question that, facing a man in court, a woman very
often finds the dice loaded in her favor. In cases involving sex, to quote
one British judge, “charges... are so easily made, but so difficult to
refute.”[728] This is all the more so because the act normally takes place
in private, where, absent witnesses, it is her word against his. This is all
the more so because, under normal circumstances, it brings pleasure to
both sides. What one side understands as harmless flirtation the other may
construct as harassment and worse. These characteristics have not
prevented numerous men from being convicted of rapes that they never
committed. Beginning around 1970, moreover, a whole category of
offenses went on the books involving cases in which penetration was not
achieved. To protect women — in other words, to enable them to make
their accusations stick without risk to themselves — the rules of arrest
were changed. Often policemen are actually prohibited from establishing
the facts of the case. Due process is put aside or perverted, and the media
permitted, if not actually ordered, to publicize the name of the alleged
perpetrator only. Only those who have gone through the process can
imagine the injustice and suffering it causes. As long as the victims are
men, though, few care.
What is true in cases involving sex is equally true in those involving
violence. One of the greatest feminist “achievements” has been to make
many people believe that rape is centered on violence, rather than on sex.
Yet at the same time, the statistics show that women are almost as likely to
engage in domestic violence as men — and indeed, are more likely to
engage in severe domestic violence.[729] But whereas a man convicted of
having battered his spouse is quite likely to end up in prison, a woman
who has done the same can expect to enter a shelter and live at taxpayers’
expense. The paradox is that, according to one survey, 77 percent of
battered women admitted to having been violent toward their spouse
during the year before admission to the shelter. Perhaps even more telling,
58 percent admitted to having been violent during the six months after
leaving .[730] In one survey conducted in a Kentucky shelter, 38 percent
admitted they had been the ones who had initiated the violence.[731] In
England, 62 percent of women in a shelter admitted that the violence was
mutual.[732] It seems that, to obtain lodging and a sympathetic ear, all a
woman has to do is attack the man with whom she lives.
When it comes to family law, the bias in favor of women is stronger
still. That may be one reason why eight out of 10 divorce lawsuits are
served by women.[733] Some of the above-mentioned cases may have
slightly tarnished the idea that mothers are particularly fond of their
children. On the whole, however, the bias against men persists. In an age
when many women leave the home for work, one could justifiably argue
that the only thing that still remains from much-maligned Victorian ideals
of domesticity is the tendency of courts to deny custody while saddling
divorced men with child support payments. As has so often been the case,
women are able to get the best of both worlds.
5. Conclusions
The legal advantages that women enjoy over men are far too numerous to
be recounted here. The obvious bias and, quite often, blatant
misguidedness inherent in many relevant laws are perhaps best captured
by a law that was on the books in Oklahoma until the mid-1970s. Under
state law, the sale of beer was prohibited to females under 18 and males
under 21. As a result, a 20-year-old male could invite a young woman of
the exact same age to have a drink, but could not have one himself. The
clear bias is made all the more absurd by the fact that women, owing to
their smaller body mass and possibly to other factors, are more susceptible
to alcohol than men. Indeed, had the law been designed to assist a young
man seduce his female date by getting her drunk, it could have thought of
no better way. Yet so firmly entrenched is the legal principle that favors
women over men that the Supreme Court had a very difficult time striking
down the Oklahoma law. In the end the nation’s highest court did so, but
only after instituting an entirely new “middle tier” of rationality ranking
between “minimum rationality” and “strict scrutiny.”[734]
In nearly every area of society, a signed contract must be honored and,
if necessary, enforced by the courts and the police, unless fraud can be
shown to have been involved. Not so, however, when it comes to surrogate
motherhood. To quote one female expert on the subject: “Currently a
contracted mother may breach a contract in a least four ways. She may (1)
refuse, after all, to be inseminated; (2) either abort or fail to abort the fetus
against the commissioning couple’s wishes; (3) negligently harm the fetus
during the pregnancy; and/or (4) refuse to give up the child at birth.”[735]
The willingness to permit women to renege on their commitments is
equally evident in custody cases. A man who has signed a notarized
agreement in which he surrenders custody can wave his child or children
goodbye. Not so a woman, in whose case a similar document may not be
binding.[736]
Anecdotes plucked from every period in America’s history can easily
give the impression that “discrimination” itself only exists as long as it
works against women. An excellent case in point was that of Joe Hogan. In
1982, he asked to be admitted to the nursing program at the University of
Mississippi, and was rejected. The Mississippi Supreme Court finally ruled
in his favor, but not because the university had been discriminating against
men. Instead, the argument used was that, by admitting only women, the
school had lent “credibility to the old view that women, not men, should
become nurses, and [made] the assumption that nursing is a field for
women a self-fulfilling prophecy.”[737] In other words, the court granted
Hogan’s plea not because he was discriminated against as a man, but
because the prohibition discriminated against women.
In fact, so strong is the social bias in favor of women that it even
affects legislation intended to establish “equality” between the sexes. For
example, when the United States Senate passed the Equal Rights
Amendment in 1972, it added a clause known as the “Hayden Rider” after
its sponsor, Carl Hayden. The clause ruled that the rights amendment
“shall not be constituted to impair any rights, benefits, or exemptions now
or hereafter conferred by law, upon persons of the female sex” in other
words, that it should not deny the privileges that women already enjoyed.
[738] A similar logic prevails in India, a country that accounts for onesixth of the world’s population. In interpreting that country’s Constitution,
Chief Justice M. C. Chagla held that a state was permitted to discriminate
in favor of women against men. However, it could not discriminate in
favor of men against women.[739]
Today, in nearly every country women’s legal privileges are at least as
extensive as they have always been. As certain authors never tire of telling
us, in patriarchal societies it is men who lay down the law. Since all known
societies have been patriarchal, one can only conclude that women should
thank men for their privileges. This interpretation is supported by the fact
that the more “feminine” the woman’s behavior at the time she is arrested
or put on trial, the more lenient the treatment she can expect.[740] In
court, her best tactic is to wear a skirt — not, however, a miniskirt — and
a blouse. The latter, while clearly showing that she is a woman, should
avoid any hint of cleavage. The next, all-but-obligatory step is to burst into
tears at an appropriate moment during the trial. That is what both Lorena
Bobbitt and the microwave-oven lady did. Compared with the way they
treat women, men have only themselves to thank for the way they treat
each other. So it has always been, and so, it can confidently be predicted, it
will always be.
.
Chapter 6: In the Maw of Mars
1. The Principle of the Thing
In regard to the way they are raised, the work they do, the economic
support they receive, and their position vis-à-vis the law, women have
always enjoyed and still enjoy considerable privileges. Likewise, when it
comes to fulfilling their obligation to society, women also have enjoyed
and still enjoy considerable privileges. The greatest single privilege is that
they are hardly ever expected to shed blood for their people.
As is well known, insofar as women do not participate in war they are
very often exempt, or supposed to be exempt, from its horrors. As is far
less well known, there were and still are certain situations in which women
are exempt, or supposed to be exempt, from the horrors of war even
though they do participate in it. Occasionally one can even find instances
when women volunteered for war becausethey were, or believed
themselves to be, more or less immune to its horrors. Insofar as life is the
most precious commodity of all, it is precisely in war that women’s
privileges stand out most clearly. So it has always been and so, let us
hope it will always be.
2. A History of Military Service
A list of all the ways in which society has selected those whom it
commanded to fight and die on its behalf would be all but equivalent to a
history of civilization. Even when presented in mere outline, such a history
shows the way in which women always have been and still are privileged.
To the extent that women did not have to participate in war, they were
privileged. And to the very limited extent that they did participate in war,
they were also privileged.
In the simplest known tribal societies, every adult male was a warrior
by definition. This fact is reflected in the Bible, in which a sharp
distinction is drawn between men, who are members of the host, and
women, who are not.[741] The same applies to many North American
Indian languages, where the standard term for “man” is “brave.” Men who
for one reason or another could not or would not fight were exposed to
contempt and derision at the hand of men and women. Alternatively, they
might declare themselves, or be declared, holy. However, doing so this
made their situation even worse; witness the pathetic figure of the priest
Charises in the Iliad, begging for his daughter’s freedom and being sent
away empty-handed. In classical Greece, once the popular assembly had
declared war, the magistrates would hold a levy. First volunteers were
called, then other citizens. The same method was used in Rome, where the
standard penalty for willful non-participation in war was death.[742]
In medieval Konstanz, and presumably other European towns as well,
“men” but not women had to join the militia at the age of 12.[743]
In most modern countries, the system under which every able-bodied male
citizen is ipso facto a warrior and keeps his weapon at home has been
obsolete for centuries past. Not so in Switzerland, where it is only now
starting to be modified. The Swiss military obliges every man to do a
period of service, which is followed by regular refresher training. The
system enables the country to maintain armed forces wholly out of
proportion to the size of its population. More important for our purpose, it
explains why Switzerland waited until 1976 before it finally enfranchised
women. Originally women, who were not obliged to bear arms, did not
participate in the popular assemblies which themselves consisted of armsbearing men. For the many years that they were not obliged to bear arms,
Swiss women were privileged. After 1976, when they still did not have to
bear arms but were entitled to vote, they became doubly privileged.
In empires such as Egypt and China, the bulk of the troops consisted
of conscripted peasants. Normally their period of service was timed to
coincide with the season when there was little agricultural work to be
done. However, should the campaign become extended, then the men
might find themselves with the regulars for years on end. Military service
was a kind of corvée. Such an arrangement still existed in 18th-century
Prussia. So harsh was Prussian discipline that it gave rise to the term
Kadavergehorsam, “corpse-like obedience.” In wartime deserters might be
shot out of hand. Women, as usual, did not share in the joys.
Beginning in some pre-literate societies, a very common method of
raising armies was feudal, in the literal sense of the word. “Feudal” comes
from feudum, or “fief,” and the system of distributing land in return for
military service was already used by some of the larger and betterorganized tribal societies. It rose to prominence in medieval Europe and
also in ancient Persia, the Ottoman Empire, and pre-modern Japan.[744]
How onerous such service could be is evident from numerous disputes
between rulers and vassals. The former were always trying to make the
latter do more. The vassals, for their part, insisted that they only had to
serve under such and such circumstances, against such and such enemies,
and for so and so many days a year.[745] Once again women — even
those, and there were always some, who had inherited land and were
holding it in their own right — were exempt.
At times, those who received land were not individuals but entire
communities. Seeking to strengthen their hold over newly conquered
territories, Hellenistic kings established numerous military colonies.[746]
Later the Romans used a similar system, both in Italy and elsewhere; that
is how many European cities were established. As late as the second half
of the 17th century, the Russian, Swedish and Austrian governments still
used similar methods.[747] In return for parcels of land, colonists were
obliged to do military service. Colonists’ sons lived under the same
obligation. Thus, men, by virtue of having been born on the king’s land,
were destined to die for him. As one ancient Egyptian poem put it, “when
[a male child] reaches manhood, his bones are scattered.”[748] Daughters
were exempt, as a matter of course. Nevertheless, as far as can be
determined, that fact did not necessarily prevent them from inheriting land.
[749]
In more sophisticated societies, and in Europe from the end of the
Middle Ages, income from land as a way of maintaining an army was
replaced by cash payment. Mercenaries began to be hired for campaigns.
Once the fighting was over, the hired troops would be discharged. If only
because they were often foreigners, such troops were regarded as
expendable. An extreme example of this attitude may be found in Thomas
More’s Utopia. Here the fighting was done by a barbaric people known as
“Venalians.” They were a stand-in for the Swiss, who in More’s time were
the mercenary people par excellence. He called them “filthy scum” and
wrote that, the more of them were killed, the better for humanity.[750]
Mercenaries’ pay was notoriously low and unreliable, which explains why
they often deserted, rebelled or switched sides. Many of them ended, if not
dead, then mutilated or destitute. Women, of course, never formed part of
the system. If they did not enjoy its dubious benefits, at any rate they did
not suffer from its disadvantages
In some cases mercenaries ended up by being put on retainer, and their
numbers were maintained not merely during war but in peacetime as well.
It was in this way that regulars and standing armies emerged. Even some
of the oldest known empires, including those of Egypt, Mesopotamia and
China, had armies whose cores consisted of regulars. Others maintained
smaller bodies of regulars, like the Roman Praetorians, whose task was to
guard the capital. In theory, service in a standing army might very well be
voluntary. But in practice it was often compulsory, as Voltaire’s Candide,
having been tricked into joining the “Bulgarian” read, Prussian
Army, found out to his detriment. Compulsory enlistment was even more
common at sea. In Rome, Venice and France, down to the days of Louis
XIV, navies got their manpower partly from among slaves and convicts.
Even Britain, the least tyrannical among the major powers of the 18th
century, regularly used the press gang to obtain sailors. That practice,
incidentally, was denounced by none other than Mary Wollstonecraft.[751]
During the first half of the 19th century, some countries, notably
France, adopted a system of selective service to find the military
manpower they needed.[752] A lottery was held, and youths unlucky
enough to be picked were made to serve for as many as six to eight years.
It was, however, possible for those who had drawn a mauvais numero to
buy themselves out by hiring a substitute at a tariff fixed by the state. The
system was designed to help members of the middle and upper classes.
The resulting economic burden could be quite considerable, equivalent to
supporting a laborer for a number of years. Once again, that burden was
carried exclusively by men. To put it differently, women were regarded as
having won the lottery by virtue of their sex. The possibility of making
them pay was never considered, even if they were physically fit, and even
if they had property of their own.
Finally, following the example set by the French Revolution in 1792
but largely abandoned after 1815, most countries adopted general
conscription from about 1870 onward. The normal period of service was
two or three years. So onerous was the burden that it became one of the
driving forces behind the emigration of young European men to the United
States.[753] Some mutilated themselves to avoid service. In principle, and
often in practice as well, conscription was capable of taking every single
man who was physically fit. And during total war, it often took men who
were not physically fit. A famous cartoon by the German expressionist
painter Georg Grosz graphically illustrates the point: It shows a corpse that
has been dug up from its grave being examined by doctors and declared
Kriegsverwendungsfähig, or “capable of being used in war.”[754] In
World War II, the Wehrmacht had entire battalions comprised of deaf
soldiers, of soldiers who suffered from stomach ulcers, and of soldiers who
were under 18 years old. Needless to say, women were not affected by any
of this. As developments after 1970 were to show, one reason why
conscription could be adopted was precisely because women were
unaffected by any of this.
Precisely because Israeli women are the only ones in history to have
been conscripted for military service, their privileges are more pronounced
than anywhere else.[755] Compared with men, Israeli women find it easier
to avoid the draft, with the result that fewer of them actually serve. They
can obtain a discharge by simply declaring that they are religious; merely
questioning a woman’s beliefs is considered injurious to her dignity and is
prohibited by law. Unlike religious men, being exempt does not oblige
them to spend time studying in a yeshiva, or religious high school, or to
refrain from making a living while so engaged. Married women, too, are
exempt. As Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion put it when he passed the
relevant legislation in 1949, men could serve first and marry later.
However, tearing away “an 18-year-old newlywed” from her husband’s
embrace was little short of a crime.[756]
Female conscripts in Israel serve for 22 months, 14 months less than
their male comrades. The vast majority of them holds comfortable jobs and
spends practically every night at home, rather than at a base. Following a
1997 proposal by the Knesset’s women’s lobby, female conscripts were
given extra pay to enable them to buy contraceptives. Since female
conscripts are by definition single, it was almost as if they were being
encouraged to be promiscuous at public expense. In addition, female
soldiers are specifically exempted from some jobs. One is driving trucks,
because doing so is heavy work, and drivers are always the first to be
called up and the last to go home. Another is cooking, considered hard and
unpleasant work. And once they have done their duty as conscripts, Israeli
women hardly ever serve in the reserves, as do nearly all their male
comrades. This means they are free from a duty which, over the course of
several decades, can take up several years of Israeli men’s lives. In my
entire 40 years as a teacher at Israeli Universities, not a single woman has
missed a single class for this reason.
In 2000, after decades when not a single woman served in a combat
unit, female soldiers began to be permitted to serve in them.[757] Even
then, the Knesset hastened to add a rider that no woman could be obliged
to serve in such a unit. Women, in other words, can and do have it both
ways. The outcome is plainly visible on the countless war memorials that
dot the Israeli countryside. He who looks for women’s names will do so
almost entirely in vain. That is true even of the 1948 War of Independence,
the one major Israeli conflict in which some women did fight.[758]Nor
does it look as if this situation will change. When a female fighter was
badly injured in the summer of 2001, Israeli feminists did not celebrate.
Instead, a well-known female journalist wrote that military women should
compete with military men with brain, not brawn in other words, that
women should get the cushy jobs while men fight and die.[759]
The fact that, from the beginning of history, hardly any women has
been obliged to serve does not mean that field armies were altogether
without women. Rather, such armies have always been trailed by female
“camp-followers.”[760] From the time of Scipio Africanus to that of
Napoleon two millennia later, they carried out many of the tasks which,
today, are performed by the so-called rear services. These tasks included
provisioning, cooking, laundering, nursing and, of course, providing the
troops with paid or unpaid sex. At times the number of women on
campaigns approached that of the men. To be sure, going into the field was
not all fun and games. Yet female camp-followers differed from soldiers in
that they were invariably volunteers. Not being bound by martial law, they
were permitted to leave at will. Now it should be remembered that, from
ancient Rome through the end of World War II, by far the single most
important crime for which soldiers were executed was desertion. Women,
simply because they were women, were exempt. To anybody in the least
bit familiar with military life, a greater privilege could hardly be imagined.
Here and there a handful of women took up arms, fought and died.
Most, it is worth noting, were transvestites namely, women who
dressed as men and took to soldiering either temporarily or permanently,
as a way of life.[761] Some did what they did out of love for some man.
Others were driven by economic reasons; others still, by a lust for
adventure. Particularly during America’s Revolutionary War and the
Napoleonic Wars, such women’s motives were sometimes mixed with
patriotism. The way contemporaries saw it, on occasion they themselves
were mixed up. Not only did they put on male clothes and adopt the most
male profession of all, some also tried to marry and bed other women.
Disguised women whose true identity became known were discharged.
Women who voluntarily revealed themselves as such were also discharged,
though a few cases are known when, begging not to be sent home and
pulling strings, they were permitted to stay and even put under special
protection.[762] Thus, to the very limited extent that women did enlist,
they could leave the colors at any time they chose. Often women were sent
home at a time when, having committed some offense, they were
scheduled to receive punishment, such as flogging and the like.
Commanders simply did not want to punish women as barbarously as they
did men. Once again, to anybody familiar with military life, a greater
privilege could scarcely be imagined.
During World War I, the situation changed again. As men enlisted,
fought and died by the millions, all the belligerents found themselves
critically short of manpower. They tried to employ women, mainly in the
fields, factories and offices, but sometimes resorted to putting them into
uniform. The first experiments were made in Britain, where the Women’s
Emergency Corps was established in late 1914.[763] It acted as a
clearinghouse for women who wanted to “do their bit.” The Corps
registered the women, classified them, and referred them to forces which
might have an interest in hiring them as civilians. The largest single group
consisted of nurses, of which it was impossible to have enough. Other
women ran canteens, or operated communications equipment, or acted as
drivers. Unlike the camp-followers of old, they neither followed individual
male soldiers nor acted as entrepreneurs. Instead, they were employed by
the army itself. Like the camp-followers of old, they did not come under
martial law. Nor were they supposed to enter war zones.
Early in 1917, a year after the beginning of male conscription, the
British forces finally felt ready to permit volunteer women to wear the
uniform. From then until the end of the war, some 100,000 did so.
However, neither in Britain nor in the United States, which followed the
British example, were women treated as male soldiers were. In the first
place, they could only be sent abroad with their own consent. If they did
go abroad, they were concentrated in the zone of communications well
behind the front. This put them out of harm’s way; which explains why,
out of the 38 female American soldiers who died during World War I, most
lost their lives to the flu.[764] Second, unlike men — conscripts or
volunteers — women were permitted to desert practically at will. They
were thus simultaneously inside the forces and outside them. This was
made clear when American navy officers tried to court-martial some
women in the service, only to have Secretary Josephus Daniels tell them to
back off, since “[one] cannot deal with women as with men.”[765]
In all that concerns the employment of women, World War II was to a
large extent a repetition of the first. In both Britain and the United States,
any ideas of conscripting women — even for labor, let alone for military
service — came to nothing. In both countries, women were called on to
volunteer for the forces. The number of those who did so in both countries
together may have amounted to 850,000 or so. Some British women
worked in anti-aircraft defense.[766] In that field, as in others, often the
first sign of the women’s impending arrival was that the male troops were
“asked” to give up their quarters for them.[767] Or as one female
American navy officer put it, “There are certain niceties it would be lovely
for men to have too, but if women don’t have them their efficiency is
jeopardized.”[768] As in World War I, the forces much preferred letting
female soldiers desert over court-martialing them. Women, in other words,
could get a discharge simply by breaking the law.[769] That, in turn, may
help explain how those women who did stay in gained a reputation for
being more disciplined than men.
As in World War I, female soldiers could be sent abroad only if they
volunteered. As a result, very few became casualties. British servicemen
were about 55 times more likely to be killed as British servicewomen.
[770]On the other side of the Atlantic, out of 350,000 American women
who wore the uniform at some point between 1941 and 1945, only 4.7
percent served “in or near combat zones.” Just 3.5 percent had been fired
upon, and only 2 percent had been in “serious combat” that is, had been
injured or saw other Americans being killed and wounded.[771] Except for
one episode early in the war, no American women were taken prisoner.
[772] The equivalent British figure was 20.
Not counting resistance movements, the only country where any
number of women — just how many is disputed[773] — saw combat
during World War II was the Soviet Union. From the end of the Russian
Civil War to the outbreak of the “Great Patriotic War” in 1941, the Red
Army hardly had any female soldiers.[774] However, after the German
invasion began women were permitted to volunteer. As in all other armies,
the vast majority served as caterers, communicators, administrators and
medics. However, a few thousand served as snipers, tank crew(wo)men,
and even combat pilots.[775] The self-sacrifice and heroism of Soviet
women, like that of many of their sisters in other countries, are beyond
question. Still, even in the Soviet Union the conditions under which they
worked and lived were incomparably better than those imposed on men.
Tens of thousands of Red Army men were executed, but to see a military
woman under arrest was cause for surprise.[776]
After World War I the British and American women’s corps were
dissolved. The aftermath of World War II, however, followed a different
course. Politicians and commanders believed that the next war would
again require the total mobilization of all available manpower and
resources.[777] This caused several countries to establish permanent
women’s corps, so as to organize and train the female soldiers who would
be coming in. By the 1960s, women accounted for 1.2 percent of American
military personnel. As in World War II, though, they could only be sent
overseas if they volunteered to go. As a result, whereas well over 2 million
American men served in Southeast Asia, for women the equivalent figure
was 8,000. Since womenat that time did not join combat units, the
discrepancy in terms of casualties suffered by service personnel of both
sexes was greater still. Of the 57,000 Americans who died in Vietnam,
only 8 0.014 percent were female.[778]
Partly because they were bowing to feminist pressures, partly because
men were becoming increasingly reluctant to take up the profession of
arms,[779] during the 1970s many other countries began to setting up
women’s corps. However, compared to their male comrades the women in
question were privileged in many ways. Even in the Soviet Union, where
the authorities showed no mercy to young men who refused to be drafted,
female soldiers were not conscripts but volunteers. Even in the Soviet
Union, female soldiers were not obliged to do combat duty. In fact, they
were kept far from any conceivable danger short of nuclear war. Even in
the Soviet Union, the discipline under which they worked was much more
relaxed. They also enjoyed a whole series of other privileges. The same
applied in other countries, among them Greece, Belgium, Switzerland and
Canada. In Canada, female soldiers could not even be arrested. The
rationale was that a facility that would cater to their special needs did not
exist. Nor, owing to the cost, could one be built.[780]In short, when an
armed force has many women, the women are privileged and when an
armed force has few women, women are also privileged.
By the time these changes started taking place in the early 1970s, at
least five countries had built nuclear weapons. Several others were thought
to be capable of doing so, if they so chose. On both sides of the Iron
Curtain, an entire generation had passed since any developed country had
fought an opponent who was even remotely capable of putting its own
existence at risk. Major war between major powers was clearly on the
decline,[781] and this decline was to continue during the ensuing decades.
The process goes a long way to explain why women suddenly wanted to
enter combat units. To put it differently, as long as armed forces were
meant for combat and occasionally engaged in it, the few women who
served were not expected to fight and hardly ever did. But as the armed
forces’ role as fighting machines all but came to an end, the number of
female soldiers who served in them rapidly rose.
As the percentage of servicewomen rose, they demanded, and in most
cases obtained, equal treatment in regard to pay, fringe benefits and
promotion, among others.[782] Equal work, they claimed, deserves equal
pay. The fact that women were not doing equal work was deliberately
ignored both by the women themselves and by the courts to which they
turned. The results first became clear during the 1991 Gulf War, when
servicewomen turned out to be four times as likely as servicemen to
experience problems that prevented them from being deployed.[783] Some
women were unavailable because they were pregnant. Indeed, at any one
time, one in 10 women in the services is likely to be pregnant.[784] Others
could not go because they were seven times more likely than men to be
single parents.[785] On that and other occasions, even those women who
did get to the theater of operations did not pull their weight. During the
first decade of the 21st century, both in Iraq and in Afghanistan,
proportionally eight times as many American male as female soldiers died.
In every armed force that has them, women continue to enjoy
privileges which, as long as those forces consisted solely of men, had been
practically unheard of. Whereas some countries still conscript men,
women only serve as volunteers. In the United States during the 1970s,
attempts to end this discrimination and force the military to conscript, or at
least register, women were repeatedly rejected by the courts as well as by
the Senate.[786] Since womenare on average less suitable for combat,
physically speaking, in all the militaries that take them they tend to get the
less demanding, cleaner and safer jobs. In truth, they are only soldiers as
long as it suits them. For example, when the Russian army went to war in
Chechnya in 1994-95, its female officers some 14 percent of the officer
corps simply refused to go. Well understanding the outcry that would
follow, the army did not try to force them to.[787]
Furthermore, women’s living conditions are often better and the duties
they are asked to perform less arduous. Often the training they get is so lax
as to border on the ridiculous. For example, when it comes to throwing
hand grenades,[788] or when Israeli female conscripts go through a “basic
training” course that lasts all of 10 days. Often women’s privileges even
apply when they are trained for serving in very high-quality, high-prestige,
military occupation specialties such as pilots.[789] Especially in the
United States, so good are the terms under which military women serve
that the forces have become a haven for single mothers. For millennia,
men have died so that women would live. Now that substantial numbers of
women are wearing the uniform as well, it will be interesting to observe
whether the sacrifice will be reciprocated. One could be forgiven for
having doubts, if only because repeated surveys have shown that very few
female soldiers want to be in combat in the first place.[790]
3. The Protected Sex
If women have very seldom fought in war, then probably the most
important reason for this is not because they are discriminated against.
Rather, it is because one of the reasons why men fight — some would say,
the most important reason — is precisely to protect women. To have
women participate in war while at the same time protecting them is folly,
the more so because it is not only the women who have to be protected,
but their children as well.
As previously mentioned, the male imperative to protect women by
fighting on their behalf may have some kind of biological basis. Often it is
inspired by love, and often it is reinforced by women’s own behavior.
After all, if men cannot protect their women, then whatever else they may
do is of questionable value. Men’s need to protect women explains why, in
the Iliad, the Trojan leader Hector preferred “going to hell and being
covered by soil and ashes” rather than witness his wife, Andromache,
“being led away, crying, by one of the copper-armored Achaeans.”[791]
Some of the reliefs of the Athenian Parthenon show Lapiths defending
their women against Centaur attacks. About 500 years after those reliefs
were made, Elazar ben Yair, commander of the Jewish Zealots at Masada,
tried to persuade his men to commit mass suicide in the face of inevitable
defeat. First he spoke about the delights of freedom, but did not carry
conviction. Next he described their wives’ and daughters’ “shame” if they
should fall into the hands of the Romans, “while they themselves were tied
up and helpless.” This time his words had the intended effect. The Zealots
cast lots, selected five among their number, lay down at their families’
side, and died to the last man.[792]
The annals of the American West bristle with accounts of lascivious
redskins lusting for white ladies’ flesh.[793] On the other side, one of the
main reasons why the settlers fought was allegedly to protect their women.
Throughout World War I, troops of all nations saw an urgent need to
protect their womenfolk against rape.[794]At various times during the
Arab-Israeli conflict, Israeli determination to fight was fueled by what
people saw as the threat that sex-starved hordes of Arab savages presented
to their women. At these and many other points in history, there is always
a ferocious enemy positively slavering after one’s own women. Those
women, depending on the fashion of the society at hand, are portrayed as
exceptionally thin, exceptionally thick, exceptionally modest,
exceptionally forthcoming in short, exceptionally beautiful and
exceptionally desirable. One of the objectives of war is always to save
them from being raped, even at the cost of one’s own life, and even if, as
occasionally happens, the women themselves do not want to be saved.
Whereas male prisoners were routinely killed, often after having
suffered the most horrible forms of torture, women, valued both for their
sexuality and for their labor, were normally spared. In California, the
Pomo and the Nisenan while they still enjoyed some independence
regularly incorporated captive women into their own tribes by way of
marriage. So did many other tribal societies. On the whole, females have
received better treatment and fared better than males. Indeed, some
scholars have suggested that this possibly applies to chimpanzee “warfare”
as well.[795] Be that as it may, the best available figures for male versus
female casualties in tribal warfare are as follows:[796]
Society Male
deaths
as a
% of
total
Female
deaths
as a %
of total
Deaths
in war
as a %
of all
deaths
Ratio
of
deaths,
female
to male
Jivaro 59.0 27.0 32.7 1:2.8
YanomamoShamatari
37.4 4.4 20.9 1:8.5
Mae Enga 34.8 2.3 18.6 1:15.1
Dugm Dani 28.5 2.4 15.5 1:11.9
YanomamoNanowei
23.7 6.9 15.3 1:3.4
Huli 19.6 6.1 13.2 1:3.2
Gebusi 8.3 8.2 8.3 1:1.02
The mean ratio of female deaths to male deaths for all seven societies is
1:6.1. In other words, for every woman who died as a result of war, just
over six men met the same fate. Moreover, there is no correlation between
a tribe’s ferocity, as expressed by the figure for deaths in war as a
percentage of all deaths, and the ratio in question. Warlike societies do not
lose proportionally more women than do peaceful ones. The only society
in which as many women as men are killed is the Gebusi. It is far and
away the most peaceful of all, as indeed it would have to be in order to
avoid extermination. Conversely, one could argue that the only societies in
which the death rate of men and women are even nearly equal are those
which for one reason or another refuse to fight. This refusal may be
connected with the fact that, at last count, there were only 500 Gebusi.
[797] One can fairly conclude that the road to demographic success, as to
so much else in life, is littered with male corpses.
Partly because women did not participate in war, partly because the
enemy saw them as a potential asset, history is full of attempts to protect
them against the worst that war can do. One of the earliest known codes
for doing so is Deuteronomy 21.10-15. Going on “optional war,” meaning
a war not explicitly ordered by the Lord, the Israelites were enjoined to kill
all male captives. However, the law required that they not “torment”
female ones. On the face of it, this is an injunction to refrain from forcible
rape. However, a passage in Genesis seems to indicate that this is not the
correct interpretation. The verb inah stood, or could stand, for sex that
took place with the woman’s own consent, but without that of her male
relatives, who were responsible for her.[798] By definition, the male
relatives of women taken in war were dead and had nothing more to say in
this or any other matter. Hence, the injunction may have meant that the
women be allowed adequate time to grieve before being married to their
captors in due form; only then could sex follow.
All over the ancient Middle East and Mediterranean, from roughly
2500 B.C. onward, women were spared the worst of war.[799] Thus,
shortly after 705 B.C, Assyrian King Sanherib commemorated his capture
of the town of Lachish in Judea by commissioning a number of reliefs.
They were used to decorate his palace at Nineveh, and are now at the
British Museum. Step by step, the reliefs show the army and the siege
operations that it conducted. At the end comes the moment where, the
town having fallen, the severed heads of its male defenders are piled up in
heaps in front of Sanherib’s throne. Other men are shown impaled on
stakes. Not so, however, the women, who apparently unharmed are led
away together with their children.
In ancient Greece, examples abound of the softer fist wielded against
women. When the Athenians recaptured the tributary city of Scione, the
men were executed, while the women were sold off as slaves.[800] The
same happened when Melos, another city which the Athenians chose to
treat as rebellious, was captured and destroyed.[801] Originally the
Athenians had decided to do the same in regard to the city of Mytilene. In
the end, however, they relented, and only 1,000 of the wealthiest male
citizens were executed. For women, it ought to be noted, not being
members of the Greek citizen body had its advantages as well as its
disadvantages.[802] Throughout the entire Peloponnesian War, which as
Thucydides points out was the greatest and most ferocious waged in
Greece to that date, the only time women are certainly known to have been
put to death was during the plundering of Mycalessus by Thracian
mercenaries. If Thucydides bothered to mention the occasion at all, then
this was precisely because of its exceptional barbarity.[803]
As one might expect, codes of chivalry often contained provisions
aimed at protecting women from the horrors of war. A typical example is
the Muslim commandment, attributed to the first khalif, that children, old
men and women not be killed, nor trees burnt, nor houses destroyed.
Medieval knights followed a similar body of rules. For example, rape,
along with the use of firearms, was prohibited by the Golden Bull of 1356,
which among other things sought to regulate the things that German
princes might and might not do when they went to war.[804] Around 1400
the French monk Honoré Bonnet published The Tree of Battles.[805] The
work bristles with injunctions concerning the need to spare women who,
along with ecclesiastics and domestic animals such as cows and asses,
were classified as “innocent” and thus deserving of Christian mercy.
A 15th
-century French document includes noblemen “who violate
women” among those who are barred from participating in tournaments.
[806] Given that tournaments were the occasion par excellence for nobles
to put their martial prowess on display and perhaps catch the eye of a
prospective employer, this was a serious punishment indeed. As late as the
16th century, German articles of war still included strong exhortations not
to harm young mothers, pregnant women and “Mädchen,” which can
alternatively be translated as either “virgins” or “young girls.”[807]
Between them, these categories must have embraced virtually all women
of an age at which they could be considered sexually attractive. That,
perhaps, was just the intention.
Beginning around the middle of the 17th century, as far as legal theory
is concerned, Western warfare stopped being waged either by individual
rulers or by peoples. More and more it became the exclusive responsibility
of states,[808] causing the distinction by age and sex to be replaced by one
between soldiers, who were permitted to fight on behalf of the state, and
civilians, who were not. Since women never wore the uniform and were
not considered to be part of the military, even when they went on
campaign, in theory they were better protected than ever before. Another
new concept, “military necessity,” worked in the same direction. As
defined by the late-16th-century Spanish jurist Balthazar Ayala,[809] among
others, the original purpose of the term was to serve as a loophole that
would enable King Philip II’s commanders to do whatever was necessary
to achieve victory. Since even the broadest interpretation of “military
necessity” could hardly be said to include having forcible sex with women,
however, as far as women were concerned the effect of the loophole was
exactly the opposite.
Depending on the occasion, entire provinces could be “devastated,”
cities bombarded and villages set on fire. On such occasions both men and
women might be killed, but as far as sex was concerned, the bodies of
women remained sacrosanct. A particularly good example of the way
things worked, or at any rate were supposed to work, comes from the
American Civil War, when General William Tecumseh Sherman made
Georgia howl. The economy of the Confederacy was systematically
destroyed, to the point that railway tracks were torn up, heated and wound
around trees like corkscrews. Yet even as the sky was darkened by the
smoke of burning farmhouses, the honor, as well as the life, of the
southern belle remained intact.
Needless to say, the injunctions against killing women, as well as
taking them prisoner and sexually mistreating them, have often been
violated. In the ancient world, Alexander and Scipio Africanus were
specifically commended for not abusing the fair captives delivered to
them.[810] The former’s behavior in this respect led some to suspect that
he might have been a homosexual. The latter was commemorated in a
special painting produced by the 16th
-century painter Domenico
Beccafumi.[811] Beccafumi’s contemporary Pierre de Bayard owed part of
his reputation as “the cavalier without reproach and without fear” to his
unusual chastity.[812] By contrast, mass rape accompanied the sack of
Rome in 1527 and the destruction of Magdeburg in 1631. On both
occasions, the perpetrators were imperial troops who had gone out of
control. Mass rape took place at the hands of the Japanese army at
Nanking in 1938, and mass rape was practiced by the Red Army as it
invaded Germany in 1945.[813] It was with these events in mind that the
obligation to treat female prisoners “with all the regard due to their sex”
was written into the Second Geneva Convention of 1949.[814] Needless to
say, no similar injunction regarding men has ever been considered
necessary. In war as in peace, often offenses committed against men are
not considered offenses at all.
In peace and in war, whether carried out on an individual basis or in an
organized way as a matter of policy, the maltreatment of women —
including, above all, rape — is a hideous and unfortunately all too
prevalent crime. Still, whether because women are less dangerous, owing
to their relative physical weakness, or because of their value for breeding
purposes, on the whole they seem to have come out of war much better
than men. Even the medieval Celts, notorious for their refusal to grant
quarter, preferred to capture “soft, youthful, bright, matchless girls” and
“blooming, silk-clad, young women” rather than kill them out of hand.
[815] Centuries later a Belgian volunteer, Léon Degrelle, noted how, amid
the immense carnage that took place on the Eastern Front in 1942, both
sides permitted Ukrainian women to work the fields between the lines.
[816] Female prisoners could also expect to be treated less harshly than
men. Allied troops captured by the Japanese during World War II died like
flies. Though the U.S. Army nurses captured at Bataan were also ravaged
by hunger and disease, every single one survived.[817] Here is the
Reverend A. E. Winnington, the bishop of London, as he was exhorting his
countrymen to wage war against Germany in the autumn of 1914:[818]
Kill Germans — to kill them, not for the sake of killing, but
to save the world, to kill the good as well as the bad, to kill
the young men as well as the old, to kill those who have
shewn kindness to our wounded as well as those fiends who
crucified the Canadian Sergeant [referring to a widely
circulated propaganda myth]...
Note that, even in this ferocious outburst of anti-Teutonic propaganda,
German women are not mentioned.
4. The Chivalrous Male
Having noted the treatment meted out to women who did not participate in
combat, it is also necessary to say something about the handful of women
who did participate. The starting point for such an examination begins with
the fact that, in war as well as in sport, men are reluctant to fight women.
In sport this reluctance has always led, and for the most part still leads, to
separate teams for people of the two sexes. Occasionally it also led to
mock fights, as when men and women bombarded each with cakes during
medieval tournaments. Had the fight been conducted in earnest, then the
field would have been littered with female bodies. Conversely, reluctance
on the part of both men and women to see a field so littered is a cardinal
reason why women have very seldom fought in war.
At all times and places, war has been a contest of force — the one
occasion in life in which all of the participants’ strength, mental and
physical, may be brought to bear with hardly any restraints. By definition,
though, such a contest can only be of value if it takes place between people
or groups whose strength is roughly equal. A boxer who knocks out a
much weaker opponent in the first round, or a large army that quickly
demolishes a far smaller enemy, will earn humiliation, not glory.
Conversely, a weak army that suffers defeat at the hands of much stronger
one will readily be excused. As the Confederate Army and the German
Africa Corps show, it may very well be admired for its heroism.
Applying this logic to the problem at hand, it is undeniable that men
are considerably stronger than women.[819]This difference continues to be
extremely important, even in an age of advanced weaponry. Whatever
some people may say, push-button warfare has not yet arrived and it
probably never will. Since men are considerably stronger than women, if
they win they will be humiliated. If they lose, they will be humiliated even
more. In the language of game theory, for them to enter the contest creates
a lose-lose situation, one which, if they are wise, they will do well to
avoid.
Ever since ancient times, few people have doubted that the Amazons
were a myth.[820] Yet even myths, by acting as distorting mirrors, may
have their uses in helping us understand reality. The earliest mention of the
Amazons is in the Iliad, which, while resting on much older foundations,
was probably written shortly before 700 B.C. From the first, the Amazons’
gender was problematic. King Priam describes them as antianeirai,
“equivalent to men.”[821] In all of Greek literature, the Amazons are the
only noun to which this adjective is applied. The form amazones itself is
masculine, being prefixed by the definite article in its plural masculine
form and corresponding with the normal way in which Greek designates
groups of people made up of both men and women. The same form may
also be used to describe armies, in which case it refers exclusively to men.
Judging solely by Homer, and ignoring subsequent traditions, had it not
been for the epithet antianeirai there would have been no way of knowing
that Priam was talking about women. Numerous other sources also
emphasize that the Amazons, though they were not men, were somehow
equivalent to them.
For the Amazons to be “equivalent to men” was extremely important.
Take the poem Aethiopis, written by the poet Arctinus at some time early
in the 6
th century A.D. Here we find the hero Achilles killing the villain
Theristes. What occasioned the act was the latter’s suggestion that Achilles
was sexually attracted to the Amazon queen Penthesilea, whom he had
unknowingly just killed in battle. Achilles’ fury is easily explained: Had
the accusation been true and Penthesilea been primarily a woman, then her
death would have been transformed from a glorious feat of arms into mere
murder.
The same reasoning may explain why, in all representations until the
middle of the 6
thcentury B.C, no Amazon, alive or dead, was ever shown
naked, as many male warriors were. Instead, they are always dressed and
armed as hoplites. They wield spears, carry shields and wear body armor
that hides their breasts. Had it not been for their given names, the white
color of their faces and bodies, and sometimes a characteristic piece of
attire, it would be impossible to know they were female. The fact that the
Amazons were “equivalent to men” served a double purpose. On the one
hand, it permitted them to fight. On the other, it enabled those who fought
against them, and on most occasions killed them, to earn glory for their
actions something which, had the Amazons simply been women like all
the rest, would not have been possible.
At some point during the 5th century B.C, Greek ideas about the
Amazons began to change.[822] The first evidence for the change is
iconographic. Instead of being presented as hoplites, more and more the
Amazons began to be depicted as women. To achieve this, much of the
armor that they used to wear on their bodies had to be discarded. Its place
was taken by loosely fitting clothes that often left one or even two breasts
exposed. With their identity as women fully revealed, the Amazons
suffered one defeat after the next. More often than not, they are shown
desperately seeking shelter behind their shields as their male enemies
prepare to run them through with the spear, a scene depicted famously on a
vase now in the Mansell collection in London.[823] Alternatively, they are
being pulled off their horses, as on a frieze from the temple of Apollo at
Bassae,[824] or being seized by the hair while trying to escape, as on
Phidias’ shield of Athene Parthenos that has survived only as a Roman
copy.[825]
Later still, Amazons began to be shown in all kinds of lively scenes.
They don armor, leave for the fray, return from battle with their dead, lead,
ride or dismount from horses, equip chariots or ride in them, or simply
wash themselves as their weapons lean nearby. The more varied the
activities in which they are shown, the less often they fight. Subsequently
this pacification of the Amazons spread from painting to literature. To put
it a different way, the Amazons could fight — and men would fight them
— only as long as they were not, and could not be identified as, women.
No sooner did they start being women than they ceased to fight. By the
end of the 4
th century B.C., the “golden-shielded, silver-axed host” of
fighting women was becoming decidedly “friendly to men.”
Even during the Amazons’ heyday, when they were said to have won
many battles and overrun many countries, to triumph over them was not
exactly a great honor. Witness the death of the Amazon queen, Penthesilea,
as recounted by the Greek poet Quintus Smyrnaeus during the second half
of the 4th
 century A.D.:[826]
Though she lay fallen in dirt and gore, beneath her lovely
eyebrows shone her beautiful face, even in death. The
Argives, crowding about, were amazed when they saw her;
she seemed like the blessed immortals. She lay on the ground
in her armor like tireless Artemis, daughter of Zeus, sleeping
when weary from chasing swift lions in the lofty mountains.
Aphrodite, beautiful garlanded wife of mighty Ares, made
Penthesilea radiant even in death to cause the son of
blameless Peleus [i.e. Achilles, her killer] to grieve. Many
men prayed that when they came home they would sleep in
the bed of a wife like her. Achilles suffered greatly in his
heart, that he slew her and did not bring her to Phthia as his
shining wife, since in height and beauty she was blameless
like the immortals.
To have killed a woman, even one who had borne arms and fought like the
devil, was an occasion for sorrow rather than for joy. Achilles’ sole excuse
was that he did not know what he was doing. This may explain why the
Amazons who came after Penthesilea tended to fight, if at all, with one of
their breasts exposed as, for instance, Virgil’s Camilla did.
The combination of combat and cleavage remains as fascinating today
as it was in ancient Greece. One need only take a look at the popular
roleplaying game Dungeons and Dragons, or watch Hollywood films such
as Barbarella, Xena the Warrior Queen or Barbed Wire. The same is true
of blockbuster computer games like Tomb Raider. The larger and more
exposed the breasts, it appears, the more exciting the game is to its target
audience, male teenagers. Both in the movies and on the computer screen,
part of the fascination may be the artistic challenge of creating a female
figure that is both sexy and battle-worthy at the same time. In part,
however, what many of these fantasy females are really doing when they
expose or emphasize their breasts is to claim immunity even as they fight.
As a result, very few of them are ever killed. If they are, then their deaths
are presented as tragic, either the result of an accident or the handiwork of
a man who is even more wicked than the rest.
Men’s dislike for killing women also explains why, as in the case of
Penthesilea, women whose real identity was discovered only after they had
been killed were normally pitied rather than hated. Fighting women could
also expect to receive quarter, if not always then at any rate more often
than men. The female villain in The Tain,[827] Medb, instigates an unjust
war — the objective of which is to prove that she is richer than anybody
else — by offering the male champion who will fight for her bothher
daughter’s “thighs” and her own. Next, she raises an army and assumes
command over it. Defeated at a loss of thousands of men, she begs for
quarter and the hero Cuchulainn, “not being a killer of women,” agrees.
Such attitudes can also readily be found in accounts of the late Middle
Ages. According to one female historian:
[One] reason why the extent of the participation by women in
the [German] Peasants’ War had been underestimated is
because women do not appear in the punishment lists that
document the peasant defeat… When women were punished
for their participation, their punishments were different from
those imposed on their husbands... for example, in July of
1525 all women of the village of Dettwang [in Bavaria] were
locked up in the local madhouse. What women more likely
had to expect was one of the traditional milder ‘women’s
punishments,’ such as being pilloried or put to public shame.
[828]
Elsewhere in history, some fighting women received quarter even though
they had not asked for it. An interesting case in point comes from Romania
during World War II. In the last year of the war, Romania changed sides,
terminating its alliance with Germany and joining with the Soviet Union
instead. This led on several occasions to face-to-face encounters between
male Romanian pilots and female Soviet aviators who had previously
fought on opposite sides of the front. In at least one known instance, the
Romanians admitted to their new Soviet comrades that they could have
shot them down, but, having recognized their opponents as women,
refrained from doing so. It is possible that the Romanian pilots were trying
to ingratiate themselves with their new allies (or masters), or else were
trying to impress the women themselves. On the other hand, the Soviet
female pilots involved, Galina Burdina and Nina Slovokhtova, would
scarcely have had reason to repeat the stories 45 years later had they not
believed them to be true. Or perhaps they were merely proud that their
charms had been judged capable of overcoming the enmity of war.
Even female irregulars rebels, insurgents, terrorists, guerrillas and
freedom fighters can expect better treatment at the hands of the enemy.
For example, following the 1916 Easter Rising in Ireland, the British
executed 14 male leaders of Sinn Fein. Not so the gun-toting Constance
Markievicz, the “Rebel Countess” who was reprieved “due only to her
sex.”[829]Later she joined the Irish Parliament and became the first
woman minister in any modern democracy proof, if anything can be,
that for rebels to be female has its advantages. That even the Germans on
the Eastern Front hesitated to treat women as they did men is illustrated by
a directive issued by General Walter von Reichenau. By German army
standards, Reichenau was more of a Nazi than most, which made him one
of Hitler’s favorite commanders. In October 1941 he ordered “draconian
measures” to be taken against male Russian civilians who could have
prevented sabotage but failed to do so;[830] females, however, are not
mentioned.
Examples elsewhere abound. If Palestinian Jewish women under the
British Mandate were often used to hide arms on their bodies, it was
primarily because British soldiers were not permitted to search them.
Initially, at least, the same was also true during the Algerian uprising
against the French during the 1950s. Another example comes from the
Seychelles. In 1982, the islands witnessed an attempted coup. After its
failure the men involved were at first sentenced to death, then reprieved
and finally given stiff prison sentences. Not so the sole female conspirator,
a South African national by the name of Sue Ingle. She spent just one
single night under arrest before being released along with her pet cat.[831]
Had the consequences for the male perpetrators not been so serious, the
entire incident would have been comic.
To cite one more example, one reason why the Palestinian uprisings so
often saw women at the forefront of demonstrations was because women
being sprayed with gravel or beaten with truncheons looks bad on
television. According to a former military prosecutor in the city of Hebron,
the normal prison sentence meted out to a Palestinian man caught trying to
knife an Israeli soldier was 15 to 17 years. A woman convicted of the same
offense would get just one year, if that.[832]
Acting as rebels, revolutionaries or insurgents, women will no doubt
continue to prove that they can be as courageous, as determined, and as
capable of withstanding the greatest stress, and the most grueling
conditions, as men. At the same time, acting as rebels, revolutionaries or
insurgents, women will usually expect to be treated better than men. Quite
often they will see their expectations met. In some cases, indeed, they will
participate precisely because they expect to be treated better than men.
Such, for example, is what happened in Nigeria in 1929, when women,
refusing to pay taxes, started a riot in the expectation, which proved to be
false, that they would not be fired upon by British troops.[833]
Women who do not participate in war are usually treated better than
men. Women who do participate in war also stand a good chance of being
treated better than men. This is the case even if they are armed, even if
they are involved in terrorism or try to perpetrate bloody attacks, and even
if they are convicted for those attacks. All this is as true in war as it is in
peace, as true during a state of emergency as it is under ordinary civilian
law. The reason is that men are chivalrous by nature, and that most men do
not like either punishing women or fighting them. In both law and war, the
fact that the criminal or the opponent is a woman can cause even some of
the worst actions to be expiated or mitigated.
5. Conclusions
If some scientists are to be believed, the male reluctance to hit women is
biologically rooted. Even if those scientists are not to be believed, there is
no doubt that the prohibition against hitting girls is drummed into boys
from the moment they are old enough to understand the meaning of “no.”
As long as they are small, their weak attempts to hit girls who are larger
than themselves are regarded with amused tolerance. But no sooner do
they become as strong as, or stronger than, girls than the prohibition
against hitting comes into effect. From this point onward, the only woman
a man is allowed to touch is his wife, and even here we have seen how, at
all times and places, society sought to limit what he might do to her.
What is true of one-on-one encounters is equally true of the collective
use of violence known as war. To be sure, for women as well as for men,
war is for the most part hell. That said, women, unlike men, have hardly
ever been conscripted to serve; since one of the most important, if not
themost important, objective of war is to preserve the life of the
community, doing so would be both absurd and counterproductive. To the
extent that women do serve at all, they do so as in the past, whether as
camp-followers or soldiers solely out of their own free will. Having
signed up as volunteers, they continue to enjoy many privileges. In
peacetime, those privileges may range from superior quarters to cushier
jobs, extra pay and laxer discipline. In wartime, no country has ever
obliged, or is likely to oblige, women to participate in combat.
Another difference between female and male volunteers is that once
the latter signs up for service, those who subsequently seek to escape their
commitment are heavily punished. Not so women who, in practice if not in
theory, may withdraw their consent at any time they choose. Should they
encounter any difficulty in doing so, then they can achieve the same result
by committing an offense, which will result in a discharge, or else by
becoming pregnant. In all probability, such women will be permitted to go
home. In military and civilian life alike, it is nearly impossible to find a
greater privilege.
In return for not participating in war, women have to some extent been
immune from its horrors. Sometimes this was because they were not
considered members of the political community, as in tribes and ancient
city states. Sometimes this was because they were considered “innocent,”
as in the Middle Ages. And sometimes this was because they were
classified as civilians, as in Europe from about 1700 onward. In tribal
warfare, as in the ancient empires, this immunity “only” consisted of the
right not to be killed. However, very often it also included other things. In
instances when men were taken prisoner rather than killed, women were
set free. Historically women have only very rarely been designated as
hostages to vouch for their relatives’ good behavior. When they are taken
as hostages as, for example, in bank robberies, aircraft hijackings and
the like they are invariably released before the men. Often men
volunteer to become hostages in order that the women may be released. A
man who obtains his release by having a woman take his place will be
treated with contempt, and rightly so. That is why he only exists in Greek
mythology.
Sometimes, and to some extent, women are immune to the horrors of
war even when they do participate in it. Should women’s immunity be
accidentally violated as happened to women who dressed as men in
order to be allowed to fight, and also to those unfortunate enough to be
designated “collateral damage” then this fact is more likely to be
regretted, to be turned into an occasion for sorrow, and to be explained
away. Should their immunity be deliberately violated, then this fact is
more likely to lead to the perpetrators being despised, ostracized or
punished. Some of these differences are incorporated into formal law.
Others are merely embedded in custom. Yet the end result is always the
same: Women are likely to emerge from war, in all its forms, in much
better shape than men do.
So great is the difference that, the more frequent and ferocious the
conflict, the more the demographic balance tends to tilt in women’s favor.
During the 17th century, so many North American Indian men were killed
as to tilt the demographic balance inside the tribes in question.[834] The
same applied to the American South after the Civil War,[835] the Soviet
Union after World War II, and as a result of Cambodia’s “killing fields”
during the 1970s.[836] In whichever way one looks at it, women’s
privileges in regard to war are both numerous and indisputable. So it has
always been and so, let us hope, it will always be.
Chapter 7: The Quality of Life
1. Once Upon a Time…
Once upon a time — in fact, during more than 90 percent of human
existence, and in many places to this very day — life for most people of
both sexes was often nasty and short. For the majority, neither a reasonable
standard of living nor adequate medical care could be taken for granted. It
was only the Industrial Revolution that put a sufficient and balanced diet,
appropriate clothing and reasonable housing within the reach of the
masses. The same applies to the factors that make for health and longevity.
These include access to clean drinking water, sufficient hot water for
cleaning both clothes and in many climates the body itself, and last but not
least, scientifically-based medical care.[837]
Physiologically speaking, the greatest advantages men enjoy over
women are greater strength and robustness,[838] as well as lesser
susceptibility to diseases of the genitourinary tract. Men, in other words,
are more resistant to the hard, dirty life than women. This may explain
why, as long as most people lived by agriculture and spent a great part of
their time working outdoors in the muck, most men seem to have outlived
most women. Findings in seven out of eight Paleolithic sites in Central
Europe and Eastern Europe indicate that, from the age of 20 onward,
males enjoyed a longer life expectancy than did females.[839] An
examination of human remains found in a late Neolithic cemetery in Spain
also shows that men lived longer than women. The same was true at Catal
Huyuk, a Hittite city that stood from roughly 8000 B.C. to 6000 B.C.[840]
Among the Copper Age population of Tiszapolgár-Basatanya in Hungary,
meanwhile, females had a higher mortality rate than males did.[841]
As best as can be ascertained today, ancient Greek men outlived
women by a considerable margin.[842] Likewise, two different methods
used to study life expectancy in ancient Rome yielded broadly similar
results. First, a comparison of the ages at which, based on their epitaphs,
men and women died leads to the conclusion that men outlived women.
[843] The second method relies on the tables produced by a famous
lawyer, Ulpian, early in the 2
nd century A.D. Apparently Ulpian’s objective
was to calculate the pensions paid to people of both sexes. On the basis of
his figures, a modern researched concluded that, for males aged 5-45, and
for females aged 5-55, life expectancy resembled that which existed in
Mauritius during the mid-1940s. Now in Mauritius, as in most developing
countries at the time, men outlived women, though not by much.[844]
Among the Avarian-Frankish population that built the 9
th century A.D.
cemetery in Sopronkohida, Hungary, females aged 20 to 60 had a longer
life expectancy than men. However, even here the mortality rate of females
over 60 years old shot up, causing the curves for both sexes to become all
but identical. Data based on the remains of five other medieval Hungarian
cemeteries also show that males consistently outlived females.[845] In late
medieval Tuscany, men apparently lived 37.2 years, as compared to 33.14
for women.[846] In English and German villages, men continued to lead
longer lives even as late as the 18th
 century.[847]
Another reason why men probably outlived women was because of the
dangers associated with pregnancy and childbirth. In part, high perinatal
mortality rates reflected the low standard of living and the harsh conditions
under which delivery sometimes took place. According to one authority,
during the Middle Ages, “conditions during pregnancy and parturition
were intolerable... Some young girls did not even realize that they were
pregnant... [and] gave birth on the bare ground.”[848] In part, it resulted
from the natural difficulty of the delivery process and inadequate medical
knowledge. It has been calculated that proportionally 23 times as many
women died of childbirth- or pregnancy-related causes in medieval
Hungary as in the modern state of Hungary during the 1960s. To turn the
figures around, modern medicine had reduced this particular cause of
women’s relative short-livedness by no less than 95.5 percent.[849] Yet
perinatal deaths in 1960s Hungary still formed 0.06 percent of all female
deaths. The corresponding figure during the Middle Ages was 1.38
percent, which means that roughly one woman in 72 died for reasons
connected with childbirth. The Hungarian figure, in turn, was about 10
times higher than in 18th
-century Germany, where complications connected
with pregnancy and birth took the life of perhaps 0.005 percent of all
women.[850]
Thus, during most of history, harsh conditions and inadequate medical
knowledge caused men to outlive women. By contrast,
civilization especially modern civilization has created a situation in
which the more advanced a country, the more women tend to outlive men.
The march of civilization is very much the story of human discovery and
invention. From the forceps through the condom to the pill,[851]
practically all those discoveries and inventions were made by men.
Nevertheless, judging by life expectancy, the results have, first and
foremost, benefited women. So it has been in the past, and so, let us hope,
it will be in the foreseeable future.
2. Civilization and Its Comforts
Almost invariably, the places that offer the most favorable conditions to
human life are those which have long been settled. Almost invariably, too,
those that offer the least hospitable conditions are frontier areas where
human settlement is relatively recent and sparse.
The reasons why fewer women than men have undertaken the hardship
of leaving their homes for some newly settled country or territory are easy
to see. Unlike men, they were not primarily responsible for making a
living and did not have the same economic incentive to spur them to
unconquered lands. Women were also less up for the hardship of travel.
Compared to men they have always married earlier, often passing straight
from their parents’ houses to those of their spouses. Once married, they
were tied down by the cycle of pregnancy, delivery and the need to look
after their children at any rate, more so than their husbands. To be sure,
at no time and place did an absolute barrier to female migration exist. On
the other hand, it was certainly more difficult for women than for men to
pack their belongings, pick up their roots, and leave. For example, in 19th
-
century Britain, male emigrants outnumbered female ones three to one.
[852]
These factors explain why, the harsher and more primitive the
conditions at any given time and place, the fewer the women to be found.
Conversely, the relative number of women at any given place and time
reflects the progress of civilization and its comforts. Throughout history,
women have been all but absent from miners’ and loggers’ camps,
construction sites and garbage dumps, among other such work sites. In our
day, the same applies to offshore oil rigs, Arctic weather stations and the
like. In the work pits of yore, so rare were women that when one did make
an appearance, she was seen as a minor miracle. In Californian mining
camps during the middle of the 19th century, men would pay large sums
just to watch a (fully dressed) woman walk around.[853] The situation on
America’s opposite coast was no different. In the first Virginia settlements
in the early 17th century, men outnumbered women seven to one.[854] In
New England, the ratio was roughly three to two. As conditions improved,
additional women arrived. Some did so on their own initiative, others
because they had been sent for by men. By the second half of the 18th
century, women were already beginning to outnumber men in New
England.
The situation in the South, where vast spaces and a less healthy
climate caused development to lag behind, was entirely different. Not only
were white women scarce, but among black slaves brought from Africa
men outnumbered women two to one.[855] The total number of women in
Dixieland only began to equal that of men around 1830 or so.[856] The
smaller the relative number of women, the more precious and exalted they
became in the eyes of the men who competed for their favors. As one
scholar later explained,[857] this situation probably contributed to the
creation of the myth of the “Southern Belle”:
This marvelous creation was... a submissive wife whose
reason for being was to love, honor, obey, and occasionally
amuse her husband, to bring up his children and manage his
household. Physically weak, and “formed for the less
laborious occupations,” she depended upon male protection.
To secure this protection she was endowed with the capacity
to “create a magic spell” over any man in her vicinity. She
was timid and modest, beautiful and graceful, “the most
fascinating being in creation... the delight and charm of every
circle she moves in.”
What was true in the South was even truer in the West. During much of
American history, the standard advice given to a young man without
means was to head in that direction. Women, who could usually make a
living by marrying, tended to stay behind, and if worst came to worst, they
found it easier to obtain charity.[858] As early as the second half of the 18th
century, these factors led to a situation in which, the farther away from the
Atlantic one got, the higher the ratio of men to women. For example, in
Portsmouth on the New Hampshire coast, the ratio was 0.86, and 10
percent of resident women were widows. On the colony’s frontier, by
comparison, Cheshire and Grafton counties had, respectively, 112 and 126
men to every 100 women. In these counties, widows only formed between
1 and 2 percent of the female population.[859]
As the West opened up during the 19th century, men continued to move
there in much larger numbers than women. Some areas had a male-tofemale ratio of 10 to one, or more. As late as 1900, Midwestern states
including Ohio, Illinois, Iowa and Kansas still had more men than women.
Further westward, in Colorado, Nevada, Montana, Idaho, Wyoming and
California, the imbalance was much greater still.[860] Judging by women's
reluctance to move to those states, one might justifiably conclude that they
had not heard about the Western frontier being closed until several decades
after renowned historian Frederick Jackson Turner had declared it so.
Furthermore, before mass immigration into the United States ended in
1924, male immigrants outnumbered females by a considerable margin.
[861] Only after World War II killed 300,000 American men, and hardly
any American women, did the number of women exceed that of men for
the first time.[862] Since then the gap has grown steadily. By the early
1990s, 50.9 percent of the population was female, 49.1 male.[863]
Outside the United States, the presence of women was likewise
directly related to the degree of comfort provided by a country, region or
town. Take Burma during the 1920s, as described in George Orwell’s
Burmese Days.[864] The British men who went to this remote, hot and
insalubrious colony usually did so because living there was cheaper than at
home. Wives apart, the few women who followed did so in the hope of
catching a man. Each year a fresh “fishing fleet” arrived, yet the further
from Rangoon one went, the fewer the European women one met. Darwin,
Australia, is a mining town with an exceptionally harsh climate that
includes cyclones and 100 inches of annual rainfall, all of which pours
down in a single season. Accordingly, its population consists of migrants,
rising to 70,000 in the winter but falling to a little more than half that
number during the summer. Needless to say, almost all the migrants are
men. No wonder that, in proportion to the town’s size, its telephone
directory probably lists more call girls than any in the world.
Throughout history, whenever immigrants are numerous or conditions
are hard and life difficult, women tend to be few and far between. These
facts, rather than female infanticide or some other forms of male
oppression of women, may explain why, as far as can be determined, men
outnumbered women in the large commercial city that was ancient Athens,
[865] just as they do in the modern state of Qatar.[866]To put it differently,
what is usually regarded as the “normal” sex ratio namely, women
outnumbering men is not really normal at all. Instead, it is the result of
men providing women with the amenities of civilized life. Often, to do so,
they had to go into the wilderness first. Often they had to engage in
backbreaking labor, and often they paid the price by dying a lonely death.
Indeed, quite often those who died far from home did not even get a sign
to mark their grave.
Nutrition apart, the most important amenity men have provided
women is housing. Since the building process usually involves heavy
labor, it tends to be performed by men for women. This was as true among
the Nuer of East Africa[867] as it is on the most modern construction sites,
as true among the matrilineal Mosuo of China as among the Eskimo. To
this day in Arab villages, when a man gets married his male relatives help
him build a house. The women assist by bringing food. To this day in
modern societies, bridegrooms are supposed to carry their brides across the
threshold, not the other way around. Once houses are standing, both men
and women share the benefit by spending at least some of their time in
them. On the other hand, women have always tended to spend more time
at home than did men. This is tantamount to saying that, to the extent that
housing provides comfort as well as shelter against heat, cold, wind, rain,
hail and snow, women have always benefited more than men did. And the
more “secluded” their lives, the truer this was and is.
The fact that women were better protected from the elements explains
why, in the art of many peoples, they are presented as having skins whiter
than those of men. The difference is noticeable in ancient Egyptian art. If
ancient Egyptian men are occasionally painted with light skin, then this
probably means they had reached a point in their career at which they no
longer had to work in the fields but were able to spend most of their time
indoors, as women did. Thus the lives of women were shared only by a
comparative handful of privileged men.[868] The same applies to India,
where illustrations showing men and women together almost always
present the latter as having lighter skin. As noted earlier, in Greek art the
lighter color of the Amazons’ skin is virtually the only indication that they
were, indeed, female. Men worked by the sweat of their brows, suffered
accordingly, and could consider themselves lucky if they were described as
rugged. Not so women, who found it easier to keep their fair complexions
and were extolled for doing so.
From ancient Egypt come images that show women being transported
by water. Boats traveling on the Nile were outfitted with special cabins
that offered shelter to their female passengers. Meanwhile, the all-male
crew, wearing nothing but a loinskirt, worked the sails and rudder under a
blazing sun. Perhaps it was fortunate for them that few lived long enough
to develop skin cancer. Partly in order to protect their beauty, partly
because crowded conditions onboard made it necessary to offer them some
privacy, the tradition which dictated that women at sea should be given the
most secluded and comfortable quarters available has continued for
thousands of years. This was even true when they were of low social rank,
and even in the much-maligned Islamic civilization. For example, Ibn
Battuta once traveled from India to China by sea. He insisted that his
female slaves be given a cabin, whereas he and the other men apparently
slept on the open deck.[869]
What was true on water was equally true on land. Fleeing Laban,
Jacob made his wives ride camels. However, he himself “drove” all his
cattle and property;[870] the implication is that he went on foot and
worked hard, even as he walked. To this day among the Bedouin, when
men and women travel together it is the former who must march whereas
the latter are mounted. The need to make women’s travel as comfortable as
possible was considered important enough to be recommended by
Mohammed in person. On one occasion, meeting some women who were
riding camels, he admonished the driver, who went on foot, to proceed
gently so as not to damage the “glass cases” under his care.[871] Ibn
Battuta, for his part, noted in his travels in India that whereas men walked
or rode, ladies traveled in litters carried by eight men.[872] To this day in
the Indian countryside, whenever one comes across a cart with its curtains
drawn, one may be almost certain that the passenger inside is a well-to-do
woman. In traditional China, the standard means of transport used by
upper-class women used to be the sedan chair.
Women have likewise been privileged over men when it comes to their
health. A cursory look into history shows that women have always
received more, if not necessarily better, medical attention than men. In
ancient Egypt, numerous books were written about female-specific
diseases.[873] However, when it comes to male-specific ones, all there is
is blank papyrus. The Greek Hippocratic Corpus, meanwhile, contains
several treatises on women’s health, but not a single one devoted
exclusively to that of men.
Perhaps the civilization that paid the greatest relative attention to
female health was that of China.[874] Partly because of the problems
attending reproduction, partly because women’s ailments were considered
“10 times more difficult to cure than those of males,”[875] physicians
devoted an entire medical specialty to women’s health. Known as fuke, it
comprised both gynecology and obstetrics. Some fuke practitioners were
male, others, particularly those who attended childbirth, female. Together
they developed a large number of drugs specifically aimed at women. By
the Song dynasty, fuke had become one of the nine disciplines comprising
medical science. One medical encyclopedia, the Imperial Grace
Formulary, devoted 12 of 100 chapters to fuke. Another, the All Inclusive
Good Prescriptions for Women, dealt exclusively with them. In China, as
in all other countries, practically the only type of the medical knowledge
that is gender specific is that which deals with women. And in China, as in
all other countries, there is no question that women received far more
medical attention than men.
To be sure, very often so rudimentary was the medical knowledge that
it could do little to help men and women alike. In Europe until the 17th
century, and in other cultures until much later, the process of delivery had
been an all-female affair. It was a mysterious rite that took place at home,
and from which men were almost entirely excluded. Many villages did not
even have a professional midwife. As a result, the only available assistance
came from experienced female relatives and neighbors. Though midwives
were usually available in the towns, the quality of their services left much
to be desired. As one early 16th
-century German limerick put it:[876]
I’m talking about the midwives all
Whose heads are empty as a hall,
And through their dreadful negligence
Cause babies’ deaths devoid of sense.
So thus we see far and about
Official murder, there’s no doubt.
Both midwives and moralists argued against the presence of males during
delivery. The former did so out of fear for their livelihood, the latter
because of their concern for female virtue. When the first male midwives
made their appearance in the 17th century, they were often ridiculed. One
male midwife who attended Queen Anne’s numerous deliveries and was
later knighted by her became known as “the rider of the cunt.”
By that time, change was in the air. In 1554, Zurich ordered that
midwives should be instructed by doctors, who were male. Other cities
eventually followed,[877] with irrefutable results. Between 1600 and
1795, even as “English midwives were degraded into mere assistants” as
one author put it,[878] perinatalmortality in London dropped by one-half,
from 24 to 12 per 1,000 live births. In Berlin it declined from 11 per 1,000
births in the 1720s to 7 in the 1780s. In Edinburgh it fell from 14 in the
1750s to 6 in the 1790s, and in Königsberg from 13 in 1769-1783 to 8 in
1794-1803. Economic circumstances permitting, the more difficult any
anticipated birth, the more likely it was to be attended by a male doctor
rather than a female midwife. Conversely, by insisting on what one
modern female historian calls “a feminist kind of delivery” that is,
without the presence of an expert male doctor Mary Wollstonecraft may
have brought about her own death.[879] The masculinization of childbirth
started in the cities. It took a long time to reach the countryside, where
women kept on as they had before. Consequently, death rates among rural
mothers only started declining later and more slowly.[880]
In summary, during most of recorded history men appeared to have
lived longer than women. This remained the case as long as conditions
were relatively rough, thanks partly to men’s greater physical robustness
and partly to the fact that they did not have to bear children. Even during
those times, however, women often enjoyed special protection. Very often,
what feminists describe as their “oppression” at the hands of men really
represented concern for their comfort and their health. Concern for
women’s health, and not oppression, explains why they usually stayed at
home more often, and for longer, than men, and the same applies to
transportation and to medical care.
3. The Demographic Revolution
As best as can be determined, given the sparseness of available data, the
very first community in which women outlived men was Paris during the
9
th century A.D. As one would expect, the phenomenon was most obvious
among members of the upper classes.[881] That early Parisian society, it
may reasonably be conjectured, was not an isolated case but the beginning
of a trend that gathered momentum during the centuries that followed.
Such a conjecture may help explain why, between 1100 and 1300, most
European towns had already developed a low sex ratio — that is, a
shortage of males — that has characterized them ever since.[882]
For example, in Frankfurt in 1385 the ratio was 90 men to 100
women. Fifty-five years later, it had risen to 85 to 100. Nuremberg in 1440
had 83 men for every 100 women. In Basel in 1454 the ratio for persons
aged 14 and over was 80 to 100.[883] Speyer in 1530 had 96 adult men for
every 100 adult women.[884] In London in 1694, the ratio was 77 to 100.
[885]In Ansbach in 1713, meanwhile, there were 1,569 women in the 50-
60 age group, as compared to 1,414 men. In the 60-70 age group, the
difference was greater still, 102 to 63. The figures for the 70-80 age group
evened out at 22 women and 23 men but whereas many of the men’s
wives were also alive, all of the 22 women were widows.[886]
By the early 18
th century, women also outnumbered men in most
Swedish cities.[887] The hypothesis that it was urbanization which made
women outlive men — even if, at first, it sometimes caused a drop in the
life expectancy of both men and women — can be beautifully
demonstrated from a series of tables pertaining to England and Wales in
the years 1813 to 1830.[888] The four counties listed in the tables with the
highest percentage of people engaged in agriculture — Bedford, Hereford,
Huntington and Rutland — had a male-to-female mortality rate of greater
than one. The four counties with the lowest percentage of people engaged
in agriculture — Derby, Lancaster, Middlesex and Surrey — had a maleto-female mortality rate of less than one. The single largest difference in
mortality, 1.19:1, was found in Middlesex. Not by accident, Middlesex,
with London as its center, was the most urbanized county by far, with only
4 percent of its population employed in agriculture. In the next most
urbanized county, Lancaster, men’s mortality exceeded that of women
1.07:1. As families moved from the countryside into the “black satanic
mills,” women’s relative health actually improved. In the words of a
contemporary demographer: “The harmful effects of industrial
development that affected the mortality of English... men were less
noticeable for women.”[889]
Figures from 19th
-century Germany, Denmark and Norway all suggest
that the rural way of life is harder on women than on men.[890]
Conversely, bad as the towns often were, they favored women over men.
Perhaps the main way they did so was by changing women’s working
environment. Living in the countryside, both men and women had to do
hard and dirty work outdoors, even though this was less true of women
than of men. In the towns, women worked, if at all, almost exclusively
indoors. Men, meanwhile, continued to be responsible for construction,
transport, delivery, garbage removal, public security and the like. The
difference was particularly marked in tasks which, in village life, were
performed by women. The provision of drinking water offers a telling
example. In early 20th
-century Arab Palestinian villages, this was the task
of women, who carried jars on their heads. Not so in Arab Palestinian
towns, where it was done by a specialized class of men using leather bags.
[891]
The first country in which women began to live longer than men
seems to have been France during the 1740s. Close on its heels came
Sweden.[892] Most West European countries reached the point sometime
between 1800 and 1850. In 1855 the number of women over the age of 60
in Germany, which at that time was poorer than both France and England,
surpassed for the first time the number of men in that cohort.[893] In Italy,
which was even poorer, the shift had to wait until after unification. Since
then, so self-evident has the expectation that women should live longer
become that it often borders on callousness toward men. For example, in
the 1820s the advantage enjoyed by French women declined from 1.9
years to 0.6 before recovering to 1.0 in the 1830s and to 2.6 in the 1870s.
[894] This temporary dip was enough to make modern demographers
speak of “excess” female mortality.
Women’s longevity both reflected their privileged economic position
— the fact that they were supported by men — and had important
economic consequences. In 1860s England, an annuity bought by a 28-
year-old woman was worth more annually than it was for a male of the
same age. At age 58, the difference reached 1.5 years, and at age 78 it still
stood at one year.[895] Observing women’s growing advantage,
contemporary experts had no doubt as to how, and at the expense of
whom, it had been achieved. In the words of one observer:[896]
It is almost certain that any material improvement in the
human physical constitution will first be observed in the
diminution of... the female mortality. The greater perils of life
to which the male is exposed in the ordinary course of a
civilized existence may neutralize his portion of the general
improvement for a long time to come; but with the female it is
different, from the nature of her social position.
The gap between the sexes was probably even larger than the tables
showed. This was because male emigrants far outnumbered females, and
more men whose births had been recorded escaped the registrars at the
time of their deaths. The same applied to military personnel, numbering
perhaps a quarter million. All were male, and three-quarters were stationed
abroad. Thus, in many cases, their deaths did not enter the statistics at
home.
Around 1900, the only Western European country in which women
had not long since started outliving men was Ireland. By 1930 even that
anomaly had disappeared. Since then, not a single Western life table has
shown a higher male life expectancy at any age below 70.[897] During the
last years of the 19thcentury, the spread of female longevity reached
Eastern Europe. It would take several more decades, but eventually the
trend reached the developing world as well. In most countries among
them Brazil, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, the Philippines, Somalia, Sri Lanka and
Thailand the tipping point seems to have been reached between 1950
and 1985.[898] By 1990, according to the Encyclopedia Britannica Book
of the Year,[899]worldwide the gap had grown to four years. Only in seven
poor countries Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, the Maldives,
Morocco, Nepal and Vanuatu did men outlive women. By 2011, even
those anomalies had disappeared, with women outliving men in every
single one of the 194 countries surveyed.[900]
Considered in absolute terms, the increase in longevity brought about
by modernity can only be called staggering. For example, in France during
the 1740s, life expectancy stood at 24.7 years. For the years 1909 to 1913
the figure was 50.5, and by the mid-1980s it had reached 74. In Germany,
the figures stood at 37.2 in 1855 and at 74.3 in 1985.[901] While both men
and women have benefited from increased life expectancy, in practically
all countries women have benefited more than men. The United States
offers a prime example. In 1900 the overall life expectancy for people of
both sexes stood at 50 years. In 1920, according to one set of statistics,
[902] the life expectancy at birth of white American women was still only
one year longer than that of men. By 1950, however, the difference had
grown to nearly six years. By 1975, whereas white women could expect to
reach 77.2 years of age, the figure for men stood at 69.4. Among black
Americans, the difference greater still: 72.3 years for women, compared to
63.6 for men.
Judging by life expectancy alone, an observer might be forgiven for
concluding that men and women have changed miraculously since 1750,
and that they are developing into different species. On the whole, the
members of one work hard, look the part, and die early. Those of the other
enjoy greater comfort, take and are allowed to take better care of
themselves, and receive superior or at least more medical care. In the most
advanced places — those where everybody else wants to go — they live
about 10 percent longer.
Since 1920, the gap between life expectancy for American women and
men has grown by several hundred percent. In Germany, meanwhile, the
difference increased by more than 20 percent between 1964 and 1984.
[903] The extraordinary speed at which the gap has developed, as well as
its spread from the richest countries to the developing world, rules out the
possibility that women’s greater longevity stems from their biology, as
some scholars have claimed.[904] Instead, the trend shows that
modernization itself tends to favor women over men, at least up to a
certain point, and so long as women do not try to work as hard as men. As
numerous studies have shown, when women do attempt to carry an equal
weight, the resulting stress is substantial and relaxation hard to achieve. To
compensate, growing numbers of women who carry such burdens take up
drinking or smoking. This is as true of female Volvo executives as it is of
senior female members of the British Civil Service.[905]
Urbanization apart, women’s good fortune is also related to the
biological functions of both sexes. Until 1900, virtually the only mothers
who went to the hospital to give birth were unmarried ones. From the turn
of the century onward, however, their numbers began to increase. In 1938,
50 percent of American babies first saw the light of day in a hospital. The
figure rose to 95 percent in 1955, and to 99 percent in the late 1970s.[906]
However much one may criticize the “imperialism” of doctors and their
predilection for Cesareans, the attendant risk became smaller and smaller
both in the hospital and at home. Between 1910 and 1955 alone, it went
down by 90 percent.[907] The decreasing danger associated with each
maternal event was accompanied by a sharp decline in fertility, a trend that
was observed in developed countries in particular. Obviously an American
woman who gives birth twice, on average, is less at risk than her Jordanian
or Pakistani sister, who can expect to have five, six or even seven children,
and who, unless she belongs to the fortunate minority, can expect to do so
under far less favorable conditions. In Europe and Japan, where the
average woman will have fewer than two children, the risk is smaller still.
As of 2011, the country with the highest number of perinatal maternal
deaths was Chad, with 1,100 per 100,000. The country with the lowest
number was Estonia, at 2 per 100,000.[908] The difference between the
two ratios is more than 500 to 1. Now, it remains true that, even in the
most advanced countries, about 90 percent of women will bear at least one
child. What is more, the proliferation of artificial insemination and
adoption agencies proves that women’s desire to have offspring is as
strong as ever. The clinics that provide the former are often booked for
months ahead. The latter make millions out of licit and illicit traffic in
children. Thus, a 500-fold improvement may not be a bad indicator of
what modern medicine has done to help women. Medicine focused on men
has nothing similar to show. One reason for this is that obstetrics is an
extremely competitive field. Babies have a habit of appearing
unexpectedly, after a process of delivery whose length cannot be foreseen,
and without regard to the time of day. The long, irregular hours cause the
field to be dominated by men.[909] In this, as in so much else, men seem
willing to work much harder for women than women themselves are.
The growing longevity gap between males and females does not affect
people of all ages equally. Take the situation as it existed in England in
1860. At age 20, the probable mean duration of life was practically equal
for people of the two sexes. At age 50, however, it stood at 18.7 for men
versus 20.7 for women. Women past childbearing age were forging ahead.
By age 75, the gap had even widened, to 2.3 years.[910] A similar trend
was observed in late 20th
-century America, where the improvement in
women’s life expectancy relative to that of men affected mainly those past
childbearing age.[911] In other words, after accounting for the
improvement in women’s life expectancy that was brought about by the
decline in perinatal mortality, British women in the 19th century, and
American ones in the 20th
, still did considerably better than men. At least
one researcher has attributed the American development to the impressive
progress that has been made in the treatment of cancer of the reproductive
organs. This, in turn, may be linked to the fact that research in the field has
been directed almost exclusively at women, not men.[912]
Yet another indication that women continue to receive better, or at any
rate more, medical attention than do men is the far greater number of
publications devoted to women’s health. At Hebrew University’s Mount
Scopus library in Jerusalem, publications on the subject outnumber those
about men's health 3 to 1. Online, the ratio in early 2013 on Amazon.com
was 1.4 to 1. Even those figures represent a great improvement over the
situation 10 years ago, when there were no books on men’s health at the
Mount Scopus library. In part, the greater attention paid to female health
reflects the plain fact that women-specific medical problems do, after all,
exist. In part it may also be the outcome of female hypochondria. In both
Britain and the United States, women’s own assessment of their health is
consistently worse than that of men[913] and where demand exists,
supply will usually follow.
To a growing extent, however, the greater attention paid to female
health is the result of institutional arrangements that discriminate against
or outright ignore men. Thus, in the 1990s America’s National Institutes of
Health, arguably the most important institution of its kind anywhere in the
world, set up an office for women’s health. A similar office for men has yet
to be established. As a result, twice as much money was spent on
researching diseases unique to women as on those that afflict men.
Nationwide, female patients accounted for two out of every three dollars
spent for health purposes.[914] The U.S. Army alone was spending $135
million a year to research breast cancer,[915] a disease that by definition
only affects the roughly 10 percent of soldiers who are women.
Nationwide, spending on breast cancer exceeded spending on prostate
cancer more than four to one. Nationwide, too, three out of every four
medical research dollars are spent on women. This fact has caused at least
one investigator to wonder whether anybody cares about men at all.[916]
The much greater concern for women’s health explains why today they
are largely excluded from clinical drug trials. Since the late 1950s, when
pregnant women were given a drug called Thalidomide, there has been a
general avoidance of using women for such tests. Developed to counter
morning sickness, thalidomide caused children to be born with fin-like
arms and legs, or none at all. The ensuing scandal caused tests on women
to be largely halted. Since women now receive medicine only after their
safety has been confirmed on men, men effectively act as guinea pigs for
both sexes.[917] Some scholars, however, continue to perceive things
otherwise. One group of researchers published a report complaining that
women’s bodies were being used as “testing grounds” for new drugs.[918]
Others complained that drugs were not being tested on women.[919]
Damned if they did and damned if they didn’t, during the 1990s the
National Institutes of Health came “under siege” by lawsuits charging
them with discriminating against women.[920]
While women were receiving the medical attention, men continued to
do almost all the dangerous jobs, sustaining the resulting injuries and, in a
great many cases, losing their lives. In early modern Europe, far more men
than women suffered from work-related accidents in the building and
hauling trades, as well as occupational diseases.[921] In Breslau during the
1680s, almost five times as many men as women met an accidental death.
[922] In late-19th
-century Germany, some 5,000 people died in workrelated accidents each year, the vast majority of them men.[923] In
England, Wales and Italy between 1871 and 1901, men were two-and-ahalf to three times more likely to suffer accidental death than women.[924]
In the words of 19th
-century statistician William Farr, “It might appear that
civilization has augmented more than it has diminished the danger to
mankind.”[925]
Some jobs were notoriously accident prone. The worst was mining, a
field in which there were few if any women after 1830. At age 18, the life
expectancy of miners stood at only 39.41 years. For the entire male
population, the figure was 41.26.[926] Other trades whose members led
conspicuously short lives were blacksmiths, bricklayers, mill operatives,
plumbers, painters, potters, printers, stonemasons and woolcombers.[927]
Some workers in these trades suffered from difficult working conditions,
including exposure and dust, which could lead to tuberculosis,
pneumoconiosis and other lung diseases. Others were killed “by poisons
unknown in the early age,” to again quote William Farr. In all but two of
these professions, potters and woolcombers, there were practically no
women. To this day in the United States, 93 percent of all those killed on
the job are men.[928]
As regards injuries resulting from violence, the difference between the
sexes is larger still. As far back as the Middle Ages, women were much
less likely than men to become the victims of a homicidal attack. To the
extent that they did become victims, they were much less likely to be the
principal targets. Instead they tended to be hit in the company of their male
relatives or friends. The injuries they sustained were, practically speaking,
accidental side effects of male-on-male violence.[929] In today’s United
States, too, men are 50 percent more likely than women to be the victims
of violent crime.[930] Even during childhood, males are much more likely
to be bullied, physically hit and threatened than girls. Often the tormentors
receive the active support of girls, who seem to like bullies.[931]
Figures from a leading feminist, Germaine Greer, paint a similar
picture:
One thing emerges with clarity: that males are always and
everywhere more likely to die a violent death than females....
Of the 606 culpable homicides recorded in Britain for 1993,
375 of the victims were male and 231 female. These figures
compare with FBI statistics of 60 percent of homicides of
male on male compared with 24 percent as male on female.
Of the 70,000 or so people maliciously wounded in Britain
each year, about two-thirds will be young males.[932]
And in the developing world, the gap between men and women is more
dramatic still.[933]
Some have argued that these differences result from males’ greater
aggressiveness and propensity to risk-taking in other words, that men
have only themselves to blame for their troubles. Given that more men
than women are involved in car accidents, there is almost certainly some
truth in this proposition. Still, there is no doubt that society as a whole
considers men’s lives to be more expendable than women’s. This is
perhaps most evident in the movies. On the silver screen, for every woman
killed, no less than 200 men suffer the same fate.[934]
Another field in which men bear the brunt of pain is that of athletics.
Throughout history, in all civilizations, much of sports was and is based on
the destruction of men’s bodies, whether attempted or actually
accomplished. Formerly in gladiatorial games and in tournaments, today in
football, boxing, wrestling, auto racing and the like, watching men being
killed or maimed or injured is considered good fun. While a few women
also practice these sports, in their case it is often less a question of
inflicting violence than of sexual display.[935] The same applies to
spectators. More than a few female spectators do what they can to attract
attention. A good example is Pamela Anderson, whose career was
launched when she was caught on camera in the stands watching a football
game. The woman with the deepest cleavage gets the man with the biggest
muscles, and the other way around.
In summary, in almost any way one can think of it, it is women, not
men, who have the easier and better life. As examined in the preceding
chapters, women are less likely to be pushed hard, less likely to work hard
or long, and more likely to be provided for by someone else, be it their
husband or the state. They are also much less likely to suffer the full force
of the law. And as examined in this chapter, women are likely to enjoy
more than their share of whatever comforts society has to offer, and are
also much less likely to be accidentally or deliberately injured. To top it all
off, a woman’s death by accident or violence is usually considered either
tragic or horrible. Not so that of a man, which is often seen as either
necessary or part of the fun.
Starting in France and Sweden two centuries ago, women’s life
expectancy vis-à-vis that of men has been increasing decade by decade. It
has now reached the point where countries in which men outlive women
have all but disappeared. Conversely, when the collapse of Communism in
Russia and Eastern Europe led to a drop in living standards and life
expectancy during the 1990s, men’s mortality rate increased much more
than that of women. When society modernizes, it treats women better than
men. When it regresses temporarily, let us hope it also treats women
better than men.[936] On top of all this there exists a special class of
women who are even more privileged than the rest. It is to these women
that we must now turn our attention.
4. Ladies of the Leisure Class
Except when they were favored by birth, and very often even then, men’s
road to fame and fortune has always led through hard work or danger. Not
so women who, provided they were born into the right families, were often
carefully shielded from both work and danger. Once married, these women
still were not expected to work. The same also applies to other women
who, coming from below, used their charms to attract and marry upperclass men.
If the belief that advancing civilization helps women more than men is
correct, then one would expect the demographic revolution to have started
with the upper classes. The little data available for the period before 1800
support this hypothesis. As noted earlier, in 9
th
-century Paris upper-class
women probably began to outlive their menfolk long before the same
process was observed among women of other classes. Likewise, while
men in late medieval Tuscany outlived women by a considerable margin,
as early as 1400 more upper-class women than men were living past the
age of 60.[937]
More evidence on this question comes from a study of English ducal
families from 1330 to 1475. It shows that men’s average life expectancy at
birth was 24 years, while that of women was a whopping 32.9 years. At
age 20 the figure for men was 21.7, that for women 31.1.[938] The reason
why so many more men than women died was because of the violent
activities in which they engaged. Not for nothing does the term “duke”
derive from the Latin dux, commander. Leading a comfortable existence
— and the life of duchesses is comfortable almost by definition — while
their menfolk fought and were killed, women lived longer. A study of
secular peers in England between 1350 and 1500 shows that no less than
20 percent of the men died of violent causes.[939]
Later figures from the 19th century provide additional proof that
civilization does, in fact, first benefit upper-class women. The numbers
come from an 1874 study conducted for the National Life Assurance
Society of 2 King William Street, E.C., London, by one Charles Ansell, a
well-known mathematician and businessman. Among Ansell’s chief
concerns was comparing the mortality rate of the upper classes with that of
the general population. In so doing, he arrived at the unsurprising
conclusion that, when it came to both men and women, those of the upper
classes fared better.
For the purposes of this examination, however, the information of
interest is the relative advantage of upper-class men and women over their
less fortunate brothers and sisters. It turned out that, until the age of 50,
there was hardly any difference between the sexes. From that age onward,
however, it started to increase until, by age 70, the gap in favor of women
was 1.14:1.[940] At the same age, the ratio of male to females was 0.88:1
among the upper classes, but only 0.8:1 among the general population.
[941] In other words, upper-class ladies led the longest lives of all. This
was true in absolute terms, as well as in comparison to both other women
and to men of their own class.
That this is so is closely linked to the fact that women of the upper
classes, instead of having to work, have always been supported by the
labor of others. In ancient Egypt, such women did not get their hands dirty,
relying on underlings and servants to do their work for them.[942] If, in
the Odyssey, Penelope engaged in weaving, this was not because she
expected to wear or sell the cloth — for that she had dozens of female
slaves. In neither Athens nor Sparta were upper class women expected to
work.[943] In the latter, so crass was the contrast between the “Spartan”
life of men and the luxurious ways of women that Aristotle blamed it for
the city’s decline.[944]
Throughout the Middle Ages, it was mainly noblewomen who
cultivated literature, poetry and music. Whether at their own expense or
that of their husbands, these ladies liked to surround themselves with
artists and performers.[945] Such entertainers often lived on the premises,
which may help explain why, toward the end of the Middle Ages, female
heads of great English households tended to employ a larger number of
servants than did male ones.[946] Bored by country life, late-16th
- and
early-17th
-century English “fine dames” pestered their husbands to journey
to London.[947] Once there they kept busy by engaging in conspicuous
consumption: “to drinke choyse Wines, eate Banqueting stuffe, and play
with a Parret, is the only employment of her houres.”[948] Other such
ladies, to quote a pamphlet written by one of them, were placed in a
position where “they have nothing to do but to glorify God and to benefit
their neighbors.”[949]
Nor were such attitudes confined to Europe. An 18th
-century Chinese
scholar, Chen Hongmou, wrote of spoiled young women. Their children
were raised by nurses and their needlework was done for them by maids.
“All they have to think about is making themselves beautiful. Everything
is done for them, so they don’t know that rice comes from a stalk and that
silk is unreeled from cocoons. They treat money like dirt and living
creatures like bits of straw.”[950] Even in the 20th century, it was a rare
Chinese lady who so much as cooked a meal.[951] The surroundings in
which these women lived reflected their privileges. Their rooms were
furnished with elaborate alcove beds, dressing tables, other tables,
comfortable chairs and a washing stand. Mirrors, toilet articles, perfumes,
sewing boxes and musical instruments were always close at hand.
In 1783, one German aristocratic lady, Sophie von la Roche, tellingly
boasted that she used to “go into my kitchen and give instructions, since I
myself am versed in the art of cooking.”[952] Evidently she thought that
doing so was unusual, almost heroic. And not without reason: the typical
“Berlinese lady of the high classes” neither read nor worked.” Instead she
passed her life “babbling, dressing or undressing.”[953] Working for a
wealthy Anglo-Irish lady at about the same time, Mary Wollstonecraft
wrote that her employer spent as many as five hours a day simply applying
makeup.[954]In 1810, one American writer put the number of “females in
Great Britain who are exempted by circumstances” that is, those with
money left to them by their fathers or given to them by their husbands
“from all necessary labor” at 50,000.[955] Europeans who visited the
United States later in the century, for their part, often expressed
astonishment at the existence of “a large class of ladies who do absolutely
nothing.”[956] American culture, which in many ways was built in
conscious opposition to that of the English, was cut from the same mold
when it came to spoiling upper class women.
An early 20th
-century analysis of such women by one of their own,
Emily James Putnam, speaks volumes. The Englishwoman, a selfproclaimed “female of the favored social class” who later became part of
the feminist pantheon, pulled no punches in her description of fellow
upper-class women:[957]
She overshadows the rest of her sex. The gentleman has never
been an analogous phenomenon, for even in countries and
times where he has occupied the center of the stage, he has
done so chiefly by virtue of his qualities as a man. A line of
gentlemen always implies a man as its origin, and cannot
indeed perpetuate itself for long without at least occasional
lapses into manhood. Moreover, the gentleman... is
numerically negligible. The lady, on the other hand, has until
lately very nearly covered the surface of womanhood. She
even occurs in great numbers in societies where the
gentleman is an exception; and in societies like the feudal
where ladies and gentlemen are usually found in pairs, she
soars so far above her mate in the development of the
qualities they have in common that he sinks back relatively
into the plane of ordinary humanity... Economically she is
supported by the toil of others; but while this is equally true
of other classes of society, the oddity in her case consists in
the acquiescence of those most concerned. The lady herself
feels no uneasiness in her equivocal situation, and the toilers
who support her do so with enthusiasm. She is not a producer;
in most communities productive labor is by consent
unladylike. On the other hand she is the heaviest of
consumers, and theorists have not been wanting to maintain
that the more she spends the better off society is. In
aristocratic societies she is required for dynastic reasons to
produce offspring, but in democratic societies even this
demand is often waived.
From the industrial lands of northern France comes perhaps the best study
— by a female author, no less — of the lives these marvelous creatures
led.[958] There, as elsewhere, what governed their existence was the
physical separation of the workplace from the home. It caused bourgeois
women, who until then had taken a lively part in their husband’s affairs, to
retreat from work. Having become “the leading consumers of industrial
goods,” they put their efforts into fashioning homes for themselves and
their families. Initially domesticity, with its emphasis on the peaceful life,
comfort and culture, was the exclusive prerogative of high-class women.
Later the ideal, and to some extent the reality as well, began to trickle
downward. By the end of the nineteenth century it had invaded workingclass homes, reaching the point where it almost amounted to a cult.
While men worked and worked — in the early capitalist world, life
was a continuous race against the clock — their womenfolk enjoyed
leisure. Often husbands worked specifically in order for their wives to be
able to rest. As the latter visited spas or seaside resorts, the former stayed
on the job, an arrangement chronicled by Kipling during the last years of
the 19
th century.[959] Though my wife and I grew up in different countries
— she in Chile, I in Israel — both of us remember it from our own
families during the 1950s. Not having to work and blessed with extended
vacations, women had the time and ease to develop a “more humane and
less economic” view of themselves. Though their day-to-day work was
done for them by servants, cooks, pastry makers, flower arrangers and
gardeners, it was they who got the credit. “Enormous sums” were spent on
clothes and jewelry, so that a broach bought by or for a wife might cost as
much as her husband’s wardrobe for three years. These women might
know nothing of the value of money. But they were certainly experts in
spending it.
Women’s physical presence in the home also gave them other
advantages. It was they who mediated between their husbands and the rest
of the family, deciding all questions of engagement, separation, marriage,
vocation, parental largesse and parental love. That was why
contemporaries spoke of a “matriarchy.” At a time when business suits
were becoming almost obligatory for men, women took to wearing
crinolines, hoop skirts, bodices, bustles, trails and huge sleeves. All these
were expressly designed to emphasize their freedom from work of any
kind. The garments also increased their wearers’ physical size to at least
double that of men; so big were some women that they could not pass
through doorways and had special seats designed for them. In so dressing,
the women demonstrated power. Too refined to handle coarse foods such
as fowls, roasts and vegetables, what cooking they did was limited solely
to pastries and delicate desserts.
Their husbands spent their days among the noise and soot of the
factories, but they had armies of servants to clean after them. Men tried to
outdo each other in economic competition with all the rough-and-tumble
risk-taking, and conflicts of conscience, that such work demanded.
Women, meanwhile, took to religion, started seeing themselves as
guardian angels, and began preaching to anyone who would (or would not)
listen. Surrounded by sofas, cushions, curtains, paintings, and incredible
amounts of bric à brac, their sheltered lives were all but impregnable to
outside influences. Whatever the law might say, within their own world
they laid down the rules. On the one hand it was a world that in many
ways permitted them to lead a child-like existence, centering on the
serenity of the home and devoid of real responsibility. On the other, it
enabled them to govern social life with an iron hand. It was they who
dictated food, fashion and rules of etiquette in a nutshell, what was and
was not considered acceptable. By using the custom of visiting others with
or without prior announcement, they were also able to establish hierarchies
and lord it over other women.
To marry such a woman a man had to be very well established.
Engagements could last for years. Not infrequently were they broken off
because the fiancé had not done as well, financially, as expected. On
average, the higher the class to which a man belonged, the later he
married.[960] Women, on the other hand, were treated as if they were
silkworms, breaking their cocoons and “coming out” into society at the
age of 17 or 18. From this time on, their lives were spent at picnics, parties
and balls. All involved enormous expense; English girls whose fathers
could not afford to show them off in London might be shipped to some
other place such as Cairo. There life was cheaper and single men, though
not as rich as those at home, were plentiful. Unless a girl was
exceptionally plain or handicapped in some other way, two or three
seasons were usually enough. The common pattern was for a woman of 20
to hitch herself, or to be hitched by her parents, to a husband in his early
30s. However, the difference in age could be much greater, and in the first
years of the 20th
 century the gap widened even further.
Once a married woman became pregnant she had found her destiny
and could afford to relax. An hour’s walk per day apart, it was customary
to spend the first three months in bed or on a sofa. If complications arose,
then it goes without saying that the best available medical care was on
hand. One late Victorian painting shows a sick lady surrounded by no
fewer than 10 doctors[961] all of whom, it is safe to assume, had been
summoned and paid for by her husband. Confinement nearly always took
place at home, where greater comfort could be provided than at any
hospital. In at least one respect, it ought to be noted, such English ladies
did indeed earn their keep: most seem to have taken contemporary
scientific advice and breastfed their children. However, everything else
was done for them by underlings. Once the children had been weaned at
nine months or so, rare was the mother who so much as entered the
nursery.
Nor was looking after children the sole purpose for which servants
were employed. Even in childless households, butlers, cooks, footmen,
coachmen, gardeners and sundry maids were considered a must. That is to
say nothing of the kind of help that came over occasionally in order to
polish floors, carry out repairs and perform other such work. This
dependence on personnel made the seasonal migration from the country to
London and back again into a hugely complicated operation. Referring to a
particularly grand household, one contemporary described its movement as
“an army on the march.”
Supported by their husbands as well as having an income of their own,
the women’s most important functions were social. Often they specialized
in throwing lavish parties. Rising living standards and advancing medical
science caused the class-differentiated gap in life expectancy between the
two sexes to persist and grow. During the interwar period, as during the
19th century, the better-off a woman, the more likely she was to outlive not
just her own menfolk, but everybody else.[962] Not even World War II,
the largest and most ferocious armed conflict of all time, was able to touch
their privileges. In Germany, faced with a grave shortage of labor, one
reason why the regime hesitated to compel women to work was because it
feared that, if it did so, the spectacle of bosses’ wives sitting in
coffeehouses and shopping might be too much for the rest of the
population to stomach. In Britain, as the most class-conscious society of
all, wealthy women were exempted from war work because they had large
houses to look after![963] One can only conclude that, by having one
privilege, a woman is entitled to enjoy others as well.
Born into the class to which they belong, surrounded by beautiful
things from birth on, and in firm control of family affairs, upper-class
women have long resisted feminists’ demands that they surrender their
leisure. To the contrary, for them it has been the fact that they did not have
to work that has made life better.[964] Unless their qualifications are
particularly high, going to work would mean having to mix with their
social inferiors. Consequently, in the United States during the 1980s, six
out of seven wives of high-income men did not have a job.[965] Likewise,
in the countries that comprised the former Soviet Union, “it is... considered
prestigious when a wife does not have to work.”[966] At the annual
gathering of the World Economic Forum in Davos, the few career women
who attend on their own account are swamped by the non-working wives
of the powerful, the rich, and the famous. These women simply cannot
work; had they done so, how could they attend?
Forming a privileged class within a privileged class, the Jacqueline
Bouvier-Kennedy-Onassises, Princess Dianas and Kate Middletons of this
world have tastes that can be satisfied, if at all, only by billionaires. Their
great-great-grandmothers were often brought up by nuns and completed
their education at exclusive “finishing schools.” They themselves often
breeze through some of the world’s best universities. However, they are
less likely to take on graduate studies where the work is harder, less time is
left over for socializing, and the knowledge acquired perhaps more likely
to intimidate a prospective husband than to attract him. Their great-greatgrandmothers were so wedded to domesticity that everything was
delivered right to their doors. These modern women, by contrast, though
still certain to rely on others to look after their household needs, are more
likely to jet their way around the world’s most expensive department
stores. Their great-great-grandmothers took pride in their delicate
constitutions and white skins, themselves the result of not having to work;
today’s most privileged women are more likely to wear a tan as a result of
spending too much time in expensive health resorts or aboard luxury
yachts.
According to the Daily Telegraph, Princess Diana once said a job was
preferable to a husband.[967] Any job she herself might have had, though,
would have been purely symbolic. As the daughter of one of the wealthiest
families in England, she neither depended on a job, nor ever could depend
on a job, for a living. For the same reason, she was able to start and stop
working at will. Now, as always, a man is successful if he makes more
than his wife can spend; a woman, if she can find such a man. Now, as
always, those who have done so are perhaps the most privileged group of
all.
5. Conclusions
If the interpretation advanced in the preceding pages is correct, then the
most basic difference between men and women is that the latter are less
resistant to the hard life. Partly out of a desire for adventure, but largely
because they had no choice, men have always ventured out to the hardest
places, often risking their lives in the process. Partly because they are
more sensible, but largely because they did have a choice, few women
joined them. If and when they did so, then usually it was only after
conditions had greatly improved. To the present day, the harder and less
comfortable the conditions in any given place, the fewer the women it
harbors. It must have been clear to every society that ever existed, even
before Xenophon made her views known, that men’s bodies are far more
suited to doing hard work than women’s. Societies that did not internalize
this incontrovertible fact could never have survived.
As one would expect, the demographic revolution that made women’s
life expectancy increase more than that of men started at society’s upper
levels. Often it did so at the expense of men. The first class to feel its
effects was the nobility, and the first places where it took place were the
towns. Both largely eliminated women’s duty to engage in outdoor work.
However, the process is only rarely mentioned in the history books.
Possibly this is because female relative longevity has been taken for
granted. Aware that women are doing better than men, people assume that
it has always been that way and have invented the most nonsensical
explanations for it.[968] Nothing, however, is further from the truth. In
particular, during the 19th century — which happens to be the first period
for which reliable nationwide statistics are available — the phenomenon
gave rise to much comment. Contemporary experts working both for
government and for private industry knew perfectly well that civilization
and its comforts benefited women more than it did men.
Two factors brought about the demographic revolution, first in
developed countries and later in developing ones. The first was an
improved standard of living; the second, better medical care. For the
purposes of this examination, the most important development was the
transition from the countryside to towns. Others factors were better
nutrition, better clothing, better housing and better hygienic facilities,
among others.[969] It goes without saying that all of these have benefited
both men and women. However, the female organism is more vulnerable
and less resistant to the kind of infection that results from contact with dirt.
Therefore, on the whole spreading civilization benefited women earlier,
and more, than it did men. And the higher the social class to which people
of both sexes belonged, the truer this was.
Medicine, too, has benefited both menand women but again, the
facts make clear that women have benefited more than men. The most
important medical advances which, relatively speaking, favored women
over men were contraceptives, on the one hand, and perinatal care, on the
other. Between them, these two advances brought down the female
mortality rate associated with childbirth so dramatically that, in today's
developed countries, it can hardly be expressed in percentage points.
Indeed, probably no other factor has done more to change the demographic
balance between men and women.
Yet while women have gained a disproportionate share of the benefits,
men have done a disproportionate share of the work. First, the transition
from the countryside to towns left far more men than women doing
manual labor outdoors, under difficult conditions, and sometimes in places
so rough that only madmen would choose to toil there. Next the industrial
revolution left more men than women exposed to occupational diseases
and accidents. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that the improvement in
the quality of women’s lives has for the most part been carried on the
shoulders of men to say nothing of the fact that now, as always, well
over 90 percent of the discoveries and inventions that drive that
improvement in life quality are made by men.
To really understand the inequity of the burden, suppose men were to
oblige some radical feminists by providing women with sperm banks
designed to produce nothing but girls, with the male donors dying off en
masse after doing their part. Since women have for the most part always
been dependent on the hard labor of men, in such a hypothetical scenario
civilization as we know it would almost certainly collapse. Mining, oil
extraction, heavy and chemical industry, long-distance transportation, most
forms of construction, and many kinds of agriculture, such as forestry and
the herding of large domestic animals, would all but cease. So would deepsea fishing. Under such conditions, over 90 percent of the world’s presentday population would die of starvation. Those women that survived such a
calamity would likely revert to a primitive life based on horticulture,
dwelling in huts and suffering from a permanent shortage of animal
protein. Judging by historical and pre-historical precedent, their life
expectancy would be reduced to less than 40 years.
Yet while the world as we know it would likely collapse without men,
often instead of thanks for their efforts they get complaints. In the past,
women whose prospective husbands were forced to work like slaves so as
to raise the brides-wealth demanded of them complained, or at any rate
had complaints raised in their name, that men were given “an automatic
head-start in life.”[970] Today, women whose husbands work so hard they
have no time to spend time with their families complain. Women whose
husbands are home all day also complain. Women who do not receive
money from Aid to Families with Dependent Children complain. Women
who do receive money from the program also complain, claiming that
male-designed and -directed bureaucracies are invading their lives.[971]
Women whose lives have been saved by Cesareans complain that male
chauvinist imperialist doctors are invading their wombs.[972] One or two
have even been known to complain that they were not made to pay
taxes[973] surely the only time in history such a complaint has been
voiced.
Given the countless privileges women enjoy, a truly complete
examination of the subject must inevitably tackle the thorny question of
whether there is anything in women’s nature or social situation that
predisposes them toward complaining. Indeed, a full appraisal of the
matter must also consider the possibility that modern feminism itself may
be just a manifestation, writ large, of this particular predisposition.
Chapter 8: The Complaining Sex
1. Femininity and Its Grievances
Judged by almost any criterion, women are, and always have been, the
privileged sex. As embryos they are considered more vulnerable, despite
the facts indicating the contrary. As children they are treated more gently
and receive more protection. As students they have long been excused, or
excused themselves, from whatever subjects were considered hardest. As
adults they are under less pressure to compete and perform. As workers
they do rather less than half of humanity’s productive labor. As economic
beings they are often in the enviable position of being able to consume
without having to produce. As criminals and litigants they are treated
much more leniently both by the law and the courts. As members of
society they are both freed from the duty to participate in the most terrible
of all human activities, war, and enjoy better protection against it.
Carried on the shoulders of men — sometimes, as when escaping
natural disasters and the like, literally so — women have always
commanded the lion’s share of whatever comforts were available to any
society at any time and place. Women are much less affected by violent
crime, which is both cause and effect of the fact that their lives are
considered more precious than those of men. Aided by rising living
standards, on the one hand, and by modern medical science on the other,
during the last two centuries or so women’s advantages have become more
and more pronounced. The more developed the society, the earlier the
change began and the greater its impact. By 2013, in all but two of the
world’s 194 countries women can expect to live longer than men.
Given these facts, one would expect women to be happy with their lot.
Such, however, is not the case. As we shall presently see, in practically all
countries, more women than men seem to be in some kind of mental
trouble or suffer from mental disturbances. In practically all countries,
women are a majority both among patients in mental hospitals and among
those who resort to various other mental-health services that do not require
hospitalization. In practically all countries, women are found endlessly
complaining about their situation in society. Since 1970 or so, advocacy
groups established by women have served as institutional voices for such
complaints. In the words of one male historian,[974] a gap seems to have
opened up between women’s objective situation in society and the way
many of them perceive it or experience it. The more advanced the country
and the more privileged the women, the truer his words ring.
The science responsible for making people happy, or at any rate for
caring for those so unhappy as to present a serious problem to themselves
and to others, is psychiatry. As shall be illustrated in the coming pages, for
its troubles psychiatry was rewarded with an onslaught from feminists,
who attacked the field as a pillar of the patriarchal order. Some of the first
shots were fired by Simone de Beauvoir. She accused psychiatry,
especially psychoanalysis, of pushing women to achieve “normalcy” by
identifying with their mothers rather than their fathers.[975] To Kate
Millett, psychiatry, with Sigmund Freud as its totemic head, was guilty of
nothing less than a diabolical plot to reestablish men’s rule over women,
which allegedly had been shaken by the first feminist wave.[976] Some
feminists even demanded that psychiatry, as a discipline, compensate
women for the harm it allegedly inflicted on them.[977]
Before we examine the problems of women’s mental health, the ropes
defining the arena must be first tied in place. First, a conspiracy does not
exist and has never existed. From Freud on down, the vast majority of
modern mental-health workers are not out to discriminate against women,
oppress them or prepare them for life under patriarchy. Instead, their
objective is to listen to women, understand them, diagnose them and, if
possible, relieve them from their endless troubles and symptoms. The fact
that doing so has proved anything but easy is hardly mental-health
workers’ fault. Rather, it is due to the fact that, more often than not, no
sooner does one kind of complaint dissolve then another takes its place.
This was true back when nearly every mental-health worker, aside from
nurses, was male. And it remains true today, early in the 21st century, when
a large number of workers in the field are female.
Second, every mental-health worker competes not just with others in
the same profession, but with anybody enterprising enough to buy a brass
plaque or post his or her name online. In the field of mental health, more
so than in other areas of medicine, objective symptoms are hard to define
and classify. In a sense, a person who says he or she feels unwell is unwell.
As George Bernard Shaw once put it, under such conditions water will be
prescribed to teetotalers, champagne to drunkards, “uric acid free” to
vegetarians, and heavy overcoats to old colonels who suffer from the cold.
[978] In other words, women who go to healers get what they ask for. So it
has been in the past, and so, barring a sudden and drastic change in human
nature, it will be in the future.
2. Dungeons and Dragons
In Europe, the priest was historically the person entrusted with attending to
people suffering from mental trouble. By recommending prayer, imposing
penance, granting absolution and even simply listening, some priests may
actually have helped the afflicted. Other priests specialized in exorcism. As
such, they overlapped with witches of both sexes. Once again, provided
people believed in them, the ceremonies may have done some good.
Most mentally troubled people probably remained on a free footing.
However, there were always men and women so troublesome to
themselves and to others that they could be helped by neither priest nor
wizard. Provided they had not committed any crime, or had committed a
crime but were obviously too deranged to take responsibility for it, they
were incarcerated in special establishments.[979] In Europe, the first such
establishment opened its doors in Valencia, Spain, early in the 15th century.
Others soon followed. Some institutions were run by the Church, others by
municipalities, others still by the state.
From 1650 onward there was a growing tendency to isolate deviant
people from society. The outcome was that the mentally ill were often
confined together with the handicapped, the vagrant and the delinquent
in other words, anybody who formed a blemish on the well-ordered picture
society was trying to present. Inmates regarded as dangerous to themselves
and to others were locked in dungeons, or chained to walls, or strapped to
chairs. Others were put in or onto a variety of exotic devices. The purpose
was to restrain them and, by so doing, to calm them down. One picture
shows a man with his arms spread and chained to two opposing walls,
while a third chain links his head to the ceiling.[980] It was believed that
the people in question had lost what was regarded as the essence of
humanity — namely, reason — and turned into brutes. As brutes, they had
to be maintained and guarded, not cured. It was as brutes, too, that they
were put on display.
Around 1790, attitudes toward the mentally ill began to be revised.
This was, as noted earlier, the era of bienfaisance, of doing good, and in
the field of mental health it led to rapid humanization. Often the process
was accompanied by considerable fanfare. At a time when the slogan of
liberty was in the air, those in charge of the reforms wasted no opportunity
to jump on the bandwagon and present themselves as liberators. Some of
the worst abuses were taken away. No longer were patients locked up in
dungeons or restrained with the aid of instruments. Chains, whips and
other paraphernalia were largely done away with. The revolution in
treatment was soon followed by an even greater one in the structures
where such treatment had been carried out. Most pre-1800 asylums were
centuries old and notorious for the damp, dark and overcrowded conditions
that prevailed in them. Owing to the cages in which patients were kept,
many also resembled a zoo or menagerie.
The first half of the 19th century saw a boom in the construction of
institutions for the mentally disturbed. For the first time, asylums meant
for treating the mentally ill were clearly separated from those intended to
house the criminal and the poor. The old buildings were replaced by hotellike structures that offered the conveniences of the era. Pictures often show
rows of beds neatly arranged in spacious halls with a potted plant near
each of them. Such, in fact, remained the standard layout of a mental
hospital in Western countries until at least the 1930s. The main objective
of these institutions was to provide rest against the “frantic pace” of
modern life. To achieve this aim, asylums were placed in rustic
environments and surrounded by gardens. Reviewing the reforms, one
authority claimed that “no class of persons in the United Kingdom are so
well cared for as the insane.” Food and clothing were provided, and in the
words of one contemporary scholar, “every sort of indulgence within
reasonable bounds [was] theirs.”[981] Like their 18th
-century predecessors,
the new asylums attracted visitors eager to take a peek inside. Now,
though, they came to admire, rather than to leer.
The so-called first revolution in psychiatry led to a change in the
identity of those whom society put in charge of mental patients. Though
doctors had always participated, until then many asylums had been run by
priests on behalf of the church. Others were supervised by officials on
behalf of the state, or by lay entrepreneurs on behalf of themselves. Some
of these people joined the movement and even helped initiate it. One was
Francis Willis, an English cleric who successfully treated the deranged
King George III. Another was William Tuke, a tea and coffee merchant
who set up a model asylum for the Quaker community of York. His son
took over where he left off, and caring for the insane became the family
business for several generations.[982]
Most of the reformers, however, were doctors. Arguably the best
known among them was Philippe Pinel.[983] Born in 1745, he studied
theology before switching to medicine and mathematics, and later became
a consulting physician to Napoleon himself. Pinel was a disciple of
Rousseau. He saw the origin of all social evils, insanity included, as rooted
in the tyranny, inequality, religiosity and superstition of the ancien regime.
By doing away with these, the Revolution laid down the groundwork for
liberating madmen as well. Freedom itself was considered the best cure for
lunacy; in one day alone, Pinel deprived 40 inmates of a municipal
madhouse of their chains and the attendants of their horsewhips. In the
place of physical constraints he put a regime emphasizing order, regularity,
sanitary conditions and work. Those who responded were rewarded; those
who resisted were punished. Such means, it was reasoned, might lead them
back, step by measured step, to rationality.
Not everybody subscribed to these ideas. In Germany, the most
important reformer was another doctor, Johan Reil. It was he who invented
the term “psychiatry.” The cures he recommended were, to say the least,
peculiar. Among other things, he suggested building special apparatuses
that would cause the madman to “sail through the air on fire-spewing
dragons.”[984] Other patients were to be immersed in water with live eels,
an early form of electroshock. Still, insofar as he emphasized regular
work, as well as the sheer power of the therapist’s personality, Reil
resembled Pinel. Most other doctors also prided themselves on the fact that
“chains or strait jackets [had] never been used or provided” in the asylums
they ran and that no attendant was permitted to lay hands on a patient.
Since then, explanations as to the nature of mental disease have
changed every few decades. At times it was seen as originating in
weakness of the will. That included the kind of weakness which led to, and
resulted from, masturbation.[985] At other times it was believed to be
caused by degeneration of the organism, which might or might not be
hereditary. Others declared that it originated in traumatic childhood
experiences, or in some mysterious electrical disturbances in the brain, or
was caused by the stress of “modern” life, or by the presence or absence of
certain chemicals in the patient’s bloodstream. All these were held
responsible for the fact that some people were desperately unhappy, or felt
extremely fatigued, or acted strangely, or could not control themselves, or
presented a danger to themselves and to others. Whatever the fashionable
theory, the principle that mental disease — the term itself was an
innovation — is primarily a medical problem became firmly established.
[986] It followed that those responsible for it should be neither jailers nor
disciplinarians, but therapists or healers.
From the patient’s point of view, being turned from a wild animal into
a sick human being did not necessarily mean that the treatment which
followed was always effective, let alone pleasant. Still, in theory at any
rate, that treatment was now based on proper scientific principles. It was
administered by people who had taken the Hippocratic Oath. They
operated, or at any rate were supposed to operate, in a sympathetic spirit
with the express objective of making the patient feel better about him- or
herself. If dungeons were still used, then this was only because no better
accommodation was available and not because darkness was considered
desirable for punishing inmates or curing them. If restraint was still
employed, then only in order to prevent patients from causing harm to
themselves and to others, and only because less brutal means were
unavailable or ineffective. The more radical a cure, the more likely it was
to be monopolized by persons who, whatever else, had behind them years
of training in psychiatry as well as medicine. Such has been the situation
since the middle of the 19th century, and so, in spite of all the changes that
have taken place, it remains today.
3. The Rise of the Female Patient
Perhaps because troubled men were more dangerous to themselves and to
their surroundings than were troubled women, before 1800 most inmates
in mental asylums appear to have been male. Certainly this applied to the
stereotype of such institutions. Pictures and drawings of people being
restrained with the aid of various instruments almost always show men.
One may properly surmise that, had they been women, then the results,
seen from the point of view of those who produced them, would have been
counterproductive. No more than today were the people of the 18th
-century
immune to the sufferings of women, real or imagined. In England, the
most famous representations of madness were the bronze chained male
nudes known as “the brazen, brainless brothers,” “Melancholy Madness”
and “Raving Madness.” They kept watch over the gates of Bedlam,
helping those who entered the hospital lose hope.[987]
By turning the mentally disturbed from brutes into sick people and
humanizing the treatment they received, the first revolution in psychiatry
caused the stereotype of the lunatic as a male monster to disappear. As if to
herald the change, in 1815 the twin statues were removed from Bedlam. In
a society that believed in progress, people felt ashamed of what their
predecessors had done to madmen.[988] In the popular imagination, the
madman’s place was taken by the disturbed woman. Later in the century,
that woman became something of a favorite with photographers and
artists. Usually she was young, and often she was beautiful. Instead of
wearing chains, she is presented as reclining on a cushion in a comfortable
room. Instead of appearing brutish or dangerous, she has the haunted look
of someone who is neither here nor there — out of this world, as it were.
Implicitly or explicitly, she is shown begging for help.
The stereotype may have influenced reality, or perhaps things worked
the other way around. Be that as it may, as more asylums were built to
“dispel the wailing of the despondent,” as one historian put it,[989] the
percentage of female inmates rose. By mid-19th century, they formed a
clear majority.[990] The English census of 1871 showed that for every
1,000 male mental patients, there were 1,182 female ones. A year later,
England and Wales had 31,822 certified female lunatics, but only 26,818
male ones. By the end of the century, the share of women had risen to
about two-thirds. As with men, the mental illnesses of women were
attributed to the most fanciful causes. As with men, those causes changed
every few decades, as psychologists and psychiatrists claimed to make
new discoveries. Whatever the causes of mental illness were believed to
be, women have formed the majority of inmates ever since. When feminist
Phyllis Chesler conducted her landmark study of women and madness in
the late 1960s, she found that American women hospitalized for mental
illness outnumbered men more than two to one.[991]
Women who were referred to the asylums only formed the tip of the
iceberg. They were joined by much larger numbers of those who, feeling
unhappy or unable to cope, either entered institutions out of their own
volition or turned to some other therapy that did not require
hospitalization. Throughout the second half of the 19th century, women
were the primary clientele at surgical clinics, water establishments, rest
homes and a whole series of similar institutions that promised quick cures
at high cost.[992] By the last quarter of the century, if not earlier, women
were undoubtedly the majority of psychiatric patients. That lead has been
maintained ever since.
Looking back, perhaps the most decisive — but least noted — fact
about the rise of the female patient is its timing. Before 1800, people
whose behavior was disturbed or troubled were locked up and tied down.
If they did not obey, they were also likely to be punished in all kinds of
exotic ways. But around 1800, as noted earlier, the disturbed and troubled
suddenly began to be regarded as sick. This caused them to become the
object of pity, to be treated with consideration and, if at all possible, to be
“cured.” And as noted earlier, when conditions improve, very often those
who benefit are primarily female; after all, women are never supposed to
endure conditions as harsh as those considered standard for men. To put it
another way, no sooner had attitudes toward troubled and disturbed people
begun to change — for the better, most people would agree — then
women suddenly became the majority among the disturbed and the
troubled.
The hypothesis that the growth in the number of female patients may
have been linked to the “domestication of insanity”[993] is supported by
the fact that, just as women were being referred to treatment or
hospitalized, men were being criminalized. Not by accident, the first
revolution in psychiatry coincided with the drawing of a very sharp line
between those who lived within the law and those who lived outside it and
formed part of the underworld, as it was later called. Not by accident, too,
it coincided with the rise of incarceration as the principal form of
punishment between fines and death.[994] Whereas the vast majority of
those institutionalized by way of punishment were male, a smaller number,
though still a majority, of those institutionalized in order to receive
treatment were female. To this day, women facing charges in court stand a
much better chance of being declared “troubled” and referred to treatment
than do men. If they are lucky, they may escape institutionalization
altogether; instead they will spend their sentence talking to another woman
with the title “therapist” in front of her name.[995]
By the 1870s, perhaps the most important mental disease was
neurasthenia, or exhaustion of the nerves. Neurasthenia was discovered by
a New York electrotherapist, George Beard, and was widely diagnosed in
both North America and Europe.[996] With men, it was supposed to be the
result of overwork, and included a vast array of symptoms including
fatigue, depression, weak memory, lack of concentration, vertigo,
insomnia, impotence and spermatorrhea (otherwise known as wet dreams).
With women, its symptoms were equally wide-ranging. However, instead
of impotence and spermatorrhea, they suffered from blushing, headaches,
uterine irritability and that most common of female maladies, irregular
menses.
The main difference, though, was that most women did not work.
Leading a sheltered life, they were much less exposed to what late 19th
-
century people called “the struggle for existence” and what we today often
call “stress.” Accordingly, the origins of their problems had to be different.
Doctors never stopped wondering why most of the patients who crowded
their waiting rooms were female.[997] Here is a contemporary physician’s
description of what, in his view, might be the cause:[998]
A woman, generally single or in some way not in a condition
for performing her reproductive function, having suffered
from some real or imagined trouble, or having passed through
a phase of hypochondriasis of sexual character, and often
being of a highly nervous stock, becomes the interesting
invalid. She is surrounded by good and generally religious
and sympathetic friends. She is pampered in every way. She
may have lost her voice or the power of a limb. These
temporary paralyses often pass off suddenly with a new
doctor or a new drug; but, as a rule, they are replaced by some
new neurosis.
The standard cure for neurasthenia was invented by an American surgeon,
Silas Weir Mitchell. His Infirmary for Nervous Diseases became a mecca
for patients from all over the world, including some of the most famous
“new women” of the age. Among them were the social worker Jane
Addams and the feminist writer Charlotte Perkins Gilman. He
recommended, and did not hesitate to enforce, extended bed rests lasting
for weeks or months. Such rest entailed the suspension of all activity
including, of course, economic activity. Normally it took place not at
home, but in a sanitarium or spa. This made it very expensive indeed; no
wonder women, who were not expected to work, could afford to become
sick more easily, and to stay sick for longer, than men.[999] The works of
Mitchell and his fellow doctors bristle with accounts of women who clung
to their diseases and did whatever they could not to be rid of their
afflictions. In the end, some were only “cured,” if at all, by the heroic will
of doctors.[1000]
The other two main mental diseases of the period, anorexia nervosa
and hysteria, were distributed even less evenly between the sexes.
Anorexia, which first received its name in 1874, was and remains between
95 percent and 98 percent a female disease.[1001] Female hysterics,
meanwhile, were estimated in the 1970s to outnumber males by between
two and four to one.[1002] And that was an improvement over the late 19th
century, when doctors put the difference at 20 to one.[1003]Worse,
whereas anybody knew how refusal to eat led to anorexia, hysteria, like
neurasthenia, seemed to have no discernible organic causes. Instead, it
manifested itself in a vast range of symptoms including headaches,
fainting spells, paralysis, mutism and uncontrollable screaming for no
apparent reason.
Why neurasthenia and hysteria should be mainly female diseases was,
and is, by no means clear. From his perch as the foremost expert of his
age, Mitchell proclaimed that “for the most entire capacity to make a
household wretched there is no more complete human receipt than a silly
woman who is to a high degree nervous and feeble, and who craves pity
and likes power.”[1004] A late 20
th
-century male psychiatrist who authored
a major study on hysteria blamed women’s greater “search for emotional
reactivity.”[1005] Others thought that “men may be less likely than women
to present symptoms in a histrionic fashion;” others still, that the “sick”
role was more acceptable for women than for men.[1006]
Some of these explanations were adduced by male experts. Others
were advanced by female ones. On the whole, the latter agreed with their
male colleagues. In the words of one late 20th
-century female historian of
madness in women:
When the hysterical woman became sick... she demanded
service and attention from others. The families of hysterics
found themselves reorganized around the patient, who had to
be constantly nursed, indulged with special delicacies, and
excused from ordinary duties... Physicians were concerned
that hysterical women were indeed enjoying their freedom
from domestic and conjugal duties, as well as their power
over the family and the doctor himself.[1007]
Anorexia, which meant refusing to take the very stuff of life and which
was normally acted out in front of the entire family at mealtimes, was even
more useful. In the words of the same historian, it gave the girls who
suffered from it “the perfect means” to control their families, making
“fathers storm, mothers cry” and turning themselves into “the sole object
of preoccupation and conversation.”[1008] Not for nothing has it been
called “the classic fashionable disease of the belle époque.”[1009]
Perceptive female patients such as Florence Nightingale sometimes
ended up by admitting that what they wanted was attention.[1010] Others
denounced the doctors who had done their best to provide a cure; others
still made their symptoms into the focus of their lives. Some women,
“having never done anything that ought to tire [them],”[1011] spent half
their lives in bed. Others went from one clinic to another, demanding that
their ovaries, or uteruses, or clitorises be operated on or removed.[1012]
Nor was it simply a case of male doctors abusing hapless female patients,
as some have claimed. First, many such operations, clitoridectomies in
particular, were carried out by female doctors who, in this respect as in so
many others, simply followed where men led. Second, similar operations
were carried out on males. In 1923 Freud himself, in the hope of
concentrating his body’s energies on combating cancer, had his seminal
vesicles severed.
Many doctors were well aware that the operations in question were
unnecessary, useless or both. They often warned each other both against
individual patients and against “active” and “passive” “mania
operatoria.”[1013] Many of their female patients, however, refused to
listen. For example, Freud’s follower and subsequent benefactor Marie
Bonaparte had her clitoris operated on. But she did so in spite, not
because, of the advice he gave her.[1014] Some women faked symptoms
by putting feces in their mouth and then vomiting it back out, in order to
simulate an injury to the digestive tract.[1015] Others talked and talked. Of
the latter, the best known was Freud’s “Dora.”[1016] Dora, whose real
name was Ida Bauer, was the daughter of an upper-middle-class family.
She was referred for a variety of symptoms, including the inability to
speak her native language (though she retained her other linguistic
abilities). So much did she like being a famous case study that her disease,
such as it was, became the center of her existence.[1017] After being
treated by Freud she tried to repeat her triumph, displaying new symptoms
and moving from one doctor to the next in an endless quest for attention.
She was still “sick” when she died in New York in 1945, much to her
family’s relief.
Still, it was not every woman who could afford a Mitchell or a Freud.
Most of their less fortunate sisters likely made do without any treatment.
Others entered public institutions. These asylums specialized in paupers
who were also diagnosed as suffering from mental illness. Or perhaps
things worked the other way around, and it was mentally diseased people
unable to afford private care who were admitted. As in the 17th and 18th
centuries, to some extent the asylums presented an alternative to the
workhouse or the street. While this was true for both men and for women,
women dominated public asylums, as they did private ones. In 1871 in
England and Wales, for every 1,000 male pauper lunatics there were 1,242
female ones. Women who, if they had been men, might have been sent to
prison were joined by those who, if they had been men, might have been
sent to the workhouse. Aware of what was going on, some asylum
superintendents warned against housing hysterics for too long. Such
women, they claimed, “sometimes get too fond of the place, preferring the
dances, amusements, and general liveliness of asylum life... to the
humdrum and hard work of poor homes.”[1018]
The history of diagnoses over the past two centuries, since the advent
of psychiatry, strongly suggests that mental diseases are simply labels
invented to fit patients’ complaints into whatever intellectual framework
exists at any given time and place. Hence it is not surprising that they
follow a similar trajectory, exploding into public view and then, over time,
losing their appeal and import. Borrowing the metaphor of the logistic
curve from the business world is instructive here. A successful commercial
product usually starts out with a slow, gradual rise in business, followed by
a steep jump indicating a tremendous expansion in sales. As competitors
catch up and the market becomes saturated, however, the curve drops and
then flattens out. The logistic curve is a fitting framework for
understanding why new ways of expressing and classifying unhappiness
are constantly being invented, and why few mental diseases have retained
their hold for very long. Indeed, it was in this way that neurasthenia and
hysteria were condemned to disappear.
Of the aforementioned diseases, the only one that has succeeded in
evading extinction is anorexia. Its longevity may be due to the clear
physical symptoms that it presents. Alternatively, it is proof of how useful
the disease is to both patients and doctors. In the words of one “victim”
who for 16 years made her own life and that of her family a misery: “The
more they tried to take anorexia away, the more I hung onto it... it kept me
strong... without it, I would have nothing... do nothing... be nothing.” She
expected her relatives to discuss it constantly. When her family talked
about anything else, she felt offended.[1019] No wonder the
“epidemic”[1020] spread of this disease has given birth to an entire
industry.
Another factor that may have contributed to the decline of
neurasthenia and hysteria was World War I.[1021] As long as they were
regarded as female maladies par excellence, these diseases were treated by
means which as befitted females, most of whom visited the doctor out
of their own free will were comparatively mild. Even if an operation
was involved, it was carried out under the influence of anesthetics.
However, the war upset the balance between the sexes. In all armies that
fought in the war, hundreds of thousands of young men began to suffer
from what was known as shell shock. Their symptoms included extreme
fatigue, insomnia, weeping, trembling, bedwetting, impotence and its
opposite priapismus, blindness, stuttering, mutism, and paralysis of the
limbs. The German Army alone registered 613,047 cases of shell shock,
amounting to almost one in 20 of all those who passed through its ranks
during the war.[1022]
The appearance of vast numbers of male neurasthenics and hysterics
shook the medical wisdom of the age. Men were supposed to cope; now,
however, those affected were not women but soldiers who, having been
examined and found healthy, engaged in the manliest activity of all. Partly
because of the sheer number of cases, partly because of the effect which
men who evaded battle by displaying the symptoms of a mental
breakdown might have on the morale of those still in the trenches, armies
could not afford to treat them with kid gloves. Some armies insisted on
keeping them in camps close to the front. Others evacuated them and
concentrated them in rear-area bases. Most gave them a few days’ rest and
then subjected them to fairly tough regimes, including drill and fatigues.
Those who did not recover were subjected to electric shocks applied to
various parts of the body.
In both England and Germany, so severe were the shocks administered
by some doctors that they amounted to real torture. The real objective of
the treatment was less to bring about a “cure” than to suggest to the
recipients that the doctor would do whatever was necessary to bring it
about. Hence there could be no question of using anesthetics; on the
contrary, the idea was to inflict as much pain as the soldier could stand,
perhaps a little more. Gradually it became clear that the best way to treat
these patients — best in the sense that they could resume their function as
cannon fodder, regardless of how terrible they may have felt — was not to
permit them to rest far away from the battlefield.[1023]
From the point of view of female neurasthenics and hysterics, the
appearance of large numbers of male ones whose symptoms resembled
their own spelled disaster. No doubt the causes that gave rise to women’s
troubles be they oppression, discrimination or abuse were deep,
serious and deserving of all respect. Still, such personal tragedies were
dwarfed by the terrible ordeal men underwent. These men, often quite
young, faced the horror of a comrade’s brains being blown up all over their
body, or the very real possibility of being buried alive in a collapsing
trench. Some neurasthenic and hysterical soldiers suffered concussions as
shells burst nearby, perhaps slamming them against a wall, showering
them with debris, and taking away their breath before they could recover.
Others were temporarily blinded by gas — hysteria was a well-known
aftereffect of exposure to this weapon — or had their lungs permanently
damaged by it. Relative to such hellish experiences, the use of the term
“survive” in the context of problems such as sexual harassment is simply
obscene.
Several contemporary female novelists described the soldiers’
symptoms in lurid detail, shocking a public largely insulated from the
mental horrors of the battlefield. One such writer, Dorothy Sayers,
declared that once neurasthenia began to attack young, healthy men, it
ceased to be presentable and became “indecent.” Informed by doctors that
their problems were quite similar to “cases of functional disorder observed
by soldiers during the war,”[1024] female patients had their thunder stolen,
so to speak. Worse still, it had been shown that a cure of sorts could be
brought about by the use of some pretty brutal means.
Yet applying such rough methods to women let alone to troubled,
frail, middle-class women was unthinkable. Instead of being talked to
and soothed, they might actually find themselves twisting and screaming
with pain as an electrical current was passed through their bodies and a
hard-faced doctor told them that this proved they could, after all, walk or
speak. Much to the surprise of doctors,[1025] both the number of female
hysterics and the severity of the symptoms of those who remained
decreased very sharply.[1026]
As hysteria all but disappeared, a need was felt for another outlet for
female complaints. Rising to the occasion, psychiatric science provided it
in the form of schizophrenia. The founding fathers of schizophrenia were
three German “mad doctors,” as psychiatrists were popularly known: Emil
Kräpelin, Eugen Bleuler and Kurt Schneider.[1027] At first it met with
only moderate success, but after 1920 schizophrenia took off, and its
subsequent rise was spectacular. Along with bipolar disorder, also known
as manic depression, it became one of the two pillars of psychiatric
practice. As with neurasthenia and hysteria, though perhaps to a lesser
extent, the majority of patients were female.[1028]More than in the case of
neurasthenia and hysteria, its symptoms including a tendency to
isolation, incoherence, delusions, hallucination and violence directed
against the self and against others were considered dangerous. Clearly
schizophrenia was not to be trifled with. Patients were almost always
institutionalized. Between 1966 and 1968, the number of Americans
diagnosed and hospitalized as schizophrenics stood at no less than
850,000. Had psychiatrists had their way and the logistic curve been
allowed to continue rising, then the point would have come where half the
population was institutionalized under the care of the other half.
The other major mental disease that replaced neurasthenia and hysteria
was depression. Whereas schizophrenia never reached more than 2 percent
of the population,[1029] depression affected as many as one in four
people. The worst depressives were hospitalized. However, the vast
majority walked the streets, and if they did commit themselves to getting
help, did so voluntarily. Depression, like most afflictions, struck people of
both sexes. However, as with other such mental diseases, the majority of
those who suffered from it, or who claimed to suffer from it, were female.
[1030] In Britain it was considered to be “the paradigmatic female
illness.”[1031]
Those were the years when psychoanalysis spread like wildfire. The
key selling point about the method of treatment is that it is essentially a
talking cure — the attention-getter par excellence, one might say. By its
very nature it cannot and does not involve any coercion. Ordinarily
patients are encouraged, even expected, to be at ease. Lying on the couch
so that nothing can disturb them, they must let themselves go and say
whatever enters their heads. Even if the therapist is unsympathetic,
ultimately all he or she has at his or her disposal is words which the patient
is free to accept or reject. Perhaps because women are better at
“networking” — the politically-correct term for small talk — than men,
[1032] they were attracted to psychoanalysis like moths to a fire. Freud’s
own early clientele consisted almost entirely of women; one, indeed,
presented him with the famous couch.[1033] At London’s Tavistock Clinic
during the 1930s, nearly two out of three patients were female.[1034]
Psychoanalysts, as one might expect, responded by pampering their
female patients. Freud himself had to be warned by his daughter Anna,
herself a renowned psychoanalyst, against sacrificing himself to his
patients. As she saw it, the “millionairesses” might as well stay mad since
that was their only occupation.[1035] Probably another reason why
women were over-represented among those taking the talking cure was the
sheer amount of time it demanded. Originally psychoanalysis was a
comparatively brief affair. Even a serious problem was supposed to be
cured in about three months.[1036] Later it stretched like chewing gum,
and a standard analysis might involve six sessions a week and last for
several years.
All these sessions had to be paid for even if they did not take place. So
great were the demands of psychoanalysis in terms of both money and
time that access to it was limited to members of the middle and upper
classes. But whereas the interwar period all but eliminated the kind of
upper class man who enjoyed leisure, this was much less the case with
women. The higher the class to which a woman belonged, the less likely
she was to work outside the home and the more likely she was to have
servants work for her inside it. That left such women with more time to
devote to talking through their complaints.
At first, practically all psychiatrists and similarly qualified therapists
were male. During the 1880s they were joined by a trickle of women.
Taught and, to some extent, overseen by the men at the head of the
profession, women practitioners treated women patients with the same
amount of sympathy, and by the same methods, as male doctors. Few if
any of them developed an alternative view, let alone tried to empower their
sisters and deliver them from the domination of men.[1037] Freud’s own
followers included many women. He treated them as adopted daughters
and judged them based on the quality of their ideas. Perhaps because he
did not see them as rivals, if anything he was more open to their ideas than
to those of his male students.[1038] Women were proportionally more
numerous among psychoanalysts than in many other professions.[1039]
One of them, Karen Horney, caused Freud some uneasiness by suggesting
that “the flight from womanhood” and penis envy were the result, rather
than the cause, of women’s position in society. Still, even Horney objected
only to one part of psychoanalysis, rather than to the system as a whole
let alone saw it as designed to oppress women, as her feminist successors
did decades later.[1040]
Freud’s other female students accepted his tenets. One, Jeanne Lampl
de Groot, insisted that “the absence of a penis cannot be regarded as a
matter of secondary and trifling significance for the little girl, as Karen
Horney [thinks].”[1041] Rather, “the material” — meaning her own
clinical experiences and that which others brought to her attention —
proved that “penis envy is a central point.” It is “from this point that the
development into normal femininity begins.”[1042] Woman’s “wish for a
penis is the consequence of a biological datum that underlies her psychic
reaction of feeling inferior and is ‘rock bottom.’”[1043] A similar line was
taken by Helene Deutsch. As one of the first Austrian women to obtain a
medical degree, Deutsch considered herself, not without reason, “a leader
in female emancipation.”[1044] Good looking, highly intelligent and very
hard working, for 30 years she was considered the world’s foremost
authority on the psychology of women. To Deutsch, the clitoris was “an
inadequate substitute” for a penis.[1045]
Freud’s teachings garnered a wide following, particularly in the United
States. The climax came around 1970, a time when no middle-class family
seemed complete without at least one psychoanalyst in the mix[1046]
“yours, mine and ours,” as a popular joke went. At $50 per 50-minute
hour, the going price in New York City at the time, it was horrendously
expensive. It drained people’s pockets without necessarily giving anything
but jargon in return. If ever a profession was subject to the logic of the
logistic curve, it was psychoanalysis. In time, even the most obtuse
patients started wondering why they should spend years discussing the
origins of depression or anxiety or obsessive-compulsive disorder if a
psycho-pharmaceutical drug such as Trophanil, Elatrol or Prozac could
relieve the symptoms in a few weeks.
These doubts were reinforced by the rising second wave of feminism.
In the eyes of many, the Nazis in particular, psychoanalysis had always
been a racket. During the 1970s it was further decried as a racket directed
against women. Freud himself was pulled down from his pedestal. Instead,
he came to be seen as a man who had refused to take seriously the
complaints of women such as “Dora.” Some even suggested that he had
abused his patients.[1047] His colleagues came under similar fire. By
defining women as weaker and more dependent than men, it was claimed,
some psychoanalysts had belittled women. By defining women as strong
and resistant to men, other psychoanalysts had failed to take women’s
complaints seriously. Yet others had had the impudence to suggest that
children need a father as well as a mother.[1048] In an age when divorce
rates were soaring and divorced women were almost certain to obtain
custody, this last transgression on the part of psychoanalysts may have
been the worst of all.
Throughout these changes, which space only allows for presenting in
the barest outline, far more women than men continued to suffer from, or
at least ask to be treated for, most kinds of mental and psychosomatic
problems.[1049] Women formed the majority of patients at a time when
most of them did not work outside the home. Perhaps not surprisingly,
now that most women work outside the home, they still form a majority of
patients. In England in 1955 and 1956, almost twice as many women as
men complained of “debility and fatigue.” Among those suffering from
“neuralgia and neuritis,” the disproportion was similar.[1050] In the
United States in 1967, proportionally twice as many women as men were
under psychiatric care in general hospitals for “psychophysiologic and
psychosomatic disorders.”[1051]Later women accounted for 70 percent to
92 percent of depressives, and 73 percent of those suffering from
“delusional parasitism” that is, the feeling that they were infected by
some imaginary germs or bugs.[1052] As one female psychiatrist
explained in 1989, patients with “such popular non-scientifically
documented disorders” as total allergy syndrome and chronic fatigue
syndrome are usually “psychologically disturbed, well-educated, single
women, aged 30-50, in unhappy life circumstances.”[1053]
Among agoraphobics, women outnumbered men four to one.[1054]
Indeed, agoraphobia has been called a “housewives’ disease.” Hysteria and
neurasthenia having gone out of favor, few other syndromes were so useful
in disrupting family life and turning it into a misery. To quote a famous
female expert on the history of women’s mental afflictions,[1055] what
women were after was “attention, understanding, merciful relief, a
personal solution” to their troubles. Whether because men are conditioned
to aggressiveness and competition or simply because they were too busy
making a living, she says, women were unable to get it “in the arms of the
right husband.”[1056]
In reality, perhaps the greatest shortcoming of psychoanalysis was its
insistence on absolute honesty. Proceeding under the motto “truth will
make you free,” and using a technique — free association — designed to
generate as much liberty as a human being is capable of achieving,
psychoanalysis by its very nature is a voyage into the self. To feminists,
however, trying to make a woman — an “unsuspecting creature” — “seek
the cause [of her unhappiness] in herself” was an “extraordinary
confidence trick.”[1057] Much as they differed in other respects, all
feminists wanted to see women’s troubles placed on the shoulders of men.
Once the premise that patriarchy was to blame for women’s troubles was
accepted, it followed that male therapists were useless, or worse. Though
caused by men, women’s troubles were unique to them. Accordingly,
troubled women should be cared for by other women who could empathize
and sympathize with them, act as role models for them, and open up to
them about their own feminine troubles, which of course no man could
fully comprehend.[1058]
The idea that the world was a male conspiracy and that only women
could properly understand women led to a massive shift in the personnel
that made up the profession. Even as the number of psychiatrists began to
decline, that of psychiatric social workers began to rise. By 1985 it had
reached 55,000 in the United States alone. Five years later, America had
no fewer than 80,000 clinical social workers.[1059] Women formed the
majority among both psychiatric and clinical social workers. The shift was
accompanied by a massive outpouring of popular literature. It bore titles
such as Women Who Love Too Much, Men Who Hate Women, and The
First Wives Club. Regardless of whether they were meant to offer
“serious” advice or comic relief, all told their female readers that many,
perhaps most, men were louts. To get rid of them was the best a woman
could do. This was all the more the case if she could milk them for money
as well, or even better, make money by writing about the process and
telling other women how to follow in her footsteps.
Yet some problems have remained. In the brave new world of psychopharmaceuticals, instead of patients getting the doctor’s attention for years
on end as with psychoanalysis during its heyday a visit to today’s
clinic takes only a few minutes. As one woman treated for obsessivecompulsive disorder recounted:[1060]
I wanted to tell the Prozac doctor about my hands. I wanted to
splay them across his desk and say: “Look at them. What are
they seeking?” I wanted him to touch my hands, not really an
odd desire, the laying on of hands a practice as ancient as the
Bible itself.... Instead, he reached down, opened a desk
drawer, and pulled out a sample pill packet.
As she herself says, this was “asking a lot” from a busy doctor working for
an insurance company. Worse still, after years of treatment and several
hospitalizations that had resulted in a file “as thick as an urban telephone
book,” presumably it was impossible to know if and when she would turn
around and accuse the doctor of sexual assault. No wonder he kept his
distance and always stayed behind his desk. As of 2013, women who still
hanker for a “laying on of hands” and there are a lot of them must
turn either to a female therapist or to a husband.
For those still seeking a doctor interested in what their hands are
saying — one who would be “not only technician, but poet, priest,
theologian, and friend” — the choices are endless. While some therapists
still stick to Freud, most have now adopted other methods. They rang from
that of Carl Gustav Jung to that of Maharishi Siva Nadi Jothida Nilayam of
Poona. Therapists include, and treat, people of both sexes. Still, the
majority among both patients and, increasingly, therapists are women.
Unsurprisingly, an estimated 20 percent to 25 percent of therapists are
lesbian.[1061] It has also been claimed that, psychological disease by
psychological disease, women receive more attention and more treatment
than their “otherwise indistinguishable” male counterparts.[1062]
Therapists may receive patients either privately, for pay, or as part of
the myriad welfare schemes that are financed by the state. As usual,
women find it easier than men to attract welfare. The more lonely, abused,
battered or batty she is, the more likely she is to be treated for free. In
Quebec, and perhaps some other places as well, the State Health Service
will even pay for a woman to have cosmetic surgery — breast implants —
if she decides that her psychological well-being depends on it.[1063] In
this way, much of the mental health care business has turned into a system
whereby the state or various other organizations pay some bijoux
indiscrets to commiserate with others of their kind. Even general practice
has often turned into a talking session, with female doctors spending on
average twice as long with their patients as their male counterparts.[1064]
Men, as usual, pay either by supporting their female relatives or indirectly,
by way of their taxes. That, after all, is the role nature has destined them
for.
4. The Anorgasmic Woman
In society at large, women who for one reason or another feel they do not
get the attention they deserve conjure up a variety of mental health
symptoms and turn to therapists to have those symptoms treated. In
conjugal life, with or without a ring, women who for one reason or another
feel they do not get the attention they deserve can always deploy the
ultimate weapon in the war between the sexes: frigidity. For men it is the
cause of endless unhappiness. For women it is both a cause of unhappiness
and, as often as not, a means of expressing it.
The fact that frigidity is not the result of Western culture refusing to
grant the human female orgasm “undeniable status”[1065] should be clear
from its prevalence in a culture as different from the West as China. The
fact that it is not a Victorian invention intended to help men “contain their
hidden panic at the secret female appetite they feared”[1066] is evident
from its antiquity. Its existence was already known to Aristotle. More
detailed information comes from the Roman poet Ovid. Judging by his
self-description Ovid, who lived around the time of the birth of Christ, was
a playboy and a man about town. He spent as much time as he could
seeking women, seducing them, and making love to them. He celebrated
his activities in some of the finest poetry ever written. As regards female
frigidity, he had this to say:[1067]
So, then, my dear ones, feel the pleasure in the very marrow
of your bones; share it fairly with your lover, say pleasant,
naughty things the while. And if Nature has withheld from
you the sensation of pleasure, then teach your lips to lie and
say you feel it all. Unhappy is the woman who feels no
answering thrill. But, if you have to pretend, don’t betray
yourself by over-acting. Let your movements and your eyes
combine to deceive us, and, gasping, panting, complete the
illusion. Alas that the temple of bliss should have its secrets
and mysteries.
Nor can the matter really be cleared up by studying other animals. Since
insemination is vital to reproduction, why the males of sexuallyreproducing species ejaculate and why evolution has caused them to
experience that activity as pleasurable is perfectly clear. In the case of
females, however, orgasm is not biologically necessary. That leaves open
the question as to why it has evolved at all — if it did. Particularly in the
case of primates as our closest relatives, the question has given rise to
much controversy.[1068] In recent years, however, it seems to have been
settled by a series of studies. Judging by their behavior, expression and
heartbeat, among other indicators, it seems that female monkeys can
experience orgasm and do so regularly. Primate females, like human ones,
like to have sex at least partly because doing so is fun.[1069] But that fact
only makes the question why some human females do not have fun, or
only do so rarely, even harder to answer.
The male orgasm is brought about by applying friction to the
erogenous zones surrounding the penis. Aristotle knew the female orgasm
is also brought about by applying friction, but just how and to what end is
not entirely clear from his writings. In 1559, Renaldus Colombus, a doctor
at the University of Padua, told his “most gentle reader” of his discovery
that the clitoris was “preeminently the seat of woman’s delight.” His claim
was promptly disputed by his successor, Gabriele Fallopius (of Fallopian
tubes fame), who asserted that he, Fallopius, had discovered the clitoris
first. In the next century, both Fallopius and Colombus were taken to task
by yet another doctor, the Dane Kaspar Bartolin. He argued that the clitoris
had been known about since it was discovered by Galen in the 2
nd century,
if not earlier.[1070]
To “discover” the clitoris’ existence is one thing, but to proclaim its
importance as the “preeminent seat of woman’s delight” is another
entirely, and in that respect Colombus was clearly the first. Others soon
came to agree with him. In 1668 Bartholin’s Anatomy, a standard textbook
used in English universities, described the clitoris as women’s “chief seat
of delight in carnal copulation” and as crucial to orgasm. Twenty years
later, yet another doctor, the Frenchman Nicholas Venette, wrote that it
provided “the fury and rage of love... the seat of pleasure and lust.”[1071]
Yet another reference dates from 1836. Expressing the general consensus,
[1072] an English manual noted that “the lower part of the vagina and the
clitoris” were “the seat of venereal feelings from excitement.”[1073]
Neither Ovid nor the 1836 handbook explained what they meant when
they said that “some” women did not experience orgasm. Subsequent
doctors tried to be more precise. In 1844, the Englishman William Acton
wrote that they were “the majority.” One, the Frenchman Adam
Raciborski, claimed that as many as three-quarters of all women merely
endured their husbands’ embraces. Throughout the 19th century, apparently
the only figures based on a survey rather than on guesswork were provided
by an American woman, Clelia Duel Mosher, who worked at the
University of Wisconsin.[1074] Using a sample of 47 women, most of
them faculty wives, she concluded that about 20 percent of them had never
had an orgasm.[1075] Mosher’s conclusion was not that much different
from the results Alfred Kinsey obtained from his much larger survey of
American married women during the late 1940s. He found that 25 percent
did not experience orgasm during their first year of marriage. After 20
years together, however, the number was down to 11 percent.[1076] These
figures were in line with subsequent findings dating to the 1970s.[1077]
The more the 19th century advanced, the more frigidity tended to be
seen as a major social problem. Such was the view of Martin Charcot in
the 1880s, Richard Krafft-Ebing in the 1890s and, from that period
onward, Freud. All three agreed that women’s psychological troubles were
largely a result of their inability to achieve orgasm. As Freud put it,
psychoanalysis showed that a woman's entire psychological makeup
depended on whether or not she enjoyed sex.[1078] Karen Horney, the
famous feminist, agreed. In her entire career, she claimed, she had not seen
even “one [female] case without some functional disturbance of their
genital system,” including, above all, “frigidity in all degrees.”[1079] Left
unsaid by virtually all, of course, was the added unhappiness the women’s
sexual problems caused among the unfortunate men condemned by the
vows of marriage to live and sleep with them.
Some of the difficulties experienced by women were clearly the fault
of husbands who lacked a penis normalis, as one of Freud’s colleagues,
referring a patient, once put it.[1080]However, many difficulties could by
no means be attributed to male impotence, insensitivity or other assorted
defects. Presented with an endless parade of neurotic or frigid females,
each doctor according to his, and increasingly her, lights did what he or
she could to help and do so, what is more, without causing them to run
away as “Dora” had. Some doctors took Galen’s advice and masturbated
their patients to orgasm. This skill they found hard to master and
unpleasant to perform; that was why one of them, hoping to rid himself of
the “chore,” invented the vibrator.[1081] Others spent countless hours of
crushing boredom trying to make sense of their patients’ complaints, only
to find that, all too often, new symptoms appeared as fast as old ones could
be cured. The fact that the doctors’ efforts were not without merit, or at
any rate not considered without merit, is proved by the ability of some of
them to attract a large, primarily female following.
By that time Darwinism had come to rule the intellectual world.
Darwinism led to the idea that each biological phenomenon served a
function which accounted for its existence and without which it could not,
or should not, have evolved. In contrast to earlier times, it was now clearly
realized that conception did not depend on a woman reaching orgasm. This
raised the question of why the female orgasm existed in the first place. The
same question was also raised about the clitoris itself, which, after all,
plays no role in reproduction. In fact it may be, and often has been, excised
without impairing a woman’s fertility. It was Freud’s belief in evolution,
not his “patriarchal” views, which gave rise to his famous theory about the
two different kinds of orgasm. Decades before his findings were confirmed
by that great researcher, Shere Hite,[1082] Freud knew that the penis
invites masturbation in a way that the clitoris, which is hidden from view,
may not.[1083]
More than most people, Freud admired and tried to model himself on
“the great Darwin.”[1084] Confronted with a riddle that had long baffled
his predecessors and continues to baffle his successors, male and female
alike,[1085] he tried to identify the origins of a woman’s orgasm by
splitting female sexual awakening into two stages. A girl, he reasoned,
starts her sexual life by discovering the clitoris in the same way as a boy
discovers his penis, though perhaps at a later stage. Once she has
discovered her clitoris, she focuses her sexual pleasure on it. However, his
reasoning went, since stimulating the clitoris was not essential for
reproduction, doing so was an immature act. For a woman to become fully
mature, therefore, she had to move the center of her sexuality to the
vagina, where the penis could reach it. Doing so was a difficult feat, one
which by no means all women successfully accomplished.[1086]
For what it is worth, most of Freud’s female followers agreed with
him. To Jeanne Lampl-de Groot, abandoning the clitoris in favor of the
vagina was “an arduous task.”[1087] To Helene Deutsch, “the awakening
of the vagina to full sexual functioning is entirely dependent on the man’s
activity.”[1088] To Simone de Beauvoir, who did not study with Freud but
was strongly influenced by him, “the clitorid system” was “only indirectly
connected with normal coition.” To her, sexual maturity in a woman could
be produced “only through the intervention of the male.”[1089] All this
may prove that women, even when studying their own anatomy and
pleasure, tend to be “schooled”[1090] by men. That, or else those who hail
de Beauvoir as the herald of female sexual emancipation have never read
her book.
Over the years, perhaps no other part of Freud’s doctrines has been
subjected to so many attacks. The climax came in the years immediately
after 1966. It was then that William Masters and Virginia Johnson showed
that “clitoral and vaginal orgasms are not separate biological
entities.”[1091] Echoes of “the great orgasm debate” are still being heard
today.[1092] The discovery gladdened the hearts of feminists. They
quickly claimed that women were much more orgasmic than men — after
all, they could achieve orgasm many times in succession.[1093] Better
still, they did not even require the help of a penis to do so.[1094] The
result was an entire literature that turned the clitoris into the glory of
creation. In fact, by concentrating on the clitoris and pretending that the
penis was unnecessary, feminists deliberately falsified Masters and
Johnson. This is because, in the words of one female sexologist, the
clitoris does not stand on its own; instead it forms part of an “erotic
network” that also comprises the labia and the perineum.[1095] That is
why, the sexologist added, women who masturbate “usually stimulate the
entire mons area rather than concentrating on the clitoral body.”[1096]
Furthermore, to quote Masters and Johnson, “The fact that the clitoral
glans rarely is contacted by the penis in intravaginal thrusting does not
preclude the coital development of indirect clitoral involvement.” “Direct
or primary stimulation of the clitoris” by the penis is particularly easy in
the “female superior and lateral coital positions.” Still, “clitoral response”
was observed even during “coital activity” in the “knee chest” position,
which is what Masters and Johnson called a woman being penetrated from
behind. In other words, the fact that “the primary focus for sexual response
in the human female’s pelvis is the clitoral body” does not obviate the
“female... demand for continued active male pelvic thrusting during the
woman’s orgasmic experience.”[1097] Other researchers believe this
“demand” may explain why human males have the largest penises of any
primates.[1098]
But as Masters and Johnson recognized,[1099] Freud was right when
he said that sex cannot be understood without taking into account the part
played by emotions. On average, sex probably is more of an emotional
experience for a woman than it is for a man. One need only note the vast
industry specializing in selling real or imaginary sex to total strangers, an
industry that caters almost exclusively to men. Further proof has been
provided by the introduction of Viagra. Viagra’s success shows that men’s
impotence is largely due to organic causes, particularly those that prevent
blood from flowing into the penis. By contrast, female orgasmic capacity
does not depend on either the size or the position of the clitoris.[1100]
Countless studies have failed to explain why 43 percent of women are said
not to enjoy sex to the fullest.[1101] Experiments in administering Viagra
to anorgasmic women only showed that placebos can do equally well.
[1102] To be satisfied, it seems, women need more than a pill.
There are several logical explanations for why emotionally achieving
sexual satisfaction is more difficult for women than for men. Women, for
one, are on average physically weaker. Secluding themselves with a man,
they are more vulnerable than he is, to say nothing about the need to open
up their bodies and be penetrated. Second, more than men they have the
consequences of sex to consider. Not only can they become pregnant, but
they are more at risk of contracting venereal disease than are heterosexual
men. In the 1990s, AIDS became the fifth-leading cause of death for
American women of childbearing age.[1103] Thus, women have excellent
reason not to abandon themselves — the term speaks volumes — before
establishing “the most absolute trust in the transcendence of life,” as a
French feminist philosopher somewhat bombastically put it.[1104]
Should a woman fail to reach climax, then to the extent that medical
science can determine, almost certainly the problem is not physiological
but psychological.[1105] And the exact nature of women’s psychological
problems has given rise to an enormous body of literature. Freudhimself
originally believed that such problems were due to excitation of girls’
genitals at too early an age in plain English, sexual abuse. But as
Freud’s first and most important biographer noted, he tended to be much
too credulous when listening to his female patients.[1106] Later the
sessions he had with those patients caused him to abandon his sexual
abuse theory. “I was at last obliged to recognize that these scenes of
seduction had never taken place, and that they were only fantasies my
patients had made up.”[1107] In his later days, Freud simply gave up. He
admitted that 30 years of research into “the feminine soul” had not taught
him “what women want.” “The sexual life of adult women,” he lamented,
was “a dark continent” for psychology.[1108]
Others, however, did not hesitate to venture where Freud had been
reluctant to go. They came up with all kinds of explanations, proffering
advice to those who turned to them for treatment or bought their books.
[1109] Most such experts were male. However some, such as the
bestselling writers and activists Isabel Hutton and Marie Stopes, were
female. Remarkably enough, Stopes produced her principal work on the
subject of sex while she was still a virgin. More remarkable still, she
managed to remain a virgin and married at the same time.[1110]
Broadly speaking, the answers proffered by these experts on sex were
of one of two types. Some continued emphasizing abuse, both that which
had taken place years previous during childhood and that perpetrated
against a woman by her sexual partner. The difficulty of defining what
exactly constituted sexual abuse perpetrated against a woman by her
sexual partner made it a challenge to ascertain the validity of the charge.
One is reminded of a story writer Stefan Zweig told about one of his aunts.
Several hours after her wedding she stormed into her parents’ house,
screaming that her husband was a madman and had tried to take her
clothes off.[1111]And accounts of abuse that took place years previous,
based as they are on what psychologists termed “repressed memory,” are
more problematic still. The minimum one can say about such charges is
that they are often unreliable as Freud, to his chagrin, discovered.
Often, and some would say not often enough, such charges are regarded
with skepticism by psychologists, policemen, lawyers and judges.[1112]
The second type of answers proffered by the experts blames the
difficulties many women have in reaching orgasm on the way they were
educated. Partly because most people in modern societies consider
themselves enlightened, and partly because contraceptives are so easily
available, notions of chastity as a woman’s paramount virtue have lost
some of their force. Still, even in developed countries, the upbringing of
young women continues to reflect their vulnerability and the consequences
that sex may entail. The parent who recommends that his or her daughter
sleep with any man as long as he agrees to wear a condom has yet to be
born. However good the intentions behind educating girls in such a
manner may be, there is little doubt that it can be overdone and turned into
a form of abuse. It stands to reason that some women who, from childhood
on, have been subjected to endless tales of wicked men and the need to
resist them may find it hard to enjoy sex when they reach the point where
they are permitted to actually have it. Indeed, mothers have been known to
“castrate” their daughters, causing frigidity to pass from one generation to
the next.[1113]
Both these interpretations assume that frigidity is something from
which women suffer, a condition that, created by external pressures,
affects them against their will, persists through no fault of their own, and
causes them nothing but pain and embarrassment. But this assumption may
be incorrect, or only partly correct. For a great deal of women, frigidity
can very well be seen as part of their sex’s greater tendency to complain
about psychological problems from hysteria and depression to
neurasthenia and anorexia. Though there is no objective evidence that
women’s lives are harder than those of men, more women complain about
mental troubles in order to attract attention. Though only a very small
percentage of frigid women display an organic defect, a much larger
number complain about frigidity in order to get the attention of their
husbands or sexual partners.
Since many frigid women do reach orgasm by masturbation,
consciously or not their inability to do so during coitus may very well be a
punishment they inflict on men for the sins the latter may have committed.
Whether those sins are real or imaginary is, in the end, both unprovable
and irrelevant. After all, there is a sense in which she (or he) who feels
sinned against has been. Some women, we are told, deliberately use their
frigidity as “a useful tool with which [they] could gain leverage in sexual
relations.”[1114] Far from being ashamed of it or trying to overcome it,
they speak of it with “self-righteous complacency.”[1115] They even
reproach other women for not using it in order to crack the whip. At least
one wrote a book about her distaste for “genital thrashing about.”[1116]
Another believes that the vaginal orgasm has been forced on women as
part of “the androcentric model of sexuality.”[1117] For such women,
being brought to orgasm by a man, and especially by a man’s penis, is a
sign of weakness. Or else, by convincing him it is all his fault, they make
sure, or try to make sure, that he stay with them.
The doyenne of modern feminists, Simone de Beauvoir, knew these
problems first hand.[1118] Like many other feminists from Mary
Wollstonecraft on down,[1119] de Beauvoir grew up in a middle-class
family whose male head found it hard to provide and became the object of
his wife’s resentment. Determined never to be in her mother’s position, the
dutiful daughter decided to stand on her own economic feet and directed
her studies toward that end. Next she met Jean-Paul Sartre, fell in love,
and wished to marry him as the only man she considered worthy of her.
He, however, did not think he could be faithful, and was honest enough to
tell her so.[1120] That led to the famous pact under which each was free to
do as he or she pleased, as long as they told one another everything. If she
could not have him entirely for herself, at any rate she could share his
adventures.
From this point on, de Beauvoir was forced to keep up with her
soulmate’s petites camerades. She would have been inhuman if she had
not resented the arrangement, and indeed in her first novel, the main
character — based on herself — ends up by murdering her competition.
[1121] Though de Beauvoir had several affairs, she was unable to find love
with others. Approaching 40 years of age, she had still not discovered the
true joy of sex. Like so many others in her position, on occasion she must
have faked it.[1122] No wonder that, over time, she and Sartre lost their
sexual interest in each other.
In the end, de Beauvoir was rescued by an American writer, Nelson
Algren. She met him while touring the United States in 1947, and for
several years she kept up a relationship with him. In The Mandarins,
which was produced not long after her affair with him ended and which is
autobiographical in all but name, she wrote: “His desire transformed me. I
who for a long time had been without taste, without form, again possessed
breasts, a belly, a sex, flesh; I was as nourishing as bread, as fragrant as
earth. It was so miraculous that I didn’t think of measuring my time or my
pleasure; I know only that before we fell asleep I could hear the gentle
chirpings of dawn.”[1123]
No longer handicapped by her personal problem, de Beauvoir found
the courage to write about the essence of womanhood. The result was her
first bestseller, The Second Sex, in which she delved into the topic of
frigidity:[1124]
Resentment is the most common cause of feminine frigidity;
in bed the woman punishes the man for all the wrongs she
feels she has endured, by offering him an insulting coldness.
There is often an aggressive inferiority complex apparent in
her attitudes... She is thus revenged at once upon him and
upon herself if he has humiliated her by neglect, if he has
made her jealous, if he was slow in declaring his intentions, if
he took her as a mistress while she wanted marriage. The
grievance can flare up suddenly and set off this reaction even
in a liaison that began happily... Frigidity... would appear to
be a punishment that woman imposes as much upon herself as
upon her partner; wounded in her vanity, she feels resentment
against him and against herself, and she denies herself
pleasure.
Many men, de Beauvoir continued, suffer “torment” from their wives’
failure to be sexually responsive. And what starts from an inability to
climax, she noted, might easily result in women refusing to have any sex at
all.[1125] Meanwhile “many married women find amusement in confiding
to one another the ‘tricks’ they use in simulating a pleasure that they deny
feeling in reality; and they laugh cruelly at the conceited simplicity of their
dupes. Such confidences may often represent still more play-acting, for the
boundary between frigidity and the will to frigidity is an uncertain one.”
“In any case,” the oracle of feminism concluded, “they consider
themselves to lack sex feeling and thus they satisfy their
resentment.”[1126]
5. Conclusions
While everything in the this book indicates that women are indeed the
privileged sex, everything in the present chapter indicates that women are
the complaining sex. To paraphrase Nietzsche in Thus Spoke Zarathustra,
everything about women, and feminists in particular, is a complaint, and
the complaint has one cause: namely, the plain fact that a woman stands a
much better chance of getting her way by complaining than a man.
Thus understood, women’s greater tendency to complain about real
and imagined troubles follows directly from their relative physical
weakness and lesser degree of competitiveness. He whom God, nature or
hormones has made competitive and strong will, more often than not, take
what he can. She whom hormones, nature or God has made less
competitive and less strong is, more often than not, better off begging,
wheedling, maneuvering or complaining. And if all else fails, she can
always weep. For most women in most situations, experience shows this
tactic usually works. All other things being equal, the more readily she can
squeeze water out of her eyes, the better her prospects.
Such histrionics have earned perhaps the greatest ire from those
women who (while otherwise privileged) did not live off of the privileges
of their sex. Indeed, history abounds with examples of successful women
expressing nothing but contempt for their weaker sisters. Queen Artemisia
of Caria — the first known female commander, and a very successful to
boot — told her lord, Emperor Xerxes of Persia, that Greeks were as
superior to Persians as men to women.[1127] Queen Elizabeth I of
England cracked jokes about women.[1128] Mary Wollstonecraft, for her
part, called female authors “timid sheep.”[1129]
Timid sheep that they might be, women are hardly passive, unknowing
participants in their own drama. Women’s greater inclination to complain
about their troubles does not indicate that “the course of a woman’s mental
illness, be it schizophrenia or manic-depression, often is more
unpredictable and labile than that of a man.” Nor does it indicate that a
woman’s mind is, as one modern author put it, “truly a syncopated
pulse,”[1130] whatever that might mean. On the contrary, by developing
symptoms and clinging to them, women have proved they have an
excellent understanding both of the advantages and disadvantages that
result from their physical structure, on the one hand, and on the other their
position in society. If you cannot beat him who, on average, is stronger and
more competitive than you, you can always “manipulate”[1131] him by
making him feel guilty.
Normally the first prerequisite for a woman’s complaint to be crowned
with success is for her to be without a man. Should she have one, then
unless he abuses her it is assumed her main difficulty is over, given that
responsibility for her rests primarily on his shoulders. As long as she is not
a “whore” or a “slut” — and under the new rules of cross-examination,
even if she is — being without a man makes a woman helpless by
definition. If she is also seen as weak or sick, then so much the better for
her chances of getting help. From the time of Moses to that of Aid to
Families with Dependent Children, having children was often the joker in
the deck of cards. An unattached woman with children earns a much
bigger bonus than does her male counterpart. That is probably one reason
why most widowed and divorced fathers remarry as soon as they can.
Conversely, women sometimes have had children specifically in order to
obtain aid That aid might take the form of a man who was forced to marry
them; or of charity; or of social security; or of a variety of other benefits.
Finally, a woman whose troubles can be attributed to other people is more
likely than anybody else to receive assistance.
Underlying all such complaints, whether personal or societal, is an
unending quest for attention. Attention is something people of both sexes
crave, and there is no reason to believe that women do so more than men.
However, their paths to receiving attention differ fundamentally. In the
eyes of both men and women, almost the sole way men can attract
attention is by succeeding. In the eyes of both women and men, women
can attract attention almost equally well by failure or by complaining
about it. This may explain why, among those with an MBA, women are
said to be four times more likely to seek psychological help than men.
[1132] Behavior tolerated and even praised in the goose is, quite simply,
not acceptable in the gander. In the words of one female historian of
women,[1133] “If ‘depression’ is soon viewed as a meaningless catchall
category, another female malady will appear to take its place for another
generation.” Since psychoactive drugs took the drama out of most kinds of
mental trouble, her prophecy came to pass. A new way of drawing
attention had to be found. Various attempts were made, but none really
caught on.[1134] A change of course was called for; and sexual harassment
duly appeared.
Like mental trouble, women’s complaints about sexual harassment
often involve “a desire for recognition.” Such a desire runs “throughout
the interviews” conducted with them, reported one otherwise empathetic
male writer.[1135] Unlike mental trouble, this kind of complaining is
played out not in the privacy of the clinic but in the courtroom. And the
courts have become a safe haven for women; witness the fact that they are
often given the choice between a public trial and one conducted behind
closed doors.[1136] But like anything else, complaints about sexual
harassment are subject to the logistic curve, and as they, too, grow into a
meaningless catchall category, they will eventually recede in prominence.
As for what will come after sexual harassment, heaven knows. Who would
have guessed that, out of the attempts during the 1970s to prove that
women can do anything as well as men, there would be born the tearyeyed, hapless victims of sexual harassment of the 1990s and 2000s?
So strong is the determination to complain at all costs that “patriarchy”
is often damned if it does and damned if it doesn’t. If women are said to be
the second sex, then this is wrong. But if they are said to be the first sex,
then this is also wrong.[1137] If fathers embrace their daughters, they may
be accused guilty of child sexual abuse. But if they “ignore the little girl’s
sexuality,” then those girls will become “insecure about it.”[1138] If fewer
girls than boys go to school, then they are discriminated against. If more
girls go to school than boys, the girls’ options are being limited.[1139] If
women who sleep around are frowned upon, then there is a double
standard. If they are encouraged to do so, then “there’s license, there’s
terror.”[1140] If husbands do not give money to their wives, then this is
cause for complaint. But if they give them an allowance, then this is
“economic abuse.”[1141]
And there is more. If child allowances are instituted, then women are
discouraged from working.[1142] If corporations offer women paid
maternity leave, their jobs guaranteed upon return from a period of
absence which may last for years, part-time jobs, flexible hours, special
training courses, and opportunities to work from home, then they are
deploying these devices to prevent women from getting ahead.[1143] If
there are no laws protecting women at work, then this is oppression. When
there are such laws, then this proves that men are trying to justify
“domination” in the name of chivalry.[1144] Women who are not given
their day in court against men who allegedly harassed or abused them
complain. Women who are given their day in court also complain, this
time about the “psychic strain” that testifying implies.[1145] Some
feminists have even complained that the law’s much more lenient
treatment of women is a male tactic designed to “slight,” “pathologize”
“depoliticize” and “trivialize” them.[1146] As the late novelist Doris
Lessing, herself a feminist, put it:[1147] “Generally it is the most stupid
and ignorant women who throw mud at the most courteous and intelligent
men.”
The supreme form of complaint is attempted suicide. Worldwide,
about four times as many women as men try to kill themselves. That does
not prove they really want to die; rather, we are told, many if not most
such attempts are directed “toward human contact and life.”[1148] If it is
true that one in six British women try to kill themselves before they are 25
years old, they seem to be remarkably incompetent at it.[1149] With men,
the situation is different indeed. Knowing that if they complain they are
much more likely to be met with indifference or contempt, far more of
them pretend they are well.[1150] Men who do see a mental health worker
often start by saying that they “do not want to talk about it.”[1151] Instead,
using drugs or alcohol, they self-destruct far more often than women do.
[1152] Ever since statistics on suicide began to be compiled at the end of
the 19th century, it has been clear that men are more likely to kill
themselves than women.[1153] By the 1960s, the phenomenon had been
documented in Australia, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, England,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Japan, Norway, Scotland,
Sweden, Switzerland and the United States.[1154] Worldwide, in the first
years of the 21st century three-and-a-half times as many men as women
committed suicide.[1155]
In that they are free to complain, as in so much else, women are the
privileged sex. That is especially the case if they are young, if they are
beautiful, and if they have mastered the fine art of appearing vulnerable.
And for those who can blame their troubles on a man, all the better for
them. Such a woman obtains license to engage in the craziest behavior; in
the case of Princess Dianathat included such misguided acts as selfinduced vomiting, throwing herself down stairs while pregnant, cutting
herself with a lemon slicer, stabbing herself in the arms and chest with a
penknife, or crashing into the glass door of a cupboard. The crazier she
acts, the more attractive she becomes, and the larger the number of males
who dream about rescuing her. As to her man husband the supposed
cause of all her troubles his one sin was that he was prohibited from
marrying the woman he loved. Still, he was supposed to keep a stiff upper
lip; his pain simply did not count. So it has always been, and so unless
the nature of people of both sexes changes suddenly and fundamentally
it will always be.
Conclusion
The most important conclusion from this study is that women, though not
the equals of men in some respects, always and everywhere have been
more than equal in others. For every disadvantage under which women
labor, there is a privilege they alone enjoy. For every man who has to bear
hardship, there was and is a woman who did not share in it, or who only
shared in it to a lesser extent. Some of women’s privileges seem to be
biologically based, but many others are socially constructed.
Another possible conclusion from the present study is that penis envy
really exists. How else to explain why it is that, in the face of
overwhelming evidence and often enough their own personal experience,
[1156] millions of women claim that men have it better? How else to
explain why women insist on participating in any and all male vices, from
killing defenseless animals[1157] to getting an “ego boost” by watching
naked strangers of the opposite sex dance?[1158] Or why women do
whatever they can to enter even the most unpleasant male occupations,
from climbing telephone poles to fighting in war, and in so doing
sometimes risk life and limb? Or why, for that matter, at least one wellknown feminist has expressed joy at the “genderquake” which, in some
advertisements, caused “phallic objects... to emerge... from women’s
groins?”[1159] One can only surmise that Freudmay have been right after
all that is, that women do in fact crave “the obvious ‘extra’ that [men]
have.”[1160]
If the campaign to show that women are oppressed is so riddled with
nonsense, then why has it succeeded to the point that, in today’s developed
countries, most people can no longer even imagine that much of it might
be false? One reason is the sheer persistence with which it has been
conducted. Ours, after all, is a democratic age. Since we are all supposedly
equal, a failure by some people to achieve as much as others must result
from discrimination, and not from other factors such as hormonal
differences. While feminists did not invent this strategy, perhaps the reason
why they have been more successful than most in using it is precisely
because they are women. In other words, their success is itself one more
proof of their privileged position in society.
Perhaps more important still, it is now almost 70 years since any
developed country has engaged in a serious war of the kind that could even
remotely endanger its national existence. Now if there is anything in the
world that can lead to a truce in the battle between the sexes, it is war.
When Simone de Beauvoir visited Israel in the spring of 1967, she was
surprised, and not a little angered, to find that Israeli women would not
listen to what at the time struck them as outrageous nonsense.[1161] War
is an unfavorable breeding ground for feminism because, as long as it
lasts, most women sit safely at home while men are obliged to fight and
die. War is an unfavorable breeding ground for feminism because, as long
as it lasts, women desperately need men to defend them. Finally, war is an
unfavorable breeding ground for feminism because, as Aristotle wrote of
Sparta,[1162] while the men are away on campaign women do exactly as
they please.
In other words, feminism is a tree that will only grow in the luxury of
peace. That is as true today as it was as under the Pax Romana, when
women enjoyed greater rights than they had under the Republic. It was
equally true during the last years before World War I, when suffragettes
argued that, since war was on its way out, women deserved to vote.[1163]
If the price of peace is indeed the rise of feminism, as some 19th century
philosophers thought, then perhaps it is a price well worth paying.
As of 2013, no threat that would seriously disturb the peace of any
developed country looms on the horizon. In such an environment, one of
two very different outcomes can be expected: Either women and men grow
further apart, or feminism as we know it collapses under the weight of its
own contradictions.
First, the former. The ongoing barrage of feminist complaints, in
particular those concerning sexual harassment, may very well lead to a
growing separation between the sexes. In some spheres, integration has
already been replaced by its opposite. Even as some women use the courts
to force their way into men’s schools, others are demanding schools that
will cater exclusively to women.[1164] Perhaps the day is not far off when
we will again see separate workplaces (as in the late 19th century); separate
transport (as in Orthodox Jewish communities and in some Indian cities);
separate schools (as during most of history); separate religious institutions
(as in Christian and Buddhist monasteries); and separate medical
treatment, as when doctors treating the womenfolk of Muslim rulers were
only allowed to see an arm stuck through a hole in the wall.
Already now, it is a brave male doctor who agrees to treat female
patients unless a female nurse is present in the room and other precautions
are taken. Already now, it is a brave male university professor who allows
his female student to close his office door while he advises her on her
paper or thesis. Though most would be loath to admit it, many professors
would prefer that female students disappear from their classrooms, so that
they can concentrate on their work without fear of being accused of
harassment. U.S. Marines are likewise terrified that the new regulations
concerning women in combat will lead to such charges.[1165] In these and
other fields, the only people not aware of the danger are those who will
soon find out.
Society’s rules already prevent both men and women from
communicating as freely as they did several decades ago. At school, the
lesson that females are frail flowers and will suffer permanent
psychological damage if they so much as overhear a naughty word being
said now starts to be hammered in when children are 5 years old. At the
other extreme, the U.S. Air Force once went so far as to jail a married
couple because, during their courtship, the woman had been under the
man’s command. Instead of trying to improve communication between the
sexes, in many ways we are doing what we can to prevent it from taking
place.
Instead of liberating women, we assume they are so vulnerable that
they cannot look at a picture of a naked person without suffering a hysteric
fit. Instead of empowering them, we present them as too foolish to know
what a male acquaintance wants of them and too weak to tell him so.
Observing the way things have changed since the 1970s, one might
conclude that advanced countries have decided to go back to Victorian
times when, among the upper classes, for an unmarried woman to be alone
with a man was considered scandalous. Or perhaps that, given the inability
of people of both sexes to keep out of each other’s way and avoid
misunderstandings as to what constitutes consent, the Victorian doctrine of
separate spheres is, in fact, the best there is.
Since boys tend to do better in single-sex schools than in mixed ones,
[1166]in case separate spheres make a comeback it is boys who have the
most to gain. Since men will still be needed to do most of society’s
productive work, as well as to defend it against internal and external
enemies, it is women who have more to lose. The higher the class to which
any woman belongs, the greater the likelihood that renewed segregation
will cause her to retreat into the home if she left it in the first place, that
is, since of all members of the human race, these ladies are the least likely
to work for a living. The process may well cause women to lose both their
earning power and the freedom to go out and about. Women may also be
forced to submit to restrictions on the clothes they can wear and the
behavior they can engage in. The more vulnerable to harassment they
claim to be, the more likely this is to happen.
The second possible outcome from the peace that by and large reigns
over today’s developed countries is that feminismwill collapse under the
weight of its own contradictions. Today, as in the past, men and women
want each other and cannot live without each other. Today, as in the past,
for a woman to succeed in her career while also looking after her home is a
challenge only a minority can successfully meet and those who do meet
the challenge are often left very, very tired. Today, as in the past, few
women, and feminists least of all, want to have men who “do not aim for
occupational pinnacles or positions of authority and... do not want to head
households or be husbands and fathers”[1167] let alone want to have
men who are economically dependent on them. And today, as in the past,
the more successful a woman, the less likely she is to have either a
husband or children.[1168] It is almost as if these women do what they can
to wage war against their own genes.
As far as the great majority of women are concerned, feminism seems
to be coming up against the fundamental clash between equality and
privilege.[1169] He or she who demands the former cannot have the latter.
She or he who demands the latter cannot have the former. Should women
achieve true equality, then many of their privileges will be lost. Many,
perhaps most, can expect both their quality of life and life expectancy to
drop sharply. This is especially true of married women who, as long as
they stayed married and often even if they did not, have always been
carried on the shoulders of men. From Alexandra Kollontai and Simone de
Beauvoir to Germaine Greer and Andrea Dworkin, perhaps much of
feminism should be understood as an attempt by women who failed to
attract and keep a man to avenge themselves on their more fortunate
sisters. Mary Wollstonecraft did it by making those who preferred raising
children over a career to feel as if they were a cross between nincompoops
and criminals. Adrianna Rich did it by trying to turn them into lesbians.
And Gloria Steinem did it by convincing them that marriage was bad for
them (before she got married, that is).
Many women, in short, would first sacrifice equality before giving up
on their sex’s privileges. At least some female authors have begun to
demand that women be given “more than equal treatment” in a whole
variety of areas from reserved parking spaces and child custody to special
rights in educational institutions and courts of law.[1170] In the United
States, millions of women turned against the Equal Rights Amendment, a
key reason it was never ratified.[1171] Today many women fear, with good
reason, that equality before the law may cause the number of female
offenders who are sent to prison to increase, and the conditions under
which they are held to deteriorate.[1172] It has even been suggested that
girls from traditional homes are less likely to be arrested than those raised
in egalitarian ones or by women on their own.[1173] If this is true, then
“patriarchy” may actually be good for young females.
At the same time, some women are realizing perhaps because so
many women have taken up paid work and begun to see men’s lives close
up that those lives are not all fun and games. To misquote three leading
feminists, the great majority of women do not want to play in the male
“ballfield.”[1174] Nor do they demand a share in male “potency” and the
“agony” of men.[1175] Rather, many of them are content to enjoy their
privileges; stay at, or return to, their homes; spend their days raising their
children and cultivating their gardens; and come as close to the Platonic
idea of happiness in contemplation as anybody can. For these women,
feminism in all its variations holds little appeal. This is in part so
because very often it demands that they betray their trust as the daughters,
sisters, wives and mothers of men.
Another reason why feminism may eventually implode is because of
the way feminists treat women who refuse to follow their call (and vice
versa). Working women accuse non-working women of not pulling their
weight in the cause of liberation. Non-working women, for their part,
accuse working ones of not being women at all.[1176] In some surveys,
over half of women say that other women had treated them unethically in
the workplace. Four out of five women claim that “female bosses [are]
often unsupportive” and prefer not to work for them.[1177] Women often
devalue their sisters’ work, as by calling household work a
“pseudoscience”[1178] and referring to “caring for the young” as “animal
functions.”[1179] Finally, it was self-styled “power feminists” who
invented the term “victim feminists” to pejoratively describe women who
did nothing but complain.[1180] As no less a figure than Simone de
Beauvoir declared, “Women are pitiless toward each other.”[1181]
If feminism does indeed recede into the dustbin of history, then
perhaps the loss to both men and women, but especially to women, will
not be all that great. Listen to Betty Friedan, who may have done more to
jumpstart the modern feminist movement than any single other person,
describing what her life looked like in the late 1950s, before she and others
raised the standard of revolt:[1182]
All the years I was working on The Feminist Mystique, I
would blithely stop writing when my little daughter came
home from school or my boys were in a Little League or
basketball game, or to make a martini when my husband got
home, fix dinner, argue, go to the movies, make love, join an
expedition to the supermarket or a country-auction on
Saturday, organize a clambake on the beach at Fire Island,
take the kids over the battlefield at Gettysburg, or camping on
Cape Hatteras the stuff of family life.
To more than a few people of both sexes, this might not sound like such a
bad deal. It might actually sound rather appealing, particularly if the
alternative is wasting several hours each day battling other drivers on the
highway, spending the time between commutes in some factory or office
doing work that one does not like for a boss whom one cannot stand, all in
return for wages that always feel as if they are just sufficient to keep one
functioning with little left to spare.
Whatever the future may hold for women, what it has in store for men
is perfectly clear: Men will continue the pursuit of power, fame and riches
so that they can lay their gains at the feet of one or more women. They will
continue to be treated more harshly by parents, at school and by other
institutions whose purpose is to prepare people for adult life. They will
also continue to work more, and harder than, women, carrying out a
wholly disproportionate number of dirty, dangerous tasks and suffering a
wholly disproportionate number of accidents as a result. Whether
individually or collectively, or both, men will continue to support women
economically by means of whatever mechanisms exist at any time and
place. Without public money, which is made up overwhelmingly of the
contributions of men, most feminist organizations would go bankrupt.
Faced by the rigor of law, men will continue to be treated much more
harshly than women. Faced by the horror of war, men will continue to die
so that women may live. In these and countless other ways, men will
continue to do what they can to give women easier, better, more
comfortable and longer lives than men themselves enjoy. All the while,
listening or quite often, trying not to listen to women’s complaints
about anything and everything, including them.
We men well realize that nature, having made us, as Nietzsche put it,
the “unfruitful animal”[1183] and forced us to compete for women, has
turned us into the superfluous sex. Giving us larger and more robust
bodies, it has also destined us to act as beasts of burden. Our need of, and
love for, women being as strong as it is, most of the time we do not really
mind the fact that they are privileged in so many ways. Nor, in our heart of
hearts, would we like the situation to change. After all, it was women who
gave us life. In a way, all we are doing is returning a debt. This is true even
if the burden is occasionally heavy, and even if while carrying it we
sometimes have to lay down our lives. Ceasing to support women, we
would lose not just our existence but our self-respect. Perhaps the real
reason why women have never fought in war is because, as Hector told his
wife, we men would rather die than watch them dying. To quote an Indian
proverb, where women are worshipped, there the gods dwell. It would be
nice, though, if from time to time, amid the torrents of invective feminists
spew at us, we occasionally heard a pleasant female voice saying “thank
you, Mate.”
Index
Abelard
and homosexuality, 151
abortion, 99, 149
Achilles, 9, 203
Acton, William
and frigidity, 270
Adam, 75
Addams, Jane, 254
adultery, 150
Africanus, Scipio Cornelius, 189, 200
agoraphobia, 265
Aid to Dependent Children, 138
Aid to Families with Dependent Children, 139, 178, 243, 281
Alcinous, 9
Alexander the Great, 200
Alfonso X, of Castile, 152
Algren, Nelson, 279
alimony, 125, 126
Amazons, 39, 203, 218
cease fighting, 204
Anderson, Pamela, 231
Andromache, 9, 195
Anne, of England, 220
anorexia, 254, 258, 277
Ansell, Charles, 233
Anselm, St.
and homosexuality, 151
Anthony, Susan B., 158
Aphrodite, 9
Apollonia, 116, 117
apprenticeship, 131
Apuleius, Lucius Saturninus, 77
Arbeit macht frei, 75
Arctinus, 203
Ares, 9
Aristotle, 10, 119, 269
Artemis, 9, 205
Artemisia, queen, 281
articles of war
and women, 199
Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor, 135
Athene, 9
Aurelian, emperor, 146
Auschwitz, 24
female guards at, 32
Ayala, Balthazar, 200
baby boom, 100
Barbarella, 205
Barbed Wire, 205
Bartolin, Kaspar, 270
Bauer, Ida, 257
Bäumer, Gertrude, 22, 26
Bayard, Pierre de, 200
Beard, George, 253
Beauvoir, Simone de, 3, 4, 53, 162, 245, 278, 287, 290
and frigidity, 279
Bebel, August, 96
Beccafumi, Dominico, 200
Bede
and homosexuality, 151
Bedlam, 250
ben Yair, Elazar, 195
Benedict, St., 74
Ben-Gurion, David, 187
Bicêtre, 132
bijoux indiscrets, 268
Blary, Isabeau, 15
Bleuler, Eugen, 260
Bloody Mary, 154
Bobbitt, Lorena, 175
Bonaparte, Marie, 256
Bonnet, Honoré, 199
Bouvier-Kennedy-Onasis, Jaqueline, 240
Bradley, Mary E., 39
Brandeis, Louis, 88
breast cancer, 228
bride-service, 46, 47
brides-wealth, 47, 114, 242
Brondstraedes Hospital, 132
Brownmiller, Susan, 21
Brüning, Heinrich, 28
Bryn Mawr College, 64
Buck, Pearl, 83
Bund Deutscher Frauen, 22
Burdina, Galina, 207
Burnet, Anna, 131
Cammens, Lisa, 24
Campanella, Thomas, 79
camp-followers, 189
Catherina de Medici, 17
Celeste, Richard
pardons female murderers, 175
Chagla, M. C, 181
chain gangs, 156
Charcot, Martin
and frigidity, 271
charivari, 167
Charles V, emperor, 16
Chesler, Phylis, 251
child allowances, 140
child custody
in the ninteenth century, 176
in the twentieth century, 177
in traditional societies, 176
unmarried couples, 177
children
illegitimate, 133
Chodorow, Nancy, 35
Cinderella, 76
Cino da Pistoia, 152
Circe, 76
circumcision, 56
clitoridectomy, 256
Clovis, 147
coeducation, 61
Colombus, Renaldus, 270
conscription, 187, 190
in Israel, 188, 194
Constans, emperor, 151
Constantine I, emperor, 150
cosmetic surgery, 268
Cuchulainn, 46, 47, 206
Cuomo, Andrew, 175
Cuomo, Mario, 175
Dalton, Katherine, 161
Daniels, Josephus, 190
Dante Alighieri, 152
Demeter, 9
depression, 261, 277, 282
Deutsch, Helene, 35, 263
and frigidity, 273
Diana, Princess, 240, 285
Dickens, Charles, 88
Dionysus, 11
divorce, 97, 119, 176, 264
initiated by women, 126
men pay for, 124
domestic service, 86, 135
domestic violence, 167, 174
and reverse spouse abuse, 174
Dora. See Bauer, Ida
double burden, 103
dowries, 117, 136
in Rome, 118
in the Renaissance, 118
Dungeons and Dragons, 205
Dworkin, Andrea, 21, 290
Easter Rising, 207
Edward III, of England, 148
Edward VI, of England, 17
Elatrol, 264
Elizabeth I, of England, 17, 281
Elphinike, 10
Engels, Friedrich, 87, 95
Equal Rights Amendment, 128, 290
E-quality, 106
equality trap, 127
Erasmus, Desiderius, 57, 59
Euripides, 8
Eve, 75
executions
of men, 168
Fallopius, Gabriele, 270
Farr, William, 229
Feder, Gottfried, 22
feminism, 3
a product of envy, 290
and rape, 179
and upper class women, 291
and working-class women, 111
complaints of, 283
future of, 287, 289
in the Soviet Union, 100
in Weimar Germany, 21
second wave, 39, 264
Fiorina, Carly, 4
Fitzalan, Elizabeth, 148
Flynn-Boyl, Lara, 169
fornication, 150
Fourier, Charles, 79
Frauenfrevel, 154
Freud, Anna, 262
Freud, Sigmund, 100, 245, 256, 262, 264, 267, 275, 286
and Darwinism, 272
and frigidity, 271
Freya, 76
Friedan, Betty, 2, 20, 42, 100, 292
Galenus
and frigidity, 272
Gearhart, Sally, 39
George III, of England, 248
German Peasants’ War, 206
Gilligan, Carol, 35
Goebbels, Joseph, 28
Golden Bull, 199
Gorbachev, Mikhail S., 99
Göring, Hermann, 29
Gratian
and homosexuality, 151
Great Depression, 28, 92, 135
Great Leap Forward, 83
Greer, Germaine, 21, 230, 290
Grosz, Georg, 187
Grumbach, Argula von, 153
Grummet v. Rushen, 166
Gulf War
and female soldiers, 194
Hanfstängel, Helene, 23
Hayden, Carl, 181
Hector, 9, 195
Hegel, Georg Friedrich, 113
Helene, 9
Helios, 146
Hellyard, Thomas, 148
Henry IV, of England, 148
Henry VIII, of England, 154
Hera, 9
Heracles, 72
Hermann, Liselotte, 24
Hess, Rudolf, 23
Hill Anita, 172
Himmler, Heinrich, 25
Hitler, Adolf, 21, 28, 207
and feminism, 32
views on women, 22, 23, 29
Hogan, Joe, 180
Holland, Constance, 148
homosexuality
in Judaism, 151
in Nazi Germany, 152
in Rome, 151
in the Middle Ages, 152
in the nineteenth century, 152
in the Soviet Union, 153
Hoppman, Antoine, 26
Horatius, Quintus Flaccus, 78
Horney, Karen, 263
and frigidity, 271
household services, 101
Hutton, Isabel, 276
hysteria, 255, 265, 277
decline of, 258
Ibn Battuta, Muhammad, 59, 114, 150, 218
Iliad, 9, 184, 195
industrial accidents, 229
Ingle, Sue, 207
initiation rites, 55
women, 56
Innocent VIII, Pope, 14
Ismail the Bloodthirsty, 40
Isomachos, 12
Italy
Maternity Insurance Act, 140
Jacob, 46, 218
James I, of England, 15
John Chrysostom, St., 151
Johnson v. Phelan, 166
Johnson, Virginia, 273
Joseph, 51
Jung, Carl Gustav, 267
Justinian, emperor, 151
and homosexuality, 152
Kadavergehorsam, 184
kibbutzim, 84, 110
Kinder, Küche, Kirche, 20
kindergartens, 83
Kinsey, Alfred
and frigidity, 271
Kipling, Rudyard, 236
Kollontai, Alexandra M., 96, 290
Koran, 113
Köstlin, Beate, 31
Krafft-Ebing, Richard
and frigidity, 271
Kräpelin, Emil, 260
Krupskaya, Nadezha K., 96
La Salpetrière, 132
Laban, 46, 218
labor
as punishment, 75, 94
history of, 72, 74
Lampl de Groot, Jeanne, 263
Leah, 46
Lebensborn Institute, 25
Lenin, Vladimir I., 96
lesbianism, 151
in Judaism, 151
in Nazi Germany, 153
in Rome, 151
in the Middle Ages, 151
in the Soviet Union, 153
Lessing, Doris, 284
levirate, 113
Ley, Robert, 22
life expectancy, 224, 225, 229, 241, 244
among the nobility, 232
in Rome, 212
in the Middle Ages, 212
in the nineteenth century, 222, 233
Livre de bienfaisance nationale, 132
Longinus, Casius, 146
Louis XIV, of France, 186
Lowys, Elizabeth, 17
Luther, Martin, 74, 113
Magnus, Albertus, 68
Maimonides, 151
maleficia, 14
Malleus Maleficarum, 15
Mann, Thomas, 42
Margaret of Austria, 16
Margaret of Parma, 17
Markievicz, Constance, 207
marriage, 48, 176, 177
common law, 123
in Hellenistic Egypt, 116
Martialis, Marcus Valerius, 57
Martineau, Harriet, 80
Marx, Karl, 95
Mary of Hungary, 17
Mary, Queen of Scots, 17
Masada, 195
Masters, William, 273
masturbation, 277
matriarchy, 237
Maudsley, Henry, 158
McCallum, Mary, 131
Mead, Margaret, 112
Medb, 46, 206
Medea, 146, 157, 161
Melville, Herman, 51
men
and Aid to Dependent Children, 138
and Aid to Families with Dependent Children, 139
and domestic violence, 173
and emigration, 214
and family income, 120
and imprisonment, 155, 156, 164, 165
and industrial accidents, 229
and labor, 77, 78, 81, 83, 85, 88, 102, 222, 236, 242
and martial law, 189
and medical care, 219, 227, 241
and mental disease, 251, 254
and punishment, 154, 163, 167
and Salic law, 147
and sexual offenses, 151
and Social Security, 139
and sport, 231
and suicide, 284
and World War I, 90
and World War II, 93
as casualties in war, 191
as living ATMs, 143
as POWs, 198
as providers, 112, 217
as victims of crime, 230
chivalrous towards women, 208
doomed to competition, 44, 47
education of, 53, 55, 56, 60, 62, 68
neglect of, 36
physiological characteristics of, 79, 211
sexual initiation of, 42
subject to military service, 184
the dispensable sex, 38
Menelaus, 9
mental disease
history of, 246, 249
Middleton, Kate, 240
midwives, 219
military service
under feudalism, 185
Mill, John S., 87, 95
Miller, Henry, 49
Millett, Kate, 21, 245
Mitchell, Silas Weir, 254, 257
Mohammed, 218
Monte di Pieta, 129
More, Thomas, 78, 186
morning-after gift, 114
Mortimer, Roger, 147
Moses, 14, 281
Mosher, Clelia Duel
and frigidity, 271
mothers’ pensions, 137
Muller v. Oregon, 88
Murray, Jean, 131
Napoleon Bonaparte, 189, 248
National Association of Social Workers, 137
National Institutes of Health, 228
Nationalsozialistische Frauenschaft, 24
Nausicaa, 9
neurasthenia, 253, 255, 265, 277
decline of, 258
Newcomer, Mabel, 64
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 23, 38, 280, 293
Nightingale, Florence, 4
Norway
Sickness Insurance Act, 140
Oberlin College, 63
Odysseus, 9
Odyssey, 9, 76, 233
Oedipus complex, 38
orgasm
female, 273
Orwell, George, 91, 216
Ovidius, Publius Naso, 270
and frigidity, 269
Paris, of Troy, 9
paternity tests, 125
patriarchy, 3, 8, 158, 283
and witch-hunting, 13
Peleus, 9
Peloponnesian War, 8, 199
Penelope, 9, 233
penis envy, 286
Penthesilea, 203, 205, 206
Pericles, 8, 10
perinatal death, 213
decline of, 220, 226
Perkins Gilman, Charlotte, 39, 254
Perkins, William, 14
Persephone, 9
Petronius, Gaius Arbiter, 78
Philiscus, 116, 117
Phryne, 146
Pinel, Philippe, 248
Plato, 8, 10, 52, 78
pleading the belly, 154
Plutarch, 119
poor relief, 136
pornography, 49
gay and Lesbian, 49
Potiphar, 51
Pre-Menstrual Syndrome Defense, 161
press gangs, 186
Priam, 9, 203
primates, 48, 52
and orgasm, 269
prisonsers of war, 198
Prometheus, 145
prostate cancer, 228
prostitutes
in prison, 155
redeemed, 130
Protestantism, 154
Prozac, 264, 267
psychiatry, 245, 248
psychoanalysis, 245, 262, 266
qawwamun, 113
Quakers, 248
Quintus Smyrnaeus, 205
Rachel, 46
Raciborski, Adam
and frigidity, 270
Ramses III, 79
rape, 50, 164, 167, 169, 178, 201
and discrimination against men, 170
and violence, 179
and war, 196
gang, 171
in Rome, 172
Ravensbrück, 24
Reagan, Ronald W., 139
Reil, Johan, 249
Reitsch, Hanna, 31
repartimiento, 78
Rich, Adrianna, 290
Riefenstahl, Leni, 31
Ritalin, 69
Roche, Sophie von la, 234
Rosenberg, Arthur, 22
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 8, 248
Russ, Joanna, 39
Sabbath, 14
Salic law
and men, 147, 149
and women, 147
Sanherib, 198
Santissima Annunziata della Minerva, 130
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 278
Sauckel, Fritz, 29
Sayers, Dorothy, 260
schizophrenia, 260, 261
Schneider, Kurt, 260
Scholz-Klink, Gertrude, 24
Schottland, Charles, 137
Second Geneva Convention, 201
Sempley, Ann, 131
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, 78
sex ratio
and shortage of men, 210
in America, 214
in Athens, 217
in the Early Modern Age, 221
in the Middle Ages, 221
in the nineteenth century, 233
sexual abuse
imaginary, 275
sexual assault, 169, 170
sexual harassment, 69, 168, 172, 288
as a desire for recognition, 282
sexual selection, 45
Seydlitz, Gertrude von, 23
Shakespeare, William, 15
Shaw, George Bernard, 246
shell shock, 258
Sherman, William Tecumseh, 200
Sisyphus, 76, 145
slavery, 73
Slovokhtova, Nina, 207
Smith, Adam, 78
Social Security, 139
Title XX, 140
Socrates, 146
Solomon, king, 77
Soranus, 82
Southern Belle, 215
Sparta, 57, 119, 233
sperm banks, 242
spiritual offenses
and witch-hunting, 19
Stalin, Joseph V., 7, 47, 153
Steinem, Gloria, 290
Stopes, Marie, 276
Strasser, Georg, 22
stuprum, 150
surrogate motherhood, 180
Svengali Defense, 162, 167
Switzerland
military service in, 184
Tacitus. Gaius Cornelius, 113
Tantalus, 145
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, 178
Thalidomide, 228
The Tain, 46, 206
Theodore of Canterbury
and homosexuality, 151
Theodosius II, emperor, 151
Theristes, 203
Thetis, 9
Thomas Aquinas
and homosexuality, 151
Thomas, Clarence, 172
Thomas, Keith, 13
Tocqueville. Alexis de, 80
Tomb Raider, 205
Trophanil, 264
Tuke, William, 248
Turner, Frederick Jackson, 216
Uhse, Beate, 31
unemployment, 108
Union of Auto Workers, 105
urbanization, 85
utopia
feminist, 39
Vassar College, 64
Venette, Nicholas, 270
Viagra, 274
Virgilius, Publius Maro, 205
Völkischer Beobachter, 23
Voltaire, Francois Marie, 186
von Reichenau, Walter, 207
Wellesley College, 64
Wenham, Jane, 17
Wilbraham, Roger, 118
William of Orange, 17
Willis, Francis, 248
Winnington, R. E., 202
Wittig, Monique, 40
Wodan, 76
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 60, 186, 220, 235
contempt for women, 281
women
and aid to dependent children, 138
and bail, 160
and child abuse, 162
and domestic violence, 173, 179
and early Christianity, 128
and emigration, 214
and family income, 120, 121
and gladiators, 46
and guilds, 131
and imprisonment, 155, 156, 164, 165
and industrial accidents, 229
and inheritance, 119
and labor, 76, 78, 82, 83, 85, 87, 89, 97, 101, 107, 223
and martial law, 189
and medical care, 219, 227, 241
and mental disease, 251, 254, 257, 265, 277, 282
and mothers' pensions, 137
and penis envy, 286
and perinatal death, 226
and pregnancy, 41
and probation, 166
and punishment, 145, 148, 150, 154, 159, 167
and Salic law, 147
and sexual offenses, 151
and sinecures, 135
and Social Security, 139
and sport, 231
and suicide, 284
and welfare allowances, 141
and witch-hunting, 17, 20
and World War II, 93, 100, 110, 239
as casualties in war, 191, 192
as consumers, 122
as mental health workers, 262
as pilots, 207
as POWs, 198
as victims of crime, 230
Athenian, 11
cooking their babies, 175
during World War I, 30, 90
during World War II, 30, 33
education of, 58, 59, 65
emigrants, 240
Hassidic, 9
in court, 161, 181
in developing countries, 107
in the Third Reich, 21, 23, 27, 29
in uprisings, 207
jealousy of women, 290
not subject to conscription, 187
not subject to military service, 184
of leisure, 235, 236, 237, 239
physiological characteristics of, 145, 194, 203, 211
privileged in war, 210
protected from the sun, 218
sexual reticience of, 41
Xena the Warrior Queen, 205
Xenophon, 8, 11, 241
Xerxes, emperor, 281
Zenobia, 146
Zeus, 9, 72, 205
Zweig, Stefan, 276
[1] See Vicki Coppock et al., The Illusions of "Post Feminism": New Women, Old Myths, London,
Taylor & Francis, 1995, chapter 1; Sherrye Henry, The Deep Divide: Why American Women Resist
Equality, New York, MacMillan, 1994, pp. 1-36; also Jean J. Mansbridge, Why We Lost the Era,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1986.
[2] For Florence Nightingale see Gertrudee Himmelfarb, The De-Moralization of Society: From
Victorian Virtues to Modern Values, New York, Vintage Books, 1994, p. 102; for Simone de Beauvoir
see her own Force of Circumstance, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin, 1968, p. 199; for Carly
Fiorina see S. Shuler. (Winter 2003). "Breaking Through the Glass Ceiling Without Breaking a Nail,"
ACJournal, 6, 2, retrieved from http://ac-journal.org/journal/vol6/iss2/articles/shuler.htm
[3] For the United States see Dahlia Moore, Labor Market Segmentation and its Implications:
Inequality, Deprivation and Entitlement, New York, Garland, 1992, pp. 145-67; for Germany see
"Das Rattenrennen nicht Mitmachen," Der Spiegel, 10/1998, p. 112; for the Ukraine see Solomea
Pavlychko, "Conservative Faces of Women in the Ukraine," in Mary Buckley, ed., Post-Soviet
Women: From the Baltic to Central Asia, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997, p. 226.
[4] Alison Jaggar, Feminist Politics and Human Nature, Totowa, NJ, Rowman & Littlefield, 1983, p.
44.
[5] See Gordon Weil, "Gender Analysis of Dismantling the Command Economy in Eastern Europe:
The Case of Poland," in Valentine M. Moghadam, ed., Democratic Reform and the Position of
Women in Transitional Economies, Oxford, Clarendon, 1993, p. 287.
[6] Bernice Glazter Rosenthal, "Love on the Tractor: Women in the Russian Revolution and After," in
Renate Bridenthal and Claudia Koonz, eds. Women in European History, Boston, Houghton Mifflin,
1977, p. 389.
[7] Juliet Webster, Shaping Women's Work: Gender, Employment and Information Technology,
London, Longman, 1996, pp. 38, 59, 60.
[8] Anne Lokke, "Philanthropists, Mothers and Doctors: The Philanthropic Struggle against Infant
Mortality in Copenhagen, 1860-1920," in Birgitta Jordansson and Tinne Vammen, Charitable
Women: Philanthropic Welfare, 1780-1930, Dense, Odense University Press, 1998, p. 154.
[9] E. L. Flacliere, Daily Life in Athens at the Time of Pericles, London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson,
1965, p. 55.
[10] Trojan Women, 646-7.
[11] Plato, Republic, 579b; Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War, 2.45.
[12] See Ken Dowden, "Approaching Women through Myth: Vital Tool or Self Delusion?" in
Richard Hawley and Barbara Levik, eds., Women in Antiquity, London, Routledge, 1995, p. 56.
[13] Aristophanes, Clouds, 1067-70.
[14] Iliad, 2.140-242.
[15] See David Cohen, "Seclusion, Separation and the Status of Women in Classical Athens," in Ian
MacAuslan and Peter Walcot, eds., Women in Antiquity, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1995, pp.
138-40.
[16] Demosthenes, 57.30-1.
[17] Politics, 1300a, 1323a.
[18] Theophrastus, 11.9-10 and 16.2.
[19] Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War, 2.46; Aristophanes, Acharnanians, 253.
[20] Plutarch, Pericles, 13.9-10.
[21] Andocides, 1.48; Lysias, 13.39-41; Plato, Phaedo, 60a.
[22] Demosthenes, 40.11.
[23] Aeschines, 2.148, 152; Plato, Apology, 34c-35b; Demosthenes, 19.310, 21.99 and 186, 25.85,
54.35; Aristophanes, Wasps, 568-9, Plutus, 380.
[24] Plutarch, Pericles, 28.
[25] Laws, 658a-d, 817a-c; Georgias, 502b-e.
[26] See Leena Vittaniemi, "Partheneia—Remarks on Virginity and Its Meanings in the Religious
Context of Ancient Greece," in Lena Larsen Loven et al., eds., Aspects of Women in Antiquity,
Sweden, Astron, 1998, pp. 51-4.
[27] Oeconomicus, 7.3-5; 9.3-4.
[28] Demosthenes, Lysias, 3.
[29] See David Cohen, Law, Sexuality and Society: The Enforcement of Morals in Classical Greece,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1991, p. 156.
[30] Epidemics, 6.7.
[31] See Eva Keuls, The Reign of the Phallus, Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1993, p.
212.
[32] Sarah Pomeroy, Families in Classical and Hellenistic Greece, Oxford, Clarendon, 1997, p. 297.
[33] Dyfri Williams, "Women on Athenian Vases: Problems of Interpretation," in Cameron and
Kuhrt, eds., Images of Women in Antiquity, pp. 103-4; Helene P. Foley, "The Conception of Women
in Athenian Drama," in Helene P. Foley, ed., Reflections of Women in Antiquity, New York, Gorden &
Breach, 1981, p. 151.
[34] Keith Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic, London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1971, p.
586.
[35] Marianne Hester, "Patriarchal Reconstruction and Witch-Hunting," in Jonathan Barry et al., eds.,
Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996, pp. 288-89. Also
see Catherine Belsey, The Subject of Tragedy: Identity and Difference in Renaissance Drama,
London, Methuen, 1985, pp. 185-86; and Karen Newman, Fashioning Femininity and English
Renaissance Drama, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1991, p. 69.
[36] See Gerhard Schormann, Hexenprozesse in Nordwestdeutschland, Hildesheim, Vanderhoeck &
Ruprecht, 1977, p. 1.
[37] See Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1990, p. 176.
[38] See Wolfgang Behringer, Hexen und Hexenverfolgung in Deutschland, Munich, Universität
Tübingen, 1988, p. 157.
[39] Leviticus, 20.57.
[40] "Sermon Preached by Mr. James Hutchinson [on Witchcraft]," 13.4.1697, in Brian D. Levack,
ed., Witchcraft in Scotland, New York, Garland, 1992, pp. 379-80; Barbara Rosen, Witchcraft in
England, Amherst, MA, University of Massachusetts Press, 1969, pp. 51-60; Gaskill, "Witchcraft in
Early Modern Kent," p. 274.
[41] See Christina Larner, Witchcraft and Religion: The Politics of Popular Belief, Alan Macfarlane
ed., Oxford, Blackwell, 1984, p. 20.
[42] Peter Burke, Culture and Society in Renaissance Italy, 1420-1540, London, Batsford, 1972, p.
164; also see George Mora et al., eds., Witches, Devils and Doctors in the Renaissance: Johann
Weyer, "e praestigiis daemonum," Binghampton, NY, Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies,
1991, pp. 181-2.
[43] Rachel Speght, A Muzzle for Melastomus (1617), quoted in Sara Gamble, ed., The Routledge
Critical Dictionary of Feminism and Postfeminism, New York, Routledge, 2000, p. 7.
[44] Heinrich Krämer and Jacob Sprenger, Malleus Maleficarum, London, Pushkin, 1948 [1495],
p.44.
[45] Marianne Hester, Lewd Women and Wicked Witches: A Study of the Dynamics of Male
Domination, London, Routledge, 1992, pp. 4, 108, 114.
[46] Robert Muchembled, La sorcière au village xve-xviii siècle, Paris, Gallimard, n.d., p. 181.
[47] Ruth Martin, Witchcraft and the Inquisition in Venice, 1550-1650, Oxford, Blackwell, 1989, pp.
226-7; Walter Rummel, Bauern, Herren und Hexen, Göttingen, Vanderhoeck, 1991, p. 317; Cynthia
B. Herrup, The Common Peace: Participation and the Criminal Law in Seventeenth Century
England, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1987, p. 33.
[48] Christina Larder, "Crimen Exceptum? The Crime of Witchcraft in Europe," in Brian D. Levack,
ed., The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe, London, Pearson, 2006, p. 87; Jim Sharpe, "The Devil
in East Anglia: the Matthew Hopkins Trials Reconsidered," in Barry, ed., Witchcraft in Early Modern
Europe, p. 254.
[49] See Larner, Witchcraft and Religion, p. 32.
[50] Marijke Gijswijt-Hofstra, "Six Centuries of Witchcraft," in Marijke Gijswijt-Hofstra and Willem
Frijhoff, eds., Witchcraft in the Netherlands, Rotterdam, University of Rotterdam Press, 1991, pp. 29-
30.
[51] C. L'Estrange-Ewen, Witch-Hunting and Witch Trials, London, Kegan Paul, 1929, p. 112ff.
[52] Hester, "Patriarchal Reconstruction and Witch-Hunting," p. 298; MacFarlane, Witchcraft in
Tudor and Stuart England, p. 160, table 15. One admittedly small sample from the Netherlands
shows that bewitched females outnumbered males two to one: Hans de Waardt, "At Bottom a Family
Affair: Feuds and Witchcraft in Nijkerk in 1550," in Gijswijt-Hofstra and Frijhoff, eds., Witchcraft in
the Netherlands, p. 137, table 1.
[53] Deborah Willis, Malevolent Nurture: Witch-Hunting and Maternal Power in Early Modern
England, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1995, pp. 13, 97.
[54] See G. Geis, "Lord Hale, Witches and Rape," in Brian D. Levack, ed., Witchcraft in England,
New York, Garland, 1992, pp. 54-7.
[55] See Alan R. Young, "Elizabeth Lowys: Witch and Social Victim, 1564," in Levack, ed.,
Witchcraft in England, pp. 79-86.
[56] Ian Bostridge, Witchcraft and its Transformations c. 1650-1950, Oxford, Clarendon, 1997, pp.
132-4; Phyllis J. Guskin, "The Context of Witchcraft: The Case of Jane Wenham," in Levack, ed.,
Witchcraft in England, pp. 94-117.
[57] W. N. Neill, "The Professional Pricker and His Test for Witchcraft," in Levack, ed., Witchcraft in
Scotland, pp. 278-9.
[58] See Richard von Dülmen, "Imagination des Teuflischen," in Richard von Dülmen, ed.,
Hexenwelten, Magie und Imagination, Frankfurt/Main, Fischer, 1987, p. 114.
[59] J. K. Swales and Hugh V. McLachlan, "Witchcraft and the Status of Women: A Comment,"
British Journal of Sociology, 30, 3, September 1979, pp. 48-9.
[60] Ruth Martin, Witchcraft and the Inquisition in Venice, 1550-1650, Oxford, Blackwell, 1989,
appendix, table 1.
[61] Wolfgang Behringer, "'Erhob sich das ganze Land zu ihrer Ausrottung...': Hexenprozesse und
Hexenverfolgungen in Europa," in Dülmen, ed., Hexenwelten, p. 143. Also see Richard von Dülmen,
Frauen vor Gericht, Frankfurt/Main, Fischer, 1990, p. 95.
[62] E. William Monter, Witchcraft in France and Switzerland, Ithaca, NY, 1976, p. 23.
[63] Muchembled, La sorcière au village, p. 176.
[64] Joseph Klaits, Servants of Satan, Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 1985, p. 52; Peter
Brown, "Sorcery, Demons and the Rise of Christianity from Late Antiquity to the Middle Ages," in
Mary Douglas, ed., Witchcraft Confessions and Accusations, London, Tavistock, 1970, pp. 17-45.
[65] Hans de Waardt and Willem de Blecourt, "'It Is No Sin To Put an Evil Person to Death,'" in
Gijswijt-Hofstra and Frijhoff, eds., Witchcraft in the Netherlands, p. 69.
[66] Bengst Hennigsen and T. Kervinen, "Finland: The Male Domination," in Bengst Ankerloo and
Gustav Henningsen, eds., Early Modern European Witchcraft, Oxford, Clarendon, 1990, pp. 31-8.
[67] Richard Kiekhefer, European Witch Trials, London, Routledge, 1976, pp. 100, 147; Monter,
Witchcraft in France and Switzerland, p. 26.
[68] Behringer, "'Erhob sich das ganze Land zu ihrer Ausrottung…'", pp. 167-8.
[69] Larner, Witchcraft and Religion: The Politics of Popular Belief, p. 28.
[70] Kate Millett, Sexual Politics, Garden City, NJ, Doubleday, 1970; Betty Friedan, The Feminine
Mystique, New York, Del, 1983 [1963], p. 37.
[71] The Female Eunuch, New York, McGraw Hill, 1970, p. 302; Susan Brownmiller, Against Our
Will, New York, Simon & Schuster, 1975, p. 394; Andrea Dworkin, Scapegoat: The Jews, Israel and
Women's Liberation, New York, Virago, 2000, p. 30; Betty Friedan, Life So Far, New York, Simon &
Schuster, 2000, p. 262.
[72] David Schoenbaum, Die Braune Revolution: eine Sozialgeschichte des Dritten Reichs, Berlin,
Kippenheuer & Witsch, 1961, p. 426.
[73] Richard Grunberger, The 12-Year Reich: A Social History of the Third Reich, New York, Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, 1971, p. 252.
[74] See Claudia Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland, New York, St. Martin's, 1987, pp. 6, 17, 405.
[75]See Ann T. Allen, Feminism and Motherhood in Germany, 1800-1914, New Brunswick, NJ,
Rutgers University Press, 1991, pp. 197, 201, 202.
[76] Christine Wittrock, Weiblichkeits Mythen, Frankfurt/Main, Sendler, 1984, pp. 81-4.
[77] See Richard J. Evans, The Feminist Movement in Germany, 1894-1933, London, Sage, 1976, pp.
157, 235, 237, 247.
[78] See Hans Peter Bleuel, Sex and Society in Nazi Germany, Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1973, pp. 26-
8.
[79] 1934 speech to the National Socialist Women's Association, printed in Max Domarus, ed., Hitler,
Reden und Proklamationen 1932-1945, Würzburg, Löwit, 1963-4, vol. 1, p. 449.
[80] Henry Picker, ed., Hitlers Tischgespräche, Stuttgart, Goldmann, 1963, p. 11, entry for 1.4.1942.
[81] Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, Mumbai, Jaico, 1988 [1924-6], p. 411.
[82] Herman Rauschning, The Voice of Destruction, New York, Putnam, 1940, p. 265.
[83] Quoted in Otto Strasser, Hitler and I, London, Cape, 1940, p. 78.
[84] Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland, pp. xxiii-xxv.
[85] Grit Philipp, Kalendarium der Ereignisse im Frauen-Konzentrationslager Ravensbrück, 1939-
1945, Berlin, Metropol, 1999, pp. 103, 107, 150, 180.
[86] Reimer Voss, Steuern im Dritten Reich, Munich, Beck, 1995, p. 80.
[87] Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland, p. 278.
[88] See Dörte Winkler, Frauenarbeit im Dritten Reich, Hamburg, Hoffman and Campe, 1977, pp.
187.
[89] Clifford Kirkpatrick, Nazi Germany: Its Women and Its Family Life, New York, Bobbs-Merrill,
1938, p. 207; Hilde Browing, Women under Fascism and Communism, London, Lawrence, 1943, p.
9.
[90] Gertrude Bäumer, Des Lebens wie der Liebe Band, Tübingen, Wunderlich, 1956, p. 135.
[91] Winkler, Frauenarbeit im Dritten Reich, pp. 49-50.
[92] Calculated from Charlotte Grätz-Menzel, "Über die rassenideologische Wirkung der
akademischen Frauenberufe mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Ärztinnen und Zahnärztinnen,"
Archiv für Rassen- and Gesellschaftsbiologie, 27, 1933, p. 143, table 10.
[93] Astrid Dageförde, "Frauen an der Hamburger Universität 1933 bis 1945: Emanzipation oder
Repression?" in Eckart Krause, ed., Hochschulalltag im "Dritten Reich," Berlin, Reimer, 1991, pp.
256-7.
[94] James C. Albisetti, Schooling German Girls and Women: Secondary and Higher Education in
the Nineteenth Century, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1988, pp. 222-3.
[95] Bleuel, Sex and Society in Nazi Germany, p. 67.
[96] Jacques R. Pauwels, Women, Nazis and Universities, Westport, CT, Greenwood, 1984, pp. 101-
5; also see Michael H. Kater, Doctors Under Hitler, Chapel Hill, NC, University of North Carolina
Press, 1989, p. 99.
[97] Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland, p. 45.
[98] Joseph Goebbels, Vom Kaiserhof zur Reichskanzlei, Munich, Zentralverlag der NDSAP, 1939, p
72.
[99] 1932 speech, quoted in Werner Siebert, Hitlers Wollen, nach Kernsätzen aus seinen Schriften
und Reden, Munich, Zentralverlag der NSDAP, 1937, p. 105.
[100] Statistisches Jahrbuch des Deutschen Reiches, 1935, Berlin, 1935, p. 474.
[101] Renate Bridenthal, "Something Old, Something New: Women between the Two World Wars,"
in Bridenthal and Koonz, eds., Becoming Visible, p. 426, table 18-1.
[102] Winkler, Frauenarbeit im Dritten Reich, pp. 55, 64-5; Bleuel, Sex and Society in Nazi
Germany, p. 63.
[103] Evans, German Feminism, p. 263.
[104] Winkler, Frauenarbeit im Dritten Reich, p. 74.
[105] See Winkler, Frauenarbeit im Dritten Reich, pp. 110-9.
[106] Bleuel, Sex and Society in Nazi Germany, p. 155.
[107] Winkler, Frauenarbeit im Dritten Reich, p. 123.
[108] Leila J. Rupp, Mobilizing Women for War: German and American Propaganda, 1939-1945,
Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1978, p. 171.
[109] Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland, pp. 161, 246.
[110] Franz Weiss, "Die Personelle Zusammensetzung der Führungskräfte der Wiener
Gestapoleitstelle zwischen 1938 und 1945," Zeitgeschichte, 20, 7-8, 1993, p. 247.
[111] Philipp, Kalendarium, pp. 101, 122, 123.
[112] Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland, p. 404-5.
[113] Kater, Doctors under Hitler, p. 110.
[114] William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson, Human Sexual Response, St. Louis, MO,
Reproductive Biology Research Foundation, 1966, p. 217; also Andy Metcalf and Martin Humphries,
eds., The Sexuality of Men, London, Pluto, 1985, p. 49.
[115] Gay Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, London, British Museum Press, 1993, p. 11.
[116] Terrell Carver, Gender Is Not a Synonym for Women, Boulder, CO, Riener, 1996.
[117] See R. E. Michod, Eros and Evolution: A Natural Philosophy of Sex, Reading, MA, Helix,
1998, chapter 6.
[118] Jared Diamond, Why is Sex Fun? The Evolution of Human Sexuality, London, Weidenfeld &
Nicolson, 1997, p. 41.
[119] E. H. Herre et al., "Sex Allocation in Animals," in S. C. Searns, ed., The Evolution of Sex and
Its Consequences, Basel, Birkhäuser, 1987, p. 222; also David Crews, "The Organizational Concept
and Vertebrates Without Sex Chromosomes," Brain Behavior and Evolution, 42, 1993, pp. 202-14.
[120] I. Waldron, "What Do We Know about the Causes of Sex Differences in Mortality?"
Population Bulletin of the United Nations, 18, 1986, pp. 59-76.
[121] Nancy J. Chodorow, Feminism and Psychoanalytic Theory, New Haven, CT, Yale University
Press, 1989, pp. 32-41; Walter Ong, Fighting for Life, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1973, p.
71.
[122] Andrea Dworkin, Pornography: Men Possessing Women, New York, Plume, 1991, pp. 49-51.
[123] Michod, Eros and Evolution, p. 41; Diamond, Why is Sex Fun? p. 46.
[124] Margaret Mead, Male and Female: A Study of the Sexes in a Changing World, New York,
Mentor, 1949, pp. 68, 72-3.
[125] See Frances Bartowski, Feminist Utopias, Lincoln, NE, University of Nebraska Press, 1989.
[126] See Josine H. Blok, The Early Amazons: Modern and Ancient Perspectives on a Persistent
Myth, Leiden, Brill, 1995, pp. 155 ff., 167, 173, 223 ff.
[127] New York, Dillingham, 1890.
[128] Reprinted New York, Pantheon, 1979.
[129] New York, Bantam.
[130] Watertown, MA, Persephone.
[131] Marc Goldstein, "Of Babies and the Barren Man," Scientific American, 10, 2, summer 1999, p.
79.
[132] Sally M. Gaerhart, "The Future—If There Is One—Is Female," in Pam McAllister, ed,
Reweaving the Web of Life, Philadelphia, New Society, 1982, pp. 266-84.
[133] Marge Piercy, Woman on the Edge of Time, New York, Knopf, 1976; Nelly Kaplan, "Husbands,
I Salute You," in Françoise Thébaud et al., eds., A History of Women in the West, Cambridge, MA,
Bellknap, 1994, vol. 5, pp. 595-7.
[134] Robert L. Trivers, "Parental Investment and Sexual Selection," in Bernhard G. Campbell, ed.,
Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man, Chicago, Aldine, 1972, pp. 136-79.
[135] Diamond, Why Is Sex Fun?, p. 38.
[136] See David D. Gilmore, Manhood in the Making: Cultural Concepts of Masculinity, New
Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1990, p. 85; Thomas Gregor, Anxious Pleasures: The Sexual Lives
of an Amazonian People, Chicago, Chicago University Press, 1985, pp. 200-1.
[137] See Natalie Angier, Woman: An Intimate Geography, New York, Anchor, 1999, p. 367.
[138] R. P. Michael and D. Zumpe, "Potency in Male Rhesus Monkeys: Effects of Continuously
Receptive Females," Science, 200, 1978, pp. 451-3.
[139] Arland Thornton and Deborah Freedman, "Changing Attitudes Toward Marriage and Single
Life," Family Planning Perspectives, 14, November-December 1982, pp. 297-303.
[140] See Ethel Person, "The Omni-Available Woman," in Gerald I. Fogel et al., eds., The
Psychology of Men, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1996, pp. 82-3; Roger Horrocks, Male
Myths and Icons: Masculinity in Popular Culture, New York, St. Martin's, 1995, pp. 9, 14-5, 18.
[141] Life So Far, p. 313.
[142] Patricia Crawford, "Sexual Knowledge in England, 1500-1700," in Roy Porter and Mikulas
Teich, eds., Sexual Knowledge, Sexual Science: The History of Attitudes to Sexuality, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp. 97-8; Roy Porter and Lesley Hall, The Facts of Life; The
Creation of Sexual Knowledge in Britain, 1650-1950, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1995,
p. 213.
[143] A sample of the written instructions in Hebrew to an Orthodox Jewish bridegroom may be
found in Pi Ha’aton, 1.1.2001, p. 10.
[144] L. Wolfe, "The Sexual Profile of the Cosmopolitan Girl," Cosmopolitan, September 1980, pp.
254-65. See Metcalf and Humphries, eds., The Sexuality of Men, p. 116.
[145] See Robin Baker and Mark A. Bellis, Human Sperm Competition: Copulation, Masturbation
and Infidelity, New York, Chapman & Hall, 1996.
[146] Diamond, Why Is Sex Fun?, p. 80.
[147] Abendzeitung, 9.4.01, p. 5.
[148] Interview with Pnina Mizrachi, head nurse at Hadassah hospital in Jerusalem.
[149] The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, New York, Random House, 1962 [1871],
p. 579.
[150] Metcalff and Humphries, The Sexuality of Men, p. 61.
[151] See Barbara Smuts, "Male Aggression against Women: An Evolutionary Perspective," Human
Nature, 3, 1992, pp. 1-44.
[152] See Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, p. 579.
[153] S. J. Arnold, "Quantitative Genetic Models of Sexual Selection: An Overview," in S. C.
Stearns, ed., The Evolution of Sex and its Consequences, Basel, Birkehäuwer, 1987, p. 290.
[154] Amotz Zahavi, "Mate Selection—A Selection for a Handicap," Journal of Theoretical Biology,
53, 1975, pp. 205-14; idem, "The Cost of Honesty," ibid, 67, 1977, pp. 603-5.
[155] D. M. Buss, "Sex Differences in Human Mate Preferences: Evolutionary Hypotheses Tested in
37 Cultures," Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 1989, pp. 1-49.
[156] William Farrell, Why Men Are the Way They Are, New York, Berkeley, 1988, p. 238.
[157] See Farrell, Why Men Are the Way They Are, pp. 18-23.
[158] The Tain, Thomas Kinsella, trans., Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1969, pp. 27, 215.
[159] For Australia, see Phyllis M. Kaberry, Aboriginal Woman: Sacred and Profane, London,
Routledge, 1939, p. 97; For Ngondi, see J. A. Barnes, Marriage in a Changing Society, London,
Rhodes-Livingstone Papers, No. 20, 1951, p. 67; For Baganda, see Lucy P. Mair, African Peoples in
the Twentieth Century, London, Russell & Russell, 1934, p. 82; For Goba, see Chet S. Lancaster,
"Brideservice and Authority among the Goba (N. Shona) of the Zambezi Valley," Africa, 44, p. 51.
[160] Jane F. Collier, Marriage and Inequality in Classless Societies, Stanford, CA, Stanford
University Press, 1988, p. 231; Wahiduddin Khan, Woman Between Islam and Western Society,
London, Islamic Center, 1995, p. 230.
[161] Lionel Tiger, The Decline of the Male, New York, St. Martin's Press, 1999 p. 154.
[162] The Tain, p. 27.
[163] See Diamond, Why is Sex Fun?, pp. 37, 55, 56, 58, 72, 107; also Konrad Lorenz, On
Aggression, London, Methuen, 1967, pp. 108-9.
[164] William Leutenegger, "A Functional Interpretation of the Sacrum of Australopithecus
Africanus," South African Journal of Science, 73, 1977, pp. 308-10.
[165] See Sherwood L. Washburn, "Longevity in Primates," in James L. McGaugh and Sara B.
Kiesler, eds., Aging: Biology and Behavior, New York, Academic Press, 1981, pp. 11-29.
[166] See Judith S. Wallerstein et al., The Unexpected Legacy of Divorce, New York, Hyperion,
2000, pp. 35-8,107-9, 250, 297.
[167] Lester Thurow, "Companies Merge, Families Break Up," The New York Times, 3.9.1995.
[168] Metcalff and Humphries, eds, The Sexuality of Men, pp. 53, 55, 57, 59, 161.
[169] Tropic of Cancer, New York, Grove Press, 1961, p. 140.
[170] See Camille Paglia, Vamps and Tramps, New York, Vintage, 1994, pp. 122-6.
[171] Person, "The Omni-Available Woman and Lesbian Sex," pp. 73-4, 75-8, 83-4.
[172] Jeff Hearn, "Troubled Masculinities in Social Policy Discourses: Young Men," in Jennie Popay
et al., eds., Men, Gender Divisions and Welfare, London, Routledge, 1998, p. 44.
[173] See James W. Messerschmidt, Masculinities and Crime: Critique and Reconceptualization of
Theory, Lanham, MD, Rowman & Littlefield, 1993.
[174] See Carl S. Taylor, Dangerous Society, East Lansing, MI, Michigan State University Press,
1989, p. 60.
[175] See Paul Pollard, "Sexual Violence Against Women," in John Archer, ed., Male Violence,
London, Routledge, 1994, pp. 186-7; N. A. Groth, Men Who Rape: The Psychology of the Offender,
New York, Plenum, 1979.
[176] Brownmiller, Against Our Will, p. 400.
[177] Menachem Amir, Patterns in Forcible Rape, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1971, p.
70; Barbara Toner, The Facts of Rape, London, Arrow Books, 1982, pp. 176-7.
[178] See Eileen B. Leonard, Women, Crime and Society: A Critique of Theoretical Criminology,
New York, Longman, 1982, p. 45.
[179] Richard Wright, "The English Rapist," New Society, 17.7.1980.
[180]See Diana Scully, Understanding Sexual Violence, Boston, Unwin Hyman, 1990, pp. 162-3; V.
Greendlinger and D. Byrne, "Coercive Sexual Fantasies of College Men as Predictors of SelfReported Likelihood to Rape and Overt Sexual Aggression," Journal of Sex Research, 23, 1987, pp.
1-11.
[181] Metcalff and Humphries, The Sexuality of Men, p. 107.
[182] Herman Melville, Billy Budd and Other Stories, New York, Penguin, 1986 [1853].
[183] Thanks to Jonathan Lewy for bringing this little-known fact to my attention.
[184] Republic, 3.3.c.
[185] Diamond, The Third Chimpanzee: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal, New York,
Harper Collins, 1992, p. 132; Charles E. Oxnard, Fossils, Teeth and Sex: New Perspectives on
Human Evolution, Seattle, WA, University of Washington Press, 1987, 252-4.
[186] Margo Wilson and Martin Daly, "An Evolutionary Psychological Perspective on Male Sexual
Proprietariness and Violence Against Wives," in Violence and Victims, 1, 28, February 1993, pp. 271-
94.
[187] Horrocks, Male Myths and Icons, p. 15; also Metcalff and Humphries, eds., The Sexuality of
Men, p. 147.
[188] The Second Sex, p. 252.
[189] Carole R. Beal, Boys and Girls: The Development of Gender Roles, New York, McGraw-Hill,
1994, pp. 27-8.
[190] L. Cherry and M. Lewis, "Mothers of Two Year Olds: A Study of Sex-Differential Aspects of
Verbal Interaction," Developmental Psychology, 12, 1976, pp. 272-82.
[191] Beal, Boys and Girls, p. 77.
[192] See B. Mitchell and E. M. Brandt, "Behavioral Differences Relate to Experience of Mother and
Sex of Infants in the Rhesus Monkey," Developmental Psychology, 3, 1970, p. 149; also C. M.
Berman, "Variation in Mother-Infant Relationships: Traditional and Nontraditional Factors," in
Meredith F. Small, ed., Female Primates: Studies by Women Anthropologists, New York, Liss, 1984,
pp. 17-36; and J. R. Walters, "Transition to Adulthood," in Barbara Smuts et al., ed., Primate
Societies, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1987, pp. 19-35.
[193] See Hilary Graham, "Socio-Economic Change and Inequalities," in Ellen Annandale and Kate
Hunt, eds., Gender Inequalities in Health, Buckingham, Open University Press, 2000, p. 103, figure
4.6 and p. 104, figure 4.7.
[194] R. Omark and M. S. Edelman, "A Comparison of Status Hierarchies in Young Children: An
Ethological Approach," Social Science Information, 14, 1975, pp. 87-107.
[195] P. J. Turner, "Attachment to Mother and Behavior with Adults in Preschool," British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 11, 1993, pp. 75-89.
[196] Susan Golombok and Robyn Fivush, Gender Development, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1994, p. 125.
[197] L. S. Carli, "Biology Does not Create Gender Differences in Personality," in Mary R. Walsh,
ed., Women, Men and Gender, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1997, p. 49.
[198] Fitz John Porter Pole, "The Ritual Forging of Identity," in Gilbert H. Herdt, ed., Rituals of
Manhood, New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction, 1998, p. 123.
[199] Gilmore, Manhood in the Making, p. 85.
[200] Gilbert H. Hertdt, "Fetish and Fantasy in Sambia Initiation," in Herdt, ed., Rituals of Manhood,
p. 79.
[201] Deborah B. Gewertz, "The Father Who Bore Me: the Role of Tsambunwuro during Chambri
Initiation Ceremonies," in Herdt, ed., Rituals of Manhood, p. 298.
[202] See above all Elisabeth Badinter, XY: On Masculine Identity, New York, Columbia University
Press, 1995, chapter 3.
[203] See Jürg Schmidt and Christin Kocher Schmidt, Söhne des Krokodils: Männerhausrituale und
Initiation in Yensan, Zentral-Iatmul, East Sepik Province, Papua New Guinea, Basel, Ethnologisches
Seminar, 1992, pp. 114-6, 143, 158.
[204] Kaberry, Aboriginal Woman, p. 82.
[205] J. L. Fischer, "Semi-Castration on Ponape," Seventh International Congress of Anthropological
and Ethnological Science, 8, 1965, p. 95.
[206] See Gisele Simard, "The Case of Mauritania: Women's Productive activities in Urban Areas—
A Process of Empowerment," in Parvin Ghorayshi and Claire Belanger, eds., Women, Work and
Gender Relations in Developing Countries: A Global Perspective, Westport, CT, Greenwood, 1996,
p. 159.
[207] Johannes Leeb, Wir waren Hitlers Eliteschüler, Munich, Heyne, 1999, p. 62.
[208] Epigrams, 9.68.
[209] James B. Given, Society and Homicide in Thirteenth-Century England, Stanford, CA, Stanford
University Press, 1977, p. 196.
[210] Peter Petschauer, The Education of Women in Eighteenth-Century Germany, Lewinston, NJ,
Edwin Mellen, 1989, pp. 486-7.
[211] Barbara Miller Solomon, In the Company of Educated Women: A History of Women and Higher
Education in America, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1985, p. 64.
[212] Theodor Penners, "Bevölkerungsgeschichtliche Probleme der Land-Stadtwanderung,"
Braunschweigische Jahrbuch, 37, 1956, p. 68.
[213] Robert Campbell, The London Tradesman, London, Gardner, 1747, p. 23.
[214] Harvey S. Graf, Conflicting Paths: Growing Up in America, Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press, 1995, p. 34.
[215] Steven A. Epstein, Wage Labor and Guilds in Medieval Europe, Chapel Hill, NC, University of
North Carolina Press, 1991, p. 118; P. J. P. Goldberg, "'For Better or Worse': Marriage and Economic
Opportunities for Women in Town and Country," in P. J. P. Goldberg, ed., Woman is a Worthy Wight:
Women in English Society, 1200-1500, Phoenix Mill, England, Sutton, 1992, pp. 111, 112.
[216] Debora Simonton, A History of European Women’s Work, 1700 to the Present, London,
Routledge, 1998, pp. 51, 53; O. Jocelyn Dunlop, English Apprenticeship and Child Labor, London,
Unwin, 1912, p. 151.
[217] Farrel, Why Men Are the Way They Are, pp. 168, 292.
[218] See Shlomo D. Goitein, A Mediterranean Society, Berkeley, CA, University of California
Press, 1971, vol. 5, pp. 183, 185.
[219] The Rehlah of Ibn Battuta, Mahdi Hussain, trans., Baroda, Oriental Institute, 1953, p. 179.
[220] Petschauer, The Education of Women, p. 105.
[221] See Brian Mitchell, Women in the Military: Flirting with Disaster, Washington, Regnery, 1998,
pp. 61-2, 64, 227-8.
[222] Virginia Valian, Why So Slow? The Advancement of Women, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1999,
p. 253.
[223] Walter H. Small, "Girls in Colonial New England," Education, 22, 1902, p. 533; Walter H.
Small, Early New England Schools, Boston, Ginn, 1914, p. 278.
[224] Anthony Fletcher, Gender, Sex and Subordination in England, 1500-1800, New Haven, CT,
Yale University Press, 1995, p. 373.
[225] A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, Mineola, NY, Dover, 1996 [1792], p. 130.
[226] Albisetti, Schooling German Girls and Women, p. 109.
[227] Charles W. Moore and George P. Sanger, School Committee Report, Charlestown, MA, 1848,
quoted in David Tyack and Elisabeth Hansot, Learning Together: A History of Coeducation in
American Schools, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1990, p. 92.
[228] Albisetti, Schooling German Girls and Women, pp. 23, 51, 52; Petschauer, The Education of
Women in Eighteenth-Century Germany, pp. 370-1.
[229] Nancy E. Durbin and Lori Kent, "Post-Secondary Education of White Women in 1900," in
Julia Wrigley, ed., Education and Gender Equality, London, Palmer, 1992, p. 72; Tyack and Hansot,
Learning Together, p. 149.
[230] W. O. Eaton and L. R. Enns, "Sex Differences in Human Motor Activity Level," Psychological
Bulletin, 100, 1986, pp. 19-28.
[231]Tyack and Hansot, Learning Together, pp. 46, 101, 102, 114; G. R. Johnson, "Girls Do Better
than Boys in Schools," School and Society, 47, 1938, pp. 313-4.
[232] Tyack and Hansot, Learning Together, pp. 114, 179; S. Klein, ed., Handbook for Achieving Sex
Equity Through Education, Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985; also Ingrid
Jonsson, "Women and Education from a Swedish Perspective," in Wrigely, ed., Education and
Gender Equality, p. 64, table 3.2; Jeff Hearn, "Troubled Masculinities in Social Policy Discourses:
Young Men," in Popay et al., eds., Men, Gender Divisions and Welfare, pp. 41-3; Christina Hoff
Sommer, The War against Boys: How Misguided Feminism is Harming Our Young Men, New York,
Simon & Schuster, 2000, pp. 23-34.
[233] Richard Rubinson, "Class Formation, Politics and Institutions: Schooling in the United States,"
American Journal of Sociology, 92, 1986, p. 521.
[234] See Hunt, Gender and Policy in English Education, p. 59.
[235] Tyack and Hansot, Learning Together, pp. 124-6, 129. The same also applied in France: Cecile
Viela, "Les écoles de charité du bureau de bienfaisance de Bordeaux dans la première moitié du xix
siècle," in Bernard Plongeron and Pierre Guillaume, eds., De la charité à l'action sociale, Paris,
CTHS, 1995, p. 273.
[236] Mabel Newcomer, A Century of Higher Education for American Women, New York, Harper &
Row, 1959, pp. 35, 42.
[237] Karen Graves, Girls' Schooling during the Progressive Era: From Female Scholar to
Domesticated Citizen, New York, Garland, 1998, p. 166.
[238] C. F. and C. B. F. Thwing, The Family: A Historical and Social Study, Boston, Lee & Shepard,
1887, p. 16.
[239] Kathleen D. McCarthy, Women's Culture: American Philanthropy and Art, 1830-1930,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1991, p. 131.
[240] Newcomer, A Century of Education for American Women, pp. 47-8.
[241] Roslyn Arlin Mickelson, "Why Does Jane Read and Write So Well?" in Wrigley, ed., Education
and Gender Equality, p. 153; Solomon, In the Company of Educated Women, p. 207.
[242] Hunt, Gender and Policy in English Education, pp. 84, 85, 120.
[243] Hunt, Gender and Policy in English Education, p. 141.
[244] Elizabeth Seymour Eschbach, The Higher Education of Women in England and America, 1865-
1920, New York, Garland, 1993, p. 4.
[245] Newcomer, A Century of Higher Education for American Women, pp. 83, 85.
[246] See Eschbach, The Higher Education of Women in England and America, pp. 62-4.
[247] Newcomer, A Century of Higher Education for American Women, pp. 59, 82; Eschbach, The
Higher Education of Women in England and America, p. 53.
[248] Newcomer, A Century of Higher Education for American Women, pp. 113, 124, 153, 155, 157.
[249] See Paul Taubman, "The Role of the Family in the Formation of Offspring's Earnings and
Income Capacity," in Paul L. Menchik, ed., Household and Family Economics, Boston, Kluwer,
1996, p. 35 fn. 22.
[250] Newcomer, A Century of Higher Education for American Women, p. 91.
[251] Solomon, In the Company of Educated Women, p. 197; Newcomer, A Century of Higher
Education for Women, p. 175.
[252] For figures relating to various countries, see Sara Delamont, A Woman's Place in Education,
Aldershot, Avebury, 1996, pp. 97-8, 117; Statistiches Amt der Europäischen Gemeinschaft, Frauen in
der Europäischen Gemeinschaft, Luxemburg, Amt für amtliche Veröffentlichungen der Europäischen
Gemeinschaft, 1999, pp. 61, 64; Rosemary Simmen, "Women in Switzerland since 1970: Major
Achievements or Minor Changes?" in Joy Charnley et al., eds., 25 Years of Emancipation? Women in
Switzerland 1971-1996, Bern, Lang, 1998, p. 19; Joan Wolffensperger, "Engendered Structure:
Education and the Conceptualization of Gender," in Kathy Davis et al., eds., The Gender of Power,
London, Sage, 1991, pp. 93-6; and Der Spiegel, 2.8.1999, p. 82; Christiane Dienel, Frauen in
Führungspositionen in Europa, Weinheim, Deutsches Jugendinstitut, 1996, pp. 25-6.
[253] Barrie Thorne, "Girls and Boys Together... but Mostly Apart," in Wrigley, ed., Education and
Gender Equality, p. 125.
[254] See Jonsson, "Women in Education from a Swedish Perspective," p. 50.
[255] T. Loose. (8.1.2013). "Ever Wonder Which Majors Require the Most Study Time?", Yahoo
Education, retrieved from http://education.yahoo.net/articles/most_demanding_majors.htm?
kid_1LCND
[256] Lynda Measor, "Gender and the Sciences," in Martyn Hammersley and Peter Woods, eds., Life
in School, Milton Keynes, Open University Press, 1984, p. 65.
[257] Evelyn Torton Beck, "To Make Our Lives a Study," in Lie and O'Leary, eds, Storming the
Tower, London, Kogan Page, 1990, p. 218.
[258] For the United States, see Valian, Why So Slow?, p. 208; for Britain and Australia, see
Rosemary Pringle, Sex and Medicine: Gender, Power and Authority in the Medical Profession,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998, pp. 150-2; also see Beck, "To Make Our Lives a
Study," p. 218.
[259] See Sara Delamont, A Woman's Place in Education, pp. 110-2. Swedish women also chose less
prestigious occupations: Jonsson, "Women in Education from a Swedish Perspective," pp. 55-6;
Diane E. Davis and Helen S. Astin, "Life Cycle, Career Patterns and Gender Stratification in
Academe," in Lie and O'Leary, eds., Storming the Tower, p. 92, table 6.1. p. 94, table 6.2; Suzanne S.
Lie, "The Juggling Act: Work and Family in Norway," ibid, pp. 109, 111, 123; J. R. Cole and Harriet
Zuckerman, "The Productivity Puzzle," in P. Maehr and M. W. Steinkampf, eds., Advancement in
Motivation and Achievement, Greenwich, CT, JAI Press, 1984, pp. 217-56; M. F Faver and C. A.
Faver, "Men, Women and Publication Productivity," Sociological Quarterly, 26, 1985, pp. 537-49.
[260] Valian, Why So Slow?, p. 227.
[261] McCarthy, Women's Culture, pp. 20, 101, 109.
[262] See J. R. Cole and B. Singer, "A Theory of Limited Differences: Explaining the Productivity
Puzzle in Science," in Harriet Zuckerman et al., eds., The Outer Circle: Women in the Scientific
Community, New York, Norton, 1991, pp. 277-310.
[263] See (in Hebrew) Ninna Toren, "Men and Women on the Faculty of the Hebrew University,
1983/1993," figures on pp. 10, 11, 12.
[264] See on this Steven Goldberg, Why Men Rule: A Theory of Male Dominance, Chicago, Open
Court, 1993.
[265] See Jere Brophy, "Interactions of Male and Female Students with Male and Female Teachers,"
in Louise C. Wilkinson and Cera B. Marrett, eds., Gender Influences in Classroom Education, New
York, Academic Press, 1985, pp. 115-42.
[266] See Delamont, A Woman's Place in Education, p. 12.
[267] Claudia Goldin, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women,
New York, Oxford University Press, 1990, pp. 204-5; Lynn D. Gordon, Gender and Higher
Education in the Progressive Era, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1990, pp. 31, 32.
[268] B. Schulte, "For Little Children, Grown-Up Labels as Sexual Harassers," Washington Post,
3.4.2008.
[269] Lawrence H. Diller, Running on Ritalin, New York, Bantam, 1999, pp. 35-6.
[270] See Pang-Mei Natasha Chang, Bound Feet and Western Dress, New York, Anchor Books,
1996, pp. 47, 59-60.
[271] See Roy Schafer, "Men Who Struggle Against Sentimentality," in Fogel et al., eds., The
Psychology of Men, pp. 95-110; Jeff Hearn, "The Welfare of Men?" in Popay et al., eds., Men,
Gender Divisions and Welfare, p. 27.
[272] Virginia Valian, Why So Slow?, p. 109; Phyllis Chesler, Women and Madness, New York
Doubleday, 1972, p. 57; Jessie Bernard, The Future of Marriage, Harmondsworth, Middlesex,
Penguin, 1973, pp. 309-14, tables 1-10.
[273] See Isaac Mendelsohn, Slavery in the Ancient Near East, New York, Oxford University Press,
1949, pp. 96-7.
[274] See Birgit van den Hoven, Work in Ancient and Medieval Thought, Amsterdam, Gieben, 1996,
pp. 28-30, 31-8; also Paul Ransome, The Work Paradigm: A Theoretical Investigation of Concepts of
Work, Aldershot, Avebury, 1996, pp. 102-5.
[275] See N. Loraux, "Ponos: Sur quelques difficultés de la peine comme nom du travail," Annali del
seminario de studi del mondo classico, 1982, pp. 171-92.
[276] van den Hoven, Work in Ancient and Medieval Thought, p. 30.
[277] van der Hoven, Work in Ancient and Medieval Thought, pp. 152-8. For the importance of the
Benedictine rule in establishing the ethic of work see also Lynn White, Machina ex Deo: Essays in
the Dynamism of Western Culture, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1968, p. 63.
[278] See Richard H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism, London, Murray, 1960 [1926], p.
108.
[279] See William C. Carroll, Fat King, Lean Beggar: Representations of Poverty in the Age of
Shakespeare, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1996, pp. 4-5.
[280] See J. Bentham, Panopticon; or, the Inspection House, London. Payne, 1794; also see J. Mill,
"Prisons and Prison Discipline," in James Mill, Political Writings, Terence Ball, ed., Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1992, pp. 195-224.
[281] J. A. Sharpe, Crime in Early Modern England 1550-1750, London, Longman, 1984, pp. 178-
80.
[282] Genesis, 3.17-9.
[283] Odyssey, 10.220-23.
[284] Mendelsohn, Slavery in the Ancient Near East, p. 99; Dr. Haim Kahana, letter to the author,
2.7.01.
[285] Ullstein Lexikon der deutschen Sprache, Berlin, Ullstein, 1969, p. 767.
[286] Mendelsohn, Slavery in the Ancient Near East, p. 92.
[287] Kings, 5.27-30.
[288] On slavery in these mines see I. Morris, "Remaining Invisible: The Archaeology of the
Excluded in Classical Athens," in Sandra R. Joshel and Sheila Murnaghan, eds., Women and Slaves in
Greco-Roman Culture: Differential Equations, London, Routledge, 1998, pp. 199-211.
[289] Apuleius, Metamorphoses, 9.12.
[290] Petronius, Satyricon, 75.11; Horace, Satires, 1.2.116-19; Seneca, Controversies, IB praef. 1.
See also Beert C. Verstraete, "Slavery and the Social Dynamics of Male Homosexual Relations in
Ancient Rome," Journal of Homosexuality, 5, 3, spring 1980, pp. 227-36.
[291] See J. Juan and A. de Ulloa, Discourse and Political Reflections on the Kingdoms of Peru,
Tulsa, OK, University of Oklahoma Press, 1978, p. 77 ff.
[292] The Wealth of Nations, Chicago, Chicago University Press, 1976 [1776], p. 253.
[293] See Karl Marx, Capital, Chicago, Kerr, 1932 [1867], vol. 1, pp. 262-3.
[294] August Meitzen, Urkunden schlesischer Dörfer, Breslau, Parey, 1863, p. 334.
[295] Republic, 457 A-B.
[296] See Brian Mitchell, Women in the Military: The Weak Link, Orlando, FL, Regnery, 1996, pp.
141-2.
[297] Desmond Morris, Manwatching; A Field Guide to Human Behavior, New York, Abrams, 1977,
pp. 239-40.
[298] Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in the Armed Forces, Report to the
President, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1993, p. C-74.
[299] Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature, Berkeley, CA, University of California Press,
1975-80, vol. 2, p. 137.
[300] See G. P. Murdock, "Comparative Data on the Division of Labor by Sex," Social Forces, 15,
1937, pp. 551-3.
[301] For the island of Vanatinai east of Papua New Guinea, see Maria Lepowsky, "Gender in an
Egalitarian Society," in Peggy Reeves Sanday and Ruth Gallagher Goodenough, eds., Beyond the
Second Sex: New Directions in the Anthropology of Gender, Philadelphia, University of Philadelphia
Press, 1990, pp. 180, 182, 202.
[302] See Malcolm Gray, The Fishing Industries of Scotland, 1790-1914, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 1978, p. 13; Nancy Dorian, Tyranny of Tide, Ann Arbor, MI, Karoma, 1985, p. 33.
[303] Democracy in America, New York, Schocken, 1967 [1835-40), p. 252.
[304] See Wendy Kaminer, A Fearful Freedom: Women's Flight from Equality, Reading, MA,
Addison-Wesley, 1990, p. 39.
[305] Society in America, New York, Doubleday, 1966 [1837], vol. 3, p. 106.
[306] For a modern example see Tuula Heinonen, "Negotiating Ideal Womanhood in Rural Philippine
Households: Work and Survival," in Parvin Ghorayshi and Claire Belanger, eds., Women, Work and
Gender Relations in Developing Countries: A Global Perspective, Westport, CT, Greenwood, 1996,
pp. 109-10.
[307] See Tamara Jacka, Women's Work in Rural China: Change and Continuity in an Era of Reform,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997, p. 22.
[308] R. S. Watson, "Girls' Houses and Working Women," in Maria Jaschok and Suzanne Miers, eds.,
Women and Chinese Patriarchy, Hong Kong, Hong Kong University Press, 1994, pp. 28, 32; Tokyo
Yoshida Ch'en, "Women in Confucian Society," Columbia University Ph.D. thesis, 1974, University
Microfilms, p. iii; John Buck, Land Utilization in China, New York, Council on Economic and
Cultural Affairs, 1937, pp. 290, 293.
[309] Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, p. 108.
[310] Theresa M. McBride, "Women's Work and Industrialization," in Bridenthal and Koonz, eds.,
Becoming Visible, p. 285; Simonton, A History of European Women's Work, pp. 42, 142, 144-6.
[311] See Raymond Pahl, Divisions of Labor, Oxford, Blackwell, 1984, p. 29; Olwen Hufton,
"Women and the Family Economy in Eighteenth-Century France," French Historical Studies, 9,
1975, p. 11; Edward Shorter, "Women's Work: What Difference Did Capitalism Make?" Theory and
Society, 3, 1976, p. 516.
[312] Soranus, Gynaicology, 1.22-3, 1.27 and 3.9.
[313] Mendelsohn, Slavery in the Ancient Near East, p. 113.
[314] Simonton, A History of European Women's Work, p. 43.
[315] Regine Mathias, "Female Labor in the Japanese Coal-Mining Industry," in Janet Hunter, ed.,
Japanese Women Working, London, Routledge, 1993, p. 113.
[316] Sue Headlee and Margaret Elfin, The Cost of Being Female, Westport, CT, Praeger, 1996, pp.
18-9.
[317] Lepowsky, "Gender in an Egalitarian Society," p. 190.
[318] See Angier, Woman, pp. 337-9.
[319] For the Middle Ages see M. Kowaleski, "Women's Work in a Medieval Town: Exeter in the
Late Fourteenth-Century," in B. A. Hanawalt, ed., Women and Work in Pre-Industrial Europe,
Bloomington, IN, University of Indiana Press, 1986, pp. 147-8; also Helena Graham, "A Woman's
Work: Labor and Gender in the Late Medieval Countryside," in Goldberg, ed., Woman is a Worthy
Wight, pp. 135-6.
[320] Clark, Working Life of Women, p. 66.
[321] Wendy Z. Goldman, Women, the State and Revolution: Soviet Family Policy and Social Life,
1917-1936, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1993, p. 177.
[322] Jacka, Women's Work in Rural China, pp. 36-7.
[323] Alison M. Bowes, Kibbutz Goshen: An Israeli Commune, Prospect Heights, IL, Waveland,
1989, pp. 81-2, 90, 93.
[324] See McBride, "Women's Work and Industrialization," p. 282.
[325] Simonton, European Women's Work, pp. 113-5; also see Annelies Moors, "Gender, Property
and Power: Mahr and Marriage in a Palestinian Village," in Kathy Davis et al., eds., The Gender of
Power, London, Sage, 1991, p. 117.
[326] Hetti A. Pott-Butter, Facts and Fairy Tales About Female Labor, Family and Fertility, a SevenCountry Comparison, 1850-1990, Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press, 1993, pp. 285-6.
[327] For London, see 1851 Census, vol. 3, London, Parliamentary Papers, 87, 1852-3, p. 8, table 2;
for Britian, see Simonton, European Women's Work, p. 98, figure 5.1; for the United States, see
Rosalyn Baxandall and Linda Gordon, eds., America's Working Women, New York, Norton, 1995, p.
200.
[328] McBride, "Women's Work and Industrialization," pp. 288-90.
[329] Katharina Schlegel, "Mistress and Servant in Nineteenth-Century Hamburg," History
Workshop, 15, 1983, p. 75.
[330] Friedrich Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England, Harmondsworth, Penguin,
1993 [1844], p. 154.
[331] Mill, The Subjection of Women, p. 47.
[332] See S. Alexander, "Women's Work in Nineteenth-Century London," in Juliet Mitchell and Ann
Oakley, eds., The Rights and Wrongs of Women, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin, 1976, pp. 59-
111; also Louise A. Tilly and Joan W. Scott, Women, Work and Family, London, Methuen, 1978, pp.
19-30, 135.
[333] For unskilled workers, see Michael Hanagan, "Family, Work and Wages: The Stéphanois
Region of France, 1840-1914," in Angelique Janssens, ed., The Rise and Decline of the Male
Breadwinner Family? Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998, pp. 137-8; for immigrants, see
Teresa Amott and Julie Matthaei, Race, Gender and Work, Boston, South End Press, 1996, p. 113.
[334] Angelique Janssens, Family and Social Change: The Household as a Process in an
Industrializing Community, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1993, p. 40.
[335] Angela V. John, By the Sweat of Our Brow: Women Workers at Victorian Coal Mines, London,
Croom Helm, 1980, pp. 24-5.
[336] Hanagan, "Family, Work and Wages," p. 135.
[337] Lynn E. Winer, From Working Girl to Working Mother: The Female Labor Force in the United
States, 1820-1980, Chapel Hill, NC, North Carolina University Press, 1985, p. 72.
[338] Mimi Abramovitz, Regulating the Lives of Women: Social Welfare Policy from Colonial Times
to the Present, Boston, South End Press, 1996 [1988], p. 188.
[339] Mary Lynn McDougal, "Working Class Women During the Industrial Revolution," in
Bridenthal and Koonz, eds., Becoming Visible, p. 262; Kaminer, A Fearful Freedom, p. 67.
[340] See Martin van Creveld, The Rise and Decline of the State, London, Cambridge University
Press, 1999, pp. 213-21.
[341] Amott and Matthaei, Race, Gender and Work, p. 115; Rosemary Orthmann, "Labor Force
Participation, Life Cycle, and Expenditure Patterns: The Case of Unmarried Factory Workers in
Berlin, 1902," in Ruth-Ellen B. Joeres and Mary Jo. Maynes, eds., German Women in the Nineteenth
Century: A Social and Literary History, Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 1986, pp. 29-36.
[342] Baxandall and Gordon, eds., America's Working Women, p. 207.
[343] August Bebel, Die Frau und der Sozialismus, Berlin, Dietz, 1923 [1883], p. 216.
[344] See Gregory Anderson, "The White Blouse Revolution," in idem, ed., The White Blouse
Revolution: Female Office Workers since 1870, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1988, pp.
1-26.
[345] MacDougall, "Working Class Women During the Industrial Revolution," in Bridenthal and
Koonz, Becoming Visible, p. 267; Alice Kessler-Harris, Out to Work: A History of Wage-Earning
Women in the United States, New York, Oxford University Press, 1982, pp. 75-107.
[346] See Gail Braybon, Women Workers in the First World War, London, Croom Helms, 1981, p. 25.
[347] Michael R. Haines, "The Demography of Life-Span Transitions: Temporal and Gender
Comparisons," in Alice S. Rossi, ed., Gender and the Life Course, New York, Aldine, 1985, p. 52,
table 3.3 (1890 figures).
[348] Valerie K. Oppenheimer et al., "United states of America," in Hans-Peter Blossfeld, ed., The
New Role of Women: Family Formation in Modern Societies, Boulder, CO, Westview, 1995, p. 142.
[349] Leslie Woodcock Tentler, Wage-Earning Women: Industrial Work and Family Life in the
United States, 1900-1930, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1979, pp. 165-6.
[350] See M. B. Hammond, British Labor Conditions and Legislation during the War, Oxford,
Oxford University Press, 1919, chapter 3.
[351] Simonton, European Women's Work, p. 186.
[352] I. O. Andrews, The Economic Effects of the World War upon Women and Children in Great
Britain, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1921, chapter 4.
[353] See A. W. Kirkaldy, Industry and Finance, London, Pitman, 1921, vol. 2, section i.
[354] Françoise Thébaud, "The Great War and the Triumph of Sexual Division," in Thébaud, ed., A
History of Women in the West, p. 37; Sandra M. Gilbert, "Soldier's Heart: Literary Men, Literary
Women, and the Great War," in Margaret R. Higonnet et al., eds., Behind the Lines: Gender in the
Two World Wars, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1987, pp. 204-12.
[355] Diana Condell and Jean Liddliard, Working for Victory? Images of Women in the First World
War, 1914-18, London, Routledge, 1987, p. 72.
[356] John R. Gillis, For Better, for Worse: British Marriages, 1600 to the Present, New York,
Oxford University Press, 1985, p. 252.
[357] Gallup polls quoted in Baxandall and Gordon, eds., America's Working Women, p. 239;
William H. Chafe, The American Woman, New York, Oxford University Press, 1980, p. 56.
[358] Solomon, In the Company of Educated Women, p. 173.
[359] Bridenthal, "Something Old, Something New," in Bridenthal and Koonz, eds., Becoming
Visible, p. 426, table 18-1.
[360] Kessler-Harris, Out to Work, pp. 258-9; Samuel A. Stouffer and Paul E. Lazersfeld, Research
Memorandum on the Family in the Depression, New York, Social Science Research Council, 1937,
pp. 28-35.
[361] See M. Komarowsky, The Unemployed Man and His Family, New York, Dryden, 1940,
passim; David Wadinger et al., "'All Jumbled Up': Employed Women with Unemployed Husbands,"
in Jennie Popay et al., eds., Men, Gender Divisions and Welfare, London, Routledge, 1998, pp. 231-
4.
[362] Meridel Le Sueur, "Women Are Hungry," in Ripening: Selected Works, 1927-1980, Old
Westbury, NY, Feminist Press, 1982, pp. 137-8.
[363] British data from Celia Briar, Working for Women? Gendered Work and Welfare Politics in
Twentieth-Century Britain, London, UCL, 1997, pp. 76-8.
[364] Kessler-Harris, Out to Work, p. 276; Chafe, American Women, p. 56.
[365] U.S. Department of Labor, Industrial Injuries to Women, Washington, 1947, Government
Printing Office, 1947, p. 4, table 1.
[366] U.S. Department of Labor, Women Workers in Ten Production Areas and Their Postwar
Employment Plans, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1946, p. 41, table II-7, and p. 44, table
III-1.
[367] U.S. Department of Labor, Industrial Injuries to Women, p. 5, table II.
[368] U.S. Department of Labor, Industrial Injuries to Women, p. 4, table I.
[369] U.S. Department of Labor, Women Workers in Ten Production Areas, p. 48, table IV-2.
[370] See Jenny de Jong Gierveld and Aart C. Liefbroer, "The Netherlands," in Blossfeld, ed., The
New Role of Women, p. 108. It turns out that women's participation in the workforce was actually
lower in 1960 than it had been in 1900.
[371] John Locke, An Essay Concerning the True Origin, Extent, and End of Civil Government, in
Two Treatises of Government, Peter Laslett ed., Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1960, pp.
305-7.
[372] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, London, Lawrence & Wishart, 1970
[1845-6], p. 42. See also Karl Marx, Capital, London, Lawrence & Wishart, 1954 [1867], vol. 1, p.
174.
[373] Friedrich Engels, The Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State, Harmondsworth,
Middles, Penguin, 1972 [1884], pp. 83, 199.
[374] Die Frau und der Sozialismus, Stuttgart, Dietz, 1910 [1879], pp. 169-82.
[375] Vladimir I. Lenin, Married Women in the Labor Force, New York, Harvester, 1966 [1921].
[376] On Krupskaya see Alena Heitligner, Women and State Socialism, London, MacMillan, 1979,
pp. 42, 108; on Kollontai Rosenthal, "Love on the Tractor," pp. 377, 388.
[377] Goldman, Women, the State and Revolution, pp. 65, 119-22.
[378] Rosenthal, "Love on the Tractor," pp. 380, 386, 387, 389, 392, 395.
[379] Goldman, Women, the State and Revolution, 123, 310-2.
[380] William M. Mandel, Soviet Women, New York, Anchor Press, 1975, pp. 124-40.
[381] For the former Soviet Union, see Rosenthal, "Love on the Tractor," pp. 392, 395; for East
Germany, Juta Gysi and Dagmar Meyer, "Leitbild: berufstätige Mutter—DDR-Frauen in Familie,
Partnerschaft und Ehe," in Gisela Herwig and Hildegard Nickel eds., Frauen in Deutschland 1945-
1992, Bonn, Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung, 1993, pp. 236-7; for Czechoslovakia, Alena
Heitinger, Women and State Socialism, London, Palgrave, 1979, p. 148.
[382] Joel C. Moses, The Politics of Women and Work in the Soviet Union and the United States,
Berkeley, CA, Institute of International Studies, 1983, pp. 32-6; Heitinger, Women and State
Socialism, p. 158.
[383] L. Remennick, "Epidemiology and Determinants of Induced Abortion in the Soviet Union,"
Social Science and Medicine, 33, 7, 1991, pp. 841-8; International Herald Tribune, 16.2.2001, p. 1.
[384] See Goldman, Women, the State and Revolution, pp. 279-81, 290-9, 333-5; also Mary Buckley,
"Glasnost and the Woman Question," in Linda Edmondson, ed., Women and Society in Russia and the
Soviet Union, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1992, p. 208.
[385] Moses, The Politics of Women and Work, pp. 22-3.
[386] Jo Peers, "Workers by Hand and Womb: Soviet Women and the Demographic Crisis," in
Barbara Holland, ed., Soviet Sisterhood, Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 1985, p. 135;
Sue Bridger, "Young Women and Perestroika," in Edmondson, ed., Women and Society in Russia, p.
191.
[387] Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Perestroika, London, Fontana, 1988, pp. 117-8.
[388] Mandel, Soviet Women, p. 110.
[389] Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, London, Hogarth, 1930, p. 34.
[390] Winer, From Working Girl to Working Mother, p. 95.
[391] See Denise Riley, War in the Nursery, London, Virago, 1983, pp. 141-4.
[392] Briar, Working for Women, p. 95.
[393] Suzanne Gordon, Prisoners of Men's Dreams: Striking Out for a New Feminine Future,
Boston, Little Brown, 1991, p. 125.
[394] Sven Illeris, The Service Economy, Chichester, Wiley, 1996, p. 36.
[395] "Holding the Baby," Economist, 31.1.1998.
[396] For the United States, see Andrea P. Baridon and David R. Eyler, Working Together: The New
Rules and Realities for Managing Men and Women at Work, New York, McGraw-Hill, p. 42, figure
1-14; for Europe, see Isabella Bakker, "Women's Employment in Comparative Perspective," in Jane
Jenson et al., eds., Feminization of the Labor Force: Paradoxes and Promises, New York, Oxford
University Press, 1988, p. 20; for Britian, see Juliet Webster, Shaping Women's Work: Gender,
Employment and Information Technology, London, Longman, 1996, p. 108; for Japan, Larry S.
Carney and Charlotte G. O’Kelly, “Women’s Work and Women’s Place in the Japanese Economic
Miracle," in Katharyn Ward, ed., Women Workers and Global Restructuring, n.p., ILR Press, 1990, p.
127.
[397] Simonton, European Women's Work, p. 184, figure 9.1.
[398] See Headlee and Elfin, The Cost of Being Female, p. 17.
[399] Jonsson, "Women in Education from a Swedish Perspective," pp. 56-7.
[400] For Britain, see C. Cockburn, Brothers: Male Dominance and Technological Change, London,
Pluto, 1983; for the United States, see Barbara F. Reskin and Patricia A. Roos, Job Queues, Gender
Queues, Philadelphia, Temple University Press, 1990, pp. 275-98.
[401] Headlee and Elfin, The Cost of Being Female, p. 18-9.
[402] Estelle B. Freedman, Their Sisters' Keepers; Women's Prison Reform in America, 1830-1930,
Ann Arbor, MI, University of Michigan Press, 1981, p. 71.
[403] Valian, Why So Slow?, pp. 208, 260; F. M. Kay and J. Hagan, "Raising the Bar: The Gender
Stratification of Law Firm Capital," American Sociological Review, 63, 1998, pp. 728-43.
[404] Carney and O'Kelly, "Women's Work and Place in Japan," p. 133.
[405] Sybille Meier and Eva Schulze, "Frauen in der Modernisierungsfalle—Wandel von Ehe,
Familie und Partnerschaft in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland," in Gisela Herwig and Hildegard
Nickel eds., Frauen in Deutschland 1945-1992, Bonn, Bundeszentrale fuer politische Bildung, 1993,
p. 173. For more recent figures, see Das Parlament, 21.1.2000, p. 2.
[406] Women, Men and Incomes: Gender Equality and Economic Independence, Government
Official Reports, No. 87, Stockholm, Ministry of Labor, 1998, pp. 13, 70.
[407] E. Nasman, "Childhood, Family and New Ways of Life: The Case of Sweden," in Lynne
Chisholm et al., eds., Growing Up in Europe, Berlin, de Gruyter, p. 124.
[408] See Katherine Hakim, Key Issues in Women's Work: Female Heterogeneity and the
Polarisation of Women's Employment, London, Athlone, 1996, pp. 52, 203.
[409] See Valian, Why So Slow?, p. 270.
[410] United Nations Development Program, Human Development Report, 1995, table 4.2.
[411] Dominique Anxo and Lennart Flood, "Patterns of Time Use in France and Sweden", in Inga
Persson and Christina Jonung, eds., Women's Work and Wages, London, Routledge, 1998, pp. 102-3.
[412] See Valian, Why So Slow? p. 267.
[413] Joy Hendry, "The Role of the Professional Housewife," in Hunter, ed., Japanese Women
Working, p. 236.
[414] N. Stockman et al., Women's Work in East and West, London, Sharpe, 1995, p. 81.
[415] M. Bartley, "Domestic Conditions, Paid Employment and Women's Experiences of Ill Health,"
Sociology of Health and Illness, 14, 3, 1992, pp. 313-41.
[416] Stockman, Women's Work in East and West, p. 200.
[417] For the United States, see May H. Stevenson, Determinants of Low Wages for Women Workers,
New York, Praeger, 1984, p. 4; for Europe, see Statistisches Amt der Europäischen Gemeinschaften,
Frauen der Europäischen Gemeinschaft, Luxemburg, Amt für amtliche Veröffentlichungen der
Europäischen Gemeinschaften, 1992, pp. 94-7.
[418] Briar, Working for Women, p. 153.
[419] See Nancy Gabin, "Time Out of Mind: the UAW's Response to Female Labor Laws and
Mandatory Overtime in the 1960s," in Ava Abron, ed., Work Engendered: Toward a New History of
American Labor, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1991, pp. 355, 351-74.
[420] "Women in the Law Say Path is Limited by 'Mommy Track,'" New York Times, 8.8.1988, p. A1.
[421] For Japan, see Carney and O'Kelly, Women's Work and Place in Japan, p. 146.
[422] For Silicon Valley, see Karen Hossfeld, "'Their Own Logic Against Them': Contradictions in
Sex, Race and Class in Silicon Valley," in Ward, ed., Women Workers and Global Restructuring, p.
172.
[423] Katherine O'Donovan and Erika Szyszcak, Equality and Sex Discrimination Law, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1988, pp. 65-6; Meade-Hill and another v. the British Council [1995], IRLR 478.
[424] See Baridon and Eyler, Working Together, pp. 188-90.
[425] Dienel, Frauen in Führungspositionen in Europa, pp. 138-41, and table 36; Bundesministerium
für Wirtschaft, ed., Frauen als Wirtschaftsfaktor in Europa, Frankfurt, Bundesministerium für
Wirtschaft, 1997, pp. 20-1, 97.
[426] Kea Tijdens, "Segregation Processes by Gender: The Case of the Electronic Data-Processing
Occupations," in Petra Beckman, ed., Gender-Specific Occupational Segregation, Nuremberg,
German Institute for Economic Research, 1996, p. 118.
[427] Nasman, "Childhood, Family and New Ways of Life: The Case of Sweden," p. 124.
[428] Pott-Butter, Facts and Fairy Tales, p. 208.
[429] A. Nyberg, "The Social Construction of Married Woman's Labor-Force Participation: The Case
of Sweden in the Twentieth Century," Continuity and Change, 9, 1994, pp. 153-4.
[430] For China, see Davin, Woman Work, p. 149.
[431] Jane L. Parpart, "Gender, Patriarchy, and Development in Africa: The Zimbabwean Case," in
Valentine M. Moghadam, ed., Patriarchy and Economic Development, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1996, p. 151.
[432] See Diane L. Wolf, "Linking Women's Labor with the Global Economy; Factory Workers and
Their Families in Rural Java," in Kathryn Ward, ed., Women Workers and Global Restructuring,
Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1990, p. 42.
[433] Sinith Sittrak, The Daughters of Development: Women and the Changing Environment,
London, Zed, 1998, p. 93.
[434] Wolf, "Linking Women's Labor with the Global Economy," p. 43; Sun Joo Oh, "The Living
Conditions of Female Workers in Korea," Korea Observer, 14, 1983, pp. 185-200.
[435] P. Pongpaichit, "Two Roads to the Factory: Industrialization Strategies and Women's
Employment in South East Asia," in Bina Agarwal, ed., Structures of Patriarchy: the State, the
Community and the Household, London, Zed, 1988, pp. 158-61.
[436] Rita S. Gallin, "Women and the Export Industry in Taiwan: The Muting of Class
Consciousness," in Ward, ed., Women Workers and Global Restructuring, p. 190.
[437] See Beth Milward, Working with Men, Hillsboro, OR, Beyond Words, 1990, pp. 179-276; also
see Elizabeth P. McKenna, When Work Doesn't Work Anymore: Women, Work and Identity, New
York, Delacorte, 1997, chapter 1.
[438] Catherine Hakim, "Theoretical Measurement Issues in the Analysis of Occupational
Segregation," in Beckman, ed., Gender-Specific Occupational Segregation, pp. 76-7; Hakim, Key
Issues in Women's Work, pp. 117, 134, 140-1.
[439] For 1996, see Council of Economic Advisers, Families and the Labor Market, 1969-1999:
Analyzing the "Time Crunch," Washington, p. 4.
[440] Tiger, The Decline of Males, p. 121; M. T. Coleman and J. Pencavel, "Trends in Market Work
Behavior of Women since 1940," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46, 1993, pp. 653-77.
[441] See John Money and Patricia Tucker, Sexual Signatures: On Being a Man or a Woman, Boston,
Little Brown, 1975, p. 199; also see Susan Moller Okin, Justice, Gender and the Family, New York,
Basic Books, 1989, p. 144.
[442] Liz Roman Gallese, Women Like Us, New York, William Morrow, 1985, p. 250-1.
[443] See Sandra Tsing Loh, "The Weaker Sex," The Atlantic, December 2010; also see A. Cherlin,
"Worklife and Marital Dissolution," in George Levinger, eds, Divorce and Separation, New York,
Basic Books, 1979, pp. 151-66.
[444] Moses, The Politics of Women and Work, pp. 24, 32.
[445] Doris Weatherford, American Women and World War II, New York, Facts on File, 1990, p. 140.
[446] Okin, Justice, Gender and the Family, p. 103.
[447] See McKenna, When Work Doesn't Work Any More, p. 37.
[448] Margaret Mead, Male and Female: A Study of the Sexes in a Changing World, New York,
Mentor, 1949, p. 145-6.
[449] See Georg W. F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1942, sections
75, 158, 159, 162; also see Shlomo Avineri, Hegel's Theory of the Modern State, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1972, 133-4, 139-41.
[450] M. Muhammad Ali, Translation of the Holy Quran, Lahore, Ahhamadyyah Anhuman Ishaat-iIslam, 1951, 3, 4, 86, and footnote 1.
[451] Tacitus, Germania, 28.
[452] Judith Evans Grubbs, Law and Family in Late Antiquity, Oxford, Clarendon, 1995, pp. 175-6.
[453] The Rehlah of Ibn Battuta, p. 202.
[454] Anon, A Treatise of Femme Couverte or the Lady's Law, London, n.p., 1732, p. 30.
[455] Moors, "Gender, Property and Power," pp. 17-8.
[456] Theodore Evergates, "Aristocratic Women in the Country of Champagne," in Theodore
Evergates, ed., Aristocratic Women in Medieval France, Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania
Press, 1999, p. 93.
[457] Anjani Kant, Women and the Law, New Delhi, APH., 1997, pp. 37, 244-51.
[458] Christine Fell et al., Women in Anglo-Saxon England and the Impact of 1066, Oxford,
Blackwell, 1984.
[459] See Herbert Helbig, "Die Verlobung im Mittelalter," Der Herold, 8, 1988, pp. 253-61.
[460] See Lepowski, "Gender in an Egalitarian Society," p. 180; also Ekong, Bridewealth, p. 68; Jack
Goody, The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1983, p. 254; Jan Ovesen et al., When Every Household is an Island: Social Organization and
Power Structures in Rural Cambodia, Uppsala, Uppsala University Press, 1996, p. 57.
[461] See L. Sharp, "The Social Organization of the Yir Yiront Tribe, Cape York Peninsula,"
Oceania, 3, 1932-3, pp. 429-30; H. Gerber, "Social and Economic Position of Women in an Ottoman
City, Bursa 1600-1700," International Journal of Middle East Studies, 1, 1980, p. 232; Jack Goody,
"Polygyny, Economy and the Role of Women," in Jack Goody, ed., The Character of Kinship,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1973, pp. 176-82.
[462] See Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, p. 129.
[463] R. B. Parkinson, Voices of Ancient Egypt: An Anthology of Middle Kingdom Writings, London,
Enchiridion, 1991, p. 55.
[464] Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, p. 134.
[465] Marylin Arthur, "'Liberated' Women: The Classical Era," in Bridenthal and Koonz, eds.,
Becoming Visible, p. 75.
[466] See Grubbs, Law and Family in Late Antiquity, p. 146.
[467] Julia Leslie, "Recycling Ancient Material: An Orthodox View of Hindu Women," in Leonie J.
Archer et al., eds., Women in Ancient Societies: An Illusion of the Night, London, MacMillan, 1994,
p. 241; Wahiduddin Khan, Woman between Islam and Western Society, p. 177.
[468] Richard Garner, Law and Society in Classical Athens, London, Croom Helm, 1987, pp. 14, 85;
Just, Women in Athenian Law and Life, p. 31.
[469] Just, Women in Athenian Law and Life, p. 73.
[470] Pomeroy, Families in Classical and Hellenistic Greece, p. 20.
[471] Grubbs, Law and Family in Late Antiquity, pp. 143, 147; O. F Robinson, "The Historical
Background," in Sheila A. M. Maclean and Noreen Burrows, eds., The Legal Relevance of Gender:
Some Aspects of Sex-Based Discrimination, London, MacMillan, 1988, pp. 48-9.
[472] Andree Coutemanche, La richesse des femmes: Patrimoines et gestion à Monasque au xive
siècle, Paris, Vrin, 1993, pp. 172-5, 294; Shachar, The Fourth Estate, pp. 127-8.
[473] See Carol Bresnahan Menning, Charity and State in Late Renaissance Italy, Ithaca, NY,
Cornell University Press, 1993. p. 155; Samuel K. Cohn, "Marriage in the Mountains, 1348-1500," in
Trevor Dean and K. J. P. Lowe, eds., Marriage in Italy, 1300-1500, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1998, pp. 184-5.
[474] David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the
Florentine Catasto of 1427, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1978, p. 228.
[475] See Felicity Heal and Clive Holmes, The Gentry in England and Wales, 1500-1700, London,
MacMillan, 1994, p. 141.
[476] See Linda Guzzetti, "Separation and Separated Couples in Fourteenth-Century Venice," in
Dean and Lowe, eds., Marriage in Italy, pp. 257-8.
[477] Steven Epstein, Wills and Wealth in Medieval Genoa, 1150-1250, Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press, 1984, pp. 103-6.
[478] See Goody, The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe, pp. 21, 207, 243, 253;
Amyu Livingstone, "Aristocratic Women in the Chartrain," in Evergates, ed., Aristocratic Women in
Medieval France, p. 59.
[479] Pomeroy, Families in Classical and Hellenistic Greece, p. 20.
[480] Aristotle, Politics, 1270a 23-4; Plutarch, Agis, 7.3-4.
[481] Epstein, Wills and Wealth in Medieval Genoa, p. 109.
[482] Kate Mertes, The English Noble Household, 1250-1600: Good Governance and Politic Rule,
Oxford, Blackwell, 199, p. 158.
[483] Goody, The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe, pp. 65, 209; Coutemanche,
La richesse des femmes, pp. 168, 172-5; Amy L. Erickson, Women and Property in Early Modern
England, London, Routledge, 1993, pp. 213, 215, 217.
[484] Sara Hormel and Jane Humphries, "The Origins and Expansion of the Male Breadwinner
Family: The Case of Nineteenth-Century Britain," in Angelique Janssens, ed., The Rise and Decline
of the Male Breadwinner Family, pp. 31, 32, 35, 47, 60-1.
[485] Horrell and Humphries, "The Origins and Expansion of the Male Breadwinner Family," p. 48.
[486] Haines, Life Cycle, Savings, Demographic Adaptation, p. 49, table 3.1.
[487] Louise A. Tilly, "Family, Gender, and Occupation in Industrial France: Past and Present," in
Alice S. Rossi, ed., Gender and the Life Course, New York, Aldine, 1985, p. 203.
[488] Alena Heitlinger, Women and State Socialism, London, MacMillan, 1979, p. 155.
[489] Moses, The Politics of Women and Work in the Soviet Union and the United States, p. 21.
[490] According to Ann Critenden, The Price of Motherhood: Why the Most Important Job in All the
World is Still the Least Valued, New York, Metropolitan, 2001, p. 248.
[491] Julia A. Shorab, Sexing the Benefit: Women, Social Security and Financial Independence in EC
Sex Equality Laws, Aldershot, England, Dartmouth, 1996, p. 23.
[492] Michael Lind, "The Beige and the Black," The New York Times Magazine, 16.8.1998, pp. 38-9.
[493] Stephanie Coontz, "The Myth of Male Decline," The New York Times, 29.9.2012.
[494] Bianchi, "A Cross National Look at Married Women's Earnings Dependency," p. 4; Hilda
Kahn, "Economic Perspectives on Work and Family Issues," in Malkah T. Notman and Carol C.
Nadelson, Women and Men: New Perspectives on Gender Differences, Washington, 1991, p. 11.
[495] G. L. Staines, "Men and Women in Role Relationships," in Ashmore and Del Boca, eds., The
Social Psychology of Female-Male Relationships, p. 228.
[496] For early modern Europe see Simonton, Women's Work in Europe, p. 20; for Cambodia see
Ovesen, When Every Household is an Island, pp. 563, 60, 62.
[497] Pliny Jr., Panegyric and Letters, 4.19.2; ILS 8444, printed in Jane F. Gardner and Th.
Wiedemann, The Roman Household: A Sourcebook, London, Routledge, 1991, p. 54.
[498] See Neil McKendrick, "Home Demand and Economic Growth: A New View of the Role of
Women and Children in the Industrial Revolution," in Neil McKendrick, ed., Historical Perspectives:
Studies in English Thought and Society, London, Europa, 1974, pp. 201-3.
[499] Lori Ann Loeb, Consuming Angels: Advertising and Victorian Women, New York, Oxford
University Press, 1994, pp. 5, 9, 12, 34.
[500] Pierre G. F. le Play, Les ouvriers européens, Paris, A. Mame, 1875, vol. 5, p. 427; Peter
Stearns, "Working Class Women in Britain, 1890-1914," in Martha Vicinus, ed., Suffer and be Still,
Bloomington, IN, University of Indiana Press, 1972, p. 106; Jane Lewis, "Models of Equality for
Women: The Case of State Support for Children in Twentieth Century Britain," in Gisela Bock and
Pat Thane, Maternity and Gender Policies: Women and the Rise of the European Welfare States,
1880s-1950s, London, Routledge, 1991, p. 81.
[501] See Germaine Greer, The Whole Woman, New York, Anchor Books, 1999, p. 145.
[502] See Stockman, Women's Work in East and West, p. 132, table 4.8; for China, see Jacka, Women
and Work in Rural China, pp. 66-8.
[503] See Gillis, For Better, for Worse, p. 199.
[504] Basch, Framing American Divorce, p. 108.
[505] Erickson, Women and Property, pp. 104-5.
[506] Erickson, Women and Property, p. 107.
[507] Peter Linebaugh, The London Hanged: Crime and Civil Society in the Eighteenth Century,
London, Allen Lane, 1991, p. 141.
[508] See Shirley Wolf Kram and Neil A. Frank, The Law of Child Custody: Development of the
Substantive Law, Lexington, MA, Lexington Books, 1982, pp. 145, 153.
[509] "What Fathers Tell Us," The Squire, 14.6.1984, p. 2.
[510] Anette Depla, "Women in Ancient Egyptian Wisdom Literature," in Archer et al., eds., Women
in Ancient Societies, p. 35.
[511] Kant, Women in the Law, pp. 91, 117, 203.
[512] Randolph Trumbach, Sex and the Gender Revolution, Chicago, Chicago University Press,
1998, pp. 525-6.
[513] See Robert E. Griswold, "Divorce and the Redefinition of Victorian Manhood," in Mark C.
Carnes and Clyde Griffin, eds., Meanings for Manhood, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1990,
chapter 5.
[514] Gillis, For Better, for Worse, pp. 209, 251.
[515] Quoted in Oxford English Dictionary, vol. 1, p. 319.
[516] Robert E. Griswold, "Divorce and the Redefinition of Victorian Manhood," in Carnes and
Griffin, eds., Meanings for Manhood, pp. 106-7.
[517] Quoted in Kram and Frank, The Law of Child Custody, p. 86.
[518] Robert Seidenberg, The Father's Emergency Guide to Divorce-Custody Battle, Takoma Park,
MD, JES, 1997, pp. 16-7.
[519] Judith A. Baer, Women in American Law: The Struggle Toward Equality from the New Deal to
the Present, New York, Holmes and Meier, 1996, p. 138.
[520] See Maeve E. Doggett, Marriage, Wife Beating and the Law in Victorian England, London,
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1992, p. 102; for New York State see Kram and Frank, The Law of Child
Custody, pp. 20-6.
[521] Fiona Williams, "Troubled Masculinities in Social Policy Discourses: Fatherhood," in Popay,
ed., Men, Gender Divisions and Welfare, p. 73.
[522] Leo Kanowitz, "'Benign' Sex Discrimination: Its Troubles and Their Cure," Hastings Law
Journal, 31, 6, July 1980, p. 1386-7.
[523] For the United States see Shirley P. Burggraf, The Feminine Economy and Economic Man:
Reviving the Role of Family in the Post-Industrial Age, Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley, 1997, pp.
120-33; for Canada see Kristen Douglas, Spousal Support Under the Divorce Act: A New Direction,
Ottawa, Library of Parliament, Background Paper No. BP-259 E, 1994.
[524] Mary Ann Mason, The Equality Trap, New York, Simon & Schuster, 1988, p. 50; Baer, Women
in American Law, p. 311; Betty Friedan, The Second Stage, New York, Summit, 1981, pp. 97-8;
Okin, Justice, Gender and the Family, pp. 134-69.
[525] See Ruth Sidel, Women and Children Last: The Plight of Poor Women in Affluent America,
New York, Viking, 1986, pp. 56-60.
[526] See Lenore Weitzman, The Marriage Contract: Spouses, Lovers and the Law, New York, Free
Press, 1981, pp. 41-3, 71-4.
[527] Andrew Hacker, "What Killed the ERA? A Lack of Concern for the Housewife," Albany (NY)
Times-Union, 19.10.1980, p. H1.
[528] i Timothy, 5.16.
[529] John Henderson, Piety and Charity in Late Medieval Florence, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1994,
pp. 36, 257, 266, 342, 383, 384, and table 9.4.
[530] Allain Tallon, "Prière et charité dans la compagnie de Saint Sacrement, 1629-1707," Histoire,
Économie et Societé, 103, 1991, p. 337.
[531] F. J. Furnivall, ed., The Fifty Earliest English Wills in the Court of Probate, London, A.D 1387-
1439, London, Early English Text Society, 1882, p. xii.
[532] B. Germeck et al., The Margins of Society in Late Medieval Paris, Cambridge, Cambridge,
University Press, 2006, p. 184; also Demetrios J. Constantelos, Poverty, Society and Philanthropy in
the Late Medieval Greek World, New Rochelle, NY, Caratzas, 1992, p. 95.
[533] Menning, Charity and State in Late Renaissance Italy, p. 259.
[534] For this and the following paragraph see Stuart Woolf, The Poor in Western Europe: The
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries, London, Methuen, 1986, 24-5.
[535] Brian Pullan, ed., Poverty and Charity: Europe, Italy, Venice, 1400-1700, Aldershot, Ashgate,
1994, p. IV 1022; IX 19-21.
[536] Marie Claude Guiller and-Champenier, "Les femmes consacrées de l'Anjou et la pauvreté aux
xvii et xviii siècles," in Plongeron and Guillaume, eds., De la charité à l'action sociale, pp. 83, 88;
Pullan, ed., Poverty and Charity, p. 4.
[537] Alice Clark, The Working Life of Woman in the Seventeenth-Century, London, Routledge,
1982, p. 107.
[538] Clark, The Working Life of Women, pp. 230-1.
[539] See Elizabeth C. Sanderson, Women and Work in Eighteenth-Century Edinburgh, London,
MacMillan, 1996, pp. 7, 11, 27, 35, 137, 138.
[540] Simonton, European Women's Work, pp. 49, 50.
[541] Mimi Abramovitz, Regulating the Lives of Women: Social Welfare Policy from Colonial Times
to the Present, Boston, South End Press, 1996 [1988], pp. 94-5.
[542] Sandra Bos, "Uyt Liefde tot Malcander:" Onderlinge Hulpverlening binnen de NoordNederlandse Gilden in Internatinale Perspectief, 1570-1820, Amsterdam, IISG, 1998, pp. 74-5, 135.
[543] Clark, The Working Life of Woman, pp. 161, 184, 194; Boss, “Uyt Liefde tot Malcander," p. 38.
[544] Clark, The Working Life of Woman, p. 153; Mary Beard, Women as Force in History: A Study in
Traditions and Realities, New York, Octagon, 1976, [1946], p. 208; Merry E. Wiesner, Women and
Gender in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1993, p. 31.
[545] Erickson, Women and Property, pp. 212, 215.
[546] H. Wunder and Th. Dunlap, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon: Women in Early Modern Germany.
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1998, p. 139.
[547] Robert M. Schwartz, Policing the Poor in Eighteenth-Century France, Chapel Hill, NC,
University of North Carolina Press, 1988, pp. 43-4.
[548] Alfhild Nakken, "La pauvreté en Norvege 1500-1800," in Thomas Riis, ed., Aspects of Poverty
in Early Modern Europe, Odense, Odense University Press, 1990, p. 72.
[549] Harald Jorgensen, "L'assistance au pauvres au Danemark jusqu'a la fin du xviii siècle," in Riis,
ed., Aspects of Poverty in Early Modern Europe, p. 25.
[550] Cissie C. Fairchilds, Poverty and Charity in Aix-en Provence, 1640-1789, Baltimore, MD,
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976, pp. 110, 113.
[551] Schwartz, Policing the Poor in Eighteenth-Century France, p. 103.
[552] Colin Jones, Charity and Bienfaisance: The Treatment of the Poor in the Montpellier Region,
1740-1815, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982, pp. 176-8, 202.
[553] Abramovitz, Regulating the Lives of Women, p. 187; Vammen, "Ambiguous Performances," p.
129, fn. 15; Kerston Norlander, "To be A Woman Capitalist," in Jordansson and Vamme, eds.,
Charitable Women, p. 173.
[554] F. K. Proschka, Women and Philanthropy in Nineteenth-Century England, Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1980, pp. 189-90, 194.
[555] Pamela Sharpe, Adapting to Capitalism: Working Women in the English Economy, 1800-1850,
London, MacMillan, 1996, p. 134-40; Vammen, "Ambiguous Performances," p. 103.
[556] Birgitta Jordansson, "Philanthropy in a Liberal Context: The Case of Gothenburg," in
Jordansson and Vammen, eds., Charitable Women, pp. 72-80.
[557] Vammen, "Ambiguous Performances," pp. 97, 129, fn. 6.
[558] Kerstin Thorn, "Stockholm's Arbertarhem: Building Welfare," in Jordansson and Tinne
Vammen, eds., Charitable Women, p. 205.
[559] Vammen, "Ambiguous Performance," p. 133, fn. 132; Thorn, "Stockholm's Arbertarhem” p.
210.
[560] Annarita Buttafuoco, "Motherhood as a Political Strategy: The Role of the Italian Women's
Movement in the Creation of the Casa Nationale di Maternità," in Thane, eds., Maternity and
Gender Policies, pp. 184-5.
[561] Proschka, Women and Philanthropy, pp. 32, 101, 244.
[562] New York City Association for Improving the Conditions of the Poor, Fifth Annual Report,
New York, 1852, pp. 20-2; Ninth Annual Report, New York, 1858, p. 38.
[563] Abramovitz, Regulating the Lives of Women, pp. 158.
[564] Sara J. Hale in Godey's Lady's Book, vol. 44, 5 June 1852, p. 99; also see Simonton, European
Women's Work, p. 65.
[565] Solomon, In the Company of Educated Women, p. 145.
[566] Albisetti, Schooling German Girls and Women, pp. 58, 177; Sharif Gemie, Women and
Schooling in France, 1815-1914, Keele, Keele University Press, 1995, p. 43.
[567] James Grant, Sketches in London, London, Clarke, 1838, p. 4.
[568] Himmelfarb, The De-Moralization of Society, pp. 132, 135.
[569] See Winer, From Working Girl to Working Mother, pp. 128-30; also see Woodcock Tentler,
Wage-Earning Women, pp. 193, 200-1, 204-5.
[570] See Abramovitz, Regulating the Lives of Women, p. 333.
[571] Baxandall and Gordon, America's Working Women, p. 213.
[572] Abramovitz, Regulating the Lives of Women, pp. 257-8.
[573] See Bock and Thane, eds., Maternity and Gender Policies, pp. 4, 11.
[574] Jane Bates, "Gender, Social Security, and Pensions: The Myth of the 'Everyday Housewife,'" in
Maclean and Burrows, eds., The Legal Relevance of Gender, p. 122.
[575] Women, Men and Incomes: Gender Equality and Economic Independence, Report to the
Committee on the Distribution of Economic Power and Economic Resources between Women and
Men, Stockholm, Ministry of Labor, 1997, pp. 36-7.
[576] Women, Men and Incomes, p. 12.
[577] Women, Men and Incomes, p. 11, table 11; p. 31, table 7; p. 35; appendix A, table 3.
[578] Women, Men and Incomes, appendix A, table 40; p. 74.
[579] See Naomi Wolf, Promiscuities: The Secret Struggle for Womanhood, New York, Fawcett
Columbine, 1997, p. 16.
[580] See Marcia Guttentag and Paul F. Secord, Too Many Women? The Sex Ratio Question, Beverly
Hills, CA, Sage, 1983, pp. 170-1.
[581] Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature, vol. 1, p. 191.
[582] Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, p. 117.
[583] Martha T. Roth, "Gender and Law: A Case Study from Ancient Mesopotamia," in Victor H.
Matthews et al., eds., Gender and Law in the Hebrew Bible and the Ancient Near East, Sheffield,
Academic Press, 1998, p. 178.
[584] See Antonia Fraser, The Warrior Queens, New York, Vintage, 1988, p. 114.
[585] See Herbert Musurillo, The Acts of the Christian Martyrs, Oxford, Oxford University Press,
1972, pp. 22, 24, 115, 129, 133.
[586] The Laws of the Salian Franks, Katherine F. Fischer, trans., Philadelphia, University of
Philadelphia Press, 1991, pp. 84, 94-5, 125, 131, 144, 162-3, 200, 203.
[587] Sheila Carapico, "Gender and Status Inequalities in Yemen: Honor, Education and Politics," in
Valentine M. Mogahdam, Patriarchy and Economic Development: Women's Positions at the End of
the Twentieth Century, New York, Oxford University Press, 1996, p. 85.
[588] Rowena E. Archer, "Women as Landholders and Administrators in the Later Middle Ages," in
Goldberg, ed., Woman is a Worthy Wight, pp. 163-9.
[589] Helena Graham, "A Woman's Work... Labor and Gender in the Late Medieval Countryside," in
Goldberg, ed., Woman Is a Worthy Wight, pp. 139, 141, 144.
[590] Clark, Working Life of Women in the Seventeenth Century, pp. 34-5.
[591] Elizabeth C. Sanderson, Women and Work in Eighteenth-Century Edinburgh, London,
MacMillan, 1996, p. 10.
[592] Gillis, For Better, for Worse, p. 77.
[593] Lisa Silverman, Tortured Subjects: Pain, Truth and the Body in Early Modern France,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2001, pp. 77, 98.
[594] Baer, Women in American Law, p. 181.
[595] Demosthenes, Against Aristocrates, 23.55, 55.
[596] Gardner, Women in Roman Law and Society, p. 129; also Grubbs, Law and Family in Late
Antiquity, p. 217.
[597] The Laws of the Salian Franks, p. 80.
[598] Laiou, "Sex, Consent and Coercion in Byzantium," in Laiou, ed., Consent and Coercion to Sex
and Marriage, pp. 119, 121, 122. 125, 126, 135, 137, 142, 146, 150-1.
[599] Dean, "Fathers and Daughters: Marriage Laws and Disputes," in Dean and Lowe, eds.,
Marriage in Italy, p. 86.
[600] The Rehlah of Ibn Battuta, p. 213.
[601] Wunder, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon, p. 125.
[602] Yebamot, 56.1. I wish to thank Amichai Borosh for bringing this passage to my attention.
[603] See Louis Crompton, "The Myth of Lesbian Impunity: Capital Laws from 1270 to 1791,"
Journal of Homosexuality, 6, 1, fall/winter 1980/81, pp. 11-3, 15-21.
[604] See Goitein, A Mediterranean Society, vol. 5, p. 316.
[605] Burchard of Worms, quoted in Danielle Jacquart and Claude Thomasset, Sexuality and
Medicine in the Middle Ages, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1985, p. 89; ibid, p. 160.
[606] See Brigitte Eriksson, "A Lesbian Execution in Germany 1721," Journal of Homosexuality, 6,
12, fall/winter 1980/81, pp. 27-40.
[607] Porter and Hall, The Facts of Life, p. 29.
[608] Hans Georg Stümke, Homosexuelle in Deutschland, Berlin, Förster, 1989, p. 144.
[609] Rüdiger Lutmann, "The Pink Triangle: The Persecution of Homosexual Males in Concentration
Camps in Nazi Germany" Journal of Homosexuality, 6, 1/2, fall/winter 1980/81, p. 141-60.
[610] For "cures" see Günter Grau, ed., Homosexualität in der NS Zeit, Frankfurt/Main, Fischer,
1993, pp. 305-21, 345-57; for why women were not persecuted see ibid, pp. 39, 102-3.
[611] Rosenthal, "Love on the Tractor," in Bridenthal and Koonz, eds., Becoming Visible, p. 388.
[612] Harriet Evans, Women and Sexuality in China, New York, Continuum, 1997, p. 208.
[613] Joanne Belknap, The Invisible Woman: Gender, Crime and Justice, Belmont, CA, Wadsworth,
1996, p. 112; Nancy K. Wilson, "Styles of Doing Time in a Coed Prison," in John Ortiz Smylka, ed.,
COED Prison, New York, Human Sciences, 1980, p. 159
[614] Data valid as of September 1993; Peter McWilliams, Ain't Nobody's Business if You Do: The
Absurdity of Consensual Crimes in a Free Society, Los Angeles, McWilliams, 1993, pp. 779-80.
[615] For ancient Rome see Tacitus, Annales, 13.32; for the early modern age see Freedman, Their
Sisters' Keepers, p. 10; Von Grumbach: Wiesner, Women and Gender in Early Modern Europe, p.
188.
[616] Arthur G. Dickens, The English Reformation, New York, Schocken, 1969, pp. 266-7.
[617] J. C. Oldham, "On Pleading the Belly: A History of 'The Jury of Matrons,'" Criminal Justice
History, 6, 1985, pp. 1-64.
[618] Linebaugh, The London Hanged, pp. 85, 91, 142.
[619] Chris Docherty, "Female Offenders," in McLean and Burrows, eds., The Legal Relevance of
Gender, p. 174.
[620] Wunder, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon, pp. 188-9.
[621] N. Finash, "Zur 'Ökonomie des Strafens': Gefängniswesen und Gefängnisreform im RoerDepartment nach 1794," Rheinische Vierteljahresberichte, 4, 1989, pp. 188-210.
[622] William C. Carroll, Fat King, Lean Beggar: Representations of Poverty in the Age of
Shakespeare, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1996, pp. 58, 112.
[623] See Freedman, Their Sisters' Keepers, p. 62.
[624] Medea Chesney-Lind and Lisa J. Pasko, The Female Offender: Girls, Women and Crime,
Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage, 1997, p. 164.
[625] See Kathryn W. Burkhart, Women in Prison, New York, Doubleday, 1973.
[626] Freedman, Their Sisters' Keepers, p. 68.
[627] Lucia Zender, Women's Crime and Custody in Victorian England, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1991, pp. 106, 145-6, 169, 175, 209.
[628] Zender, Women's Crime, pp. 147, 168.
[629] Zender, Women's Crime, pp. 22, 138, 170, 247; Roger Matthews, Doing Time: An Introduction
to the Sociology of Imprisonment, London, MacMillan, 1999, p. 182.
[630] The English Woman's Journal, January 1859, p. 291, quoted in Zender, Women's Crime, p. 19.
[631] Basch, Framing American Divorce, p. 165.
[632] Adam Hargrave, Woman and Crime, London, Laurie, 1914, p. 4.
[633] Zender, Woman's Crime, pp. 38, 78-9; Elaine Showalter, The Female Malady: Women,
Madness and English Culture, 1830-1980, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin, 1983, p. 58-9.
[634] Vernon Harris, "The Female Prisoner," The Nineteenth Century and After, No. 363, May 1907,
p. 783.
[635] See Eleanor Flexner, Century of Struggle: The Woman's Rights Movement in the United States,
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1975, pp. 169-71.
[636] Henry Maudesley, Responsibility in Mental Disease, London, Kegan Paul, 1874, p. 28.
[637] Leonard, Women, Crime and Society, p. 82.
[638] Leonard, Women, Crime and Society, p. 84.
[639] Otto Pollack, The Criminality of Women, Westport, CT, Greenwood Press, 1978, p. 151.
[640] U.S. Department of Justice, Survey of State Prison Inmates—1991, Women in Prison, Bureau
of Justice Statistics Special Report NCJ 145321, Washington, Government Printing Office, March
1994, p. 4.
[641] Frank H. Julian, "Gender and Crime: Different Sex, Different Treatment?" in Concetta C.
Culliver, ed., Female Criminality: The State of the Art, New York, Garland, 1993, p. 358.
[642] Chesney-Lind, "Female Offenders: Paternalism Reexamined," in L. L. Crites and W. L
Hepperle, eds., Women, the Courts and Equality, Newbury Park, Ca, Sage, 1987, pp. 114-39.
[643] Belknap, The Invisible Woman, p. 85.
[644] Leonard, Women, Crime and Society: A Critique of Theoretical Criminology, New York,
Longman, 198, p. 9.
[645] Dougherty, "Female Offenders," in McLean and Burrows, eds., The Legal Relevance of
Gender, p. 186; Home Office, Criminal Statistics, London, HMSO, 1983, table 5.5.
[646] M. D. Krohn et al., "Is Chivalry Dead? An Analysis of the Changes in Police Disposition of
Males and Females," Criminology, 21, 1983, pp. 417-38.
[647] E. Mould, "Chivalry and Paternalism—Disparities of Treatment in the Criminal Justice
System," Western Political Quarterly, 31, 1978, pp. 416-30.
[648] I. H. Nagel et al., "Sex Differences in the Processing of Criminal Defendants," in D. K.
Weisberg, ed., Women and the Law: A Social Historical Perspective, Cambridge, MA, Schenkman,
1982, vol. 1, pp. 259-82.
[649] Noreen L. Channels and Sharon D. Herzberger, "The Role of Gender in Pretrial Decision
Making," in Culliver, ed., Female Criminality, p. 330.
[650] Kant, Women and the Law, p. 140.
[651] Baer, Women in American Law, p. 283.
[652] See Ronald B. Flowers, Women and Criminality: The Woman as Victim, Offender and
Practitioner, Westport, CT, Greenwood, 1987, pp. 108-9.
[653] See G. A. Samspon, "Premenstrual Syndrome: A Double Blind Controlled Trial of
Progesterone and Placebo," British Journal of Psychiatry, 135, 1979, pp. 209-15; P. A. Buchon and
K. Calhoun, "Menstrual Cycle Symptomatology: The Role of Social Expectancy and Experimental
Characteristics," Psychosomatic Medicine, 47, 1985, pp. 35-45.
[654] Doggett, Marriage, Wife Beating and the Law in Victorian England, pp. 51-3.
[655] Jörg Friedrich, Die kalte Amnestie: NS Täter in der Bundesrepublik, Munich, Piper, 1994 ed.,
pp. 190, 193, 228.
[656] The Second Sex, p. 478.
[657] See Farrell, Why Men Are the Way They Are, pp. 239.
[658] See Naomi Wolf, Fire with Fire: The New Female Power and How To Use It, New York,
Ballantine, 1994, p. 221.
[659] See Michele Elliott, Frauen als Täterinnen: Sexueller Missbrauch an Mädchen und Jungen,
Ruhmark, Donna Vita, 1995, pp. 99, 102, 155, 159, 306.
[660] Channels and Herzberger, "The Role of Gender in Pretrial Decision Making," p. 323.
[661] Hilary Allen, Justice Unbalanced: Gender, Psychiatry, and Judicial Decisions, Milton Keynes,
Open University, 1987, pp. xii-xiii, 4-5, 7, 100-1, 106-7.
[662] Carol Hedderman and Mike Hough, Does the Criminal System Treat Men and Women
Differently? London, HMSO, 1994, pp. 3-4.
[663] Jo Bridgeman and Susan Millins, eds., Feminist Perspectives on Law: Law's Engagement with
the Female Body, London, Sweet & Maxwell, 1998, pp. 624-5.
[664] Nancy Levit, The Gender Line: Men, Women and the Law, New York, New York University
Press, 1998, p. 107.
[665] Levit, The Gender Line, p. 107.
[666] See Leonard, Women, Crime and Society, pp. 30, table 10; 31; 37, table 2.
[667] Rita J. Simon, "Women in Prison," in Culliver, ed., Female Criminality, p. 375.
[668] Frank H. Julian, "Gender and Crime: Different Sex, Different Treatment?" in Culliver, ed.,
Female Criminality, p. 346.
[669] U.S. Department of Justice, Survey of State Prison Inmates—1991, p. 4; also see M. Zingraff
and R. Thomsen, "Differential Sentencing of Women and Men in the USA," International Journal of
the Sociology of Law, 12, 1984, pp. 401-13.
[670] Culliver, ed., Female Criminality, pp. 368-9, 371.
[671] Clemens Bartillas, "Little Girls Grow Up: the Perils of Institutionalization," in Culliver, ed.,
Female Criminality, p. 469.
[672] Ralph R. Arditi et al., "The Era and COED Prisons," in Smylka, ed., COED Prison, p. 270.
[673] Belknap, The Invisible Woman, p. 102.
[674] Bartillas, "Little Girls Grow Up: The Perils of Institutionalization," in Culliver, ed., Female
Criminality, pp. 475, 477-8.
[675] Matthews, Doing Time, p. 200.
[676] See Levit, The Gender Line, pp. 109-11.
[677] C. Frazier et al., "The Role of Probation Officers in Determining Gender Differences in
Sentencing Severity," Sociological Quarterly, 24, 1983, pp. 305-18.
[678] Deuteronomy, 22.25-6.
[679] Laiou, "Sex, Consent and Coercion in Byzantium," pp. 165, 188.
[680] David W. Sabean, Property, Family and Production in Neckarhausen, 1700-1870, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1990, p. 191.
[681] Suzanne Steinmetz, "The Battered Husband Syndrome," Victimology, 2, 1977, p. 499; Fletcher,
Sex, Gender and Subordination, p. 271.
[682] Given, Society and Homicide, pp. 48, 117, 134-49.
[683] John R. Gillis, For Better, for Worse, p. 76.
[684] See Muhammad Ali, Translation of the Holy Quran, p. 86 footnote 5.
[685] Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Policy Guidance on Current Issues of Sexual
Harassment, No. N-915-050, March 1990, p. 3.
[686] See Andrea P. Baridon and David R. Eyler, Working Together: The New Rules and Realities for
Managing Men and Women at Work, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1994, p. 127.
[687] See Belknap, The Invisible Woman, p. 265.
[688] Levit, The Gender Line, pp. 109, 113.
[689] See (in Hebrew) Yediot Acharonot, Arutzim, 9.2.2001, p. 15.
[690] Baer, Women in American Law, p. 258.
[691] According to Patricia Lucie, "Discrimination Against Males in the USA," in McLean and
Burrows, The Legal Relevance of Gender, p. 228.
[692] According to Suzanne S. Ageton, Sexual Assault Among Adolescents, Lexington, MA, Heath,
1983, p. 155.
[693] See Brownmiller, Against Our Will, p. 377, where rape is defined as "falling midway between
robbery and assault."
[694] Kramer and Sprenger, Malleus Maleficarum, p. 228.
[695] See Belknap, The Invisible Woman, p. 265
[696] Greer, The Whole Woman, p. 289.
[697] Gardner, Woman in Roman Law and Society, p. 121.
[698] Quoted in Chicago Tribune, 13.10.1991.
[699] See Paglia, Vamps and Tramps, p. 48.
[700] Belknap, The Invisible Woman, pp. 159, 187.
[701] James Ptacek, Battered Women in the Courtroom, Boston, Northeastern University Press, 1999,
p. 124.
[702] Peter H. Neidig, "Executive Summary Family Advocacy Prevention/Survey Project Update:
Overview and Preliminary Findings," Behavioral Science Associates, unpublished paper prepared for
U.S. Army, Stony Brook, NY, 1993, p. 3.
[703] M. Straus and R. Gelles, "Societal Change and Change in Family Violence from 1975 to 1985
as Revealed by Two National Surveys," Journal of Marriage and the Family, 48, August 1986, pp.
465-79.
[704] M. Straus, "Physical Assaults by Wives: A Major Social Problem," in R. J. Gelles and D. R.
Loseke, eds., Current Controversies on Family Violence, Newbury Park, CA, Sage, 1983, p. 74.
[705] Reported in E. Lupri, "Harmonie und Aggression: Über die Dialektik Ehelicher Gewalt,"
Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie, 42, 3, 1990, pp. 479-501.
[706] M. McLeod, "Women Against Men: An Examination of Domestic Violence Based on an
Analysis of Official Data and National Victimization Data," Justice Quarterly, 1, 1984, p. 185.
[707] See Flowers, Women and Criminality, p. 111-2.
[708] For men disbelieved, Ptacek, see Battered Women in the Courtroom, p. 71; for women
believed, see Jalna Hanmer, "Out of Control: Men, Violence and Family Life," in Popay et al., eds.,
Men, Gender Divisions, and Welfare, pp. 128-45; also see William R. Blunt et al., "Intimate Abuse
Within an Incarcerated Female Population," in Culliver, ed., Female Criminality, pp. 413-68.
[709] S. V. McLeer and R. Anwar, "A Study of Battered Women Presenting in an Emergency
Department," American Journal of Public Health, 79, 1, January 1989, pp. 65-6.
[710] W. Goldberg and M. Tomlanovich, "Domestic Violence Victims in the Emergency
Department," Journal of the American Medical Association, 251, 24, 28, 9.6.1984, pp. 359-64.
[711] C. S. Greenblat, "A Hit Is a Hit Is a Hit... or Is It? Approval and Tolerance of the Use of
Physical Force by Spouses," in D. Finkelohr et al., eds., The Dark Side of Families: Current Family
Evidence Research, Beverly Hills, CA, Sage, 1983, pp. 235-60.
[712] See Donald Nicolson, "Telling Tales: Gender Discrimination, Gender Construction and
Battered Women Who Kill," (1953), in Jo Bridgeman and Susan Millins, eds., Feminist Perspectives
on Law: Law's Engagement with the Female Body, London, Sweet & Maxwell, 1998, p. 630.
[713] See C. Martin, "Getting Even? Women Who Kill in Domestic Encounters," Justice Quarterly,
5, 1, 1988, pp. 40-1.
[714] Quoted in Naomi Wolf, Fire with Fire, p. 199.
[715] U.S Department of Justice, Survey of State Prison Inmates—1991, p. 3.
[716] Chesney-Lind, The Female Offender, p. 40.
[717] ABC News. (13.12.2000). "Woman Sentenced for Microwaving Baby," retrieved from
http://abcnews.go.com/US/story?id=94713&page=1
[718] See Bad Breeders. (27.6.2011). “Ka Yang nuked her newborn,” retrieved from
http://badbreeders.net/tag/elizabeth-renee-otte/
[719] McKendrick, "Home Demand and Economic Growth," p. 155.
[720] Shirley W. Kram and Neil A. Frank, The Law of Child Custody, Lexington, MA, Lexington
Books, 1982, p. 79.
[721] Doggett, Marriage, Wife Beating and the Law in Victorian England, p. 102; Juliet Mitchell, and
Jack Goody, "Feminism, Fatherhood and the Family in Britain," in Ann Oakley and Juliet Mitchell,
eds., Who is Afraid of Feminism? Seeing Through the Backlash, New York, New Press, 1997, pp.
218-20.
[722] Lucie, "Discrimination Against Males in the USA," p. 226.
[723] Levit, The Gender Line, p. 120.
[724] Seidenberg, The Father's Emergency Guide, p. 39.
[725] D. Cohen, "It's a Guy Thing," Guardian Weekend, 14.5.1996, p. 30.
[726] Sylvia Ann Hewett and Cornel West, "A Parents' Bill of Rights Would End a 30 Years War,"
The New York Times, 12.4.1998.
[727] See Judith S. Wallerstein et al., The Unexpected Legacy of Divorce, New York, Hyperion,
2000, pp. 136, 250-3.
[728] See Toner, The Facts of Rape, p. 218.
[729] See Murray Strauss et al., Behind Closed Doors: Violence in the American Family, New
Brunswick, NJ, Transaction, 2006 [1981].
[730] J. Giles-Sims, Wife Battering: A Systems Theory Approach, New York, Guilford Press, 1983, p.
49.
[731] C. A. Hornung et al., "Status Relationships in Marriage Risk Factors in Spouse Abuse," Journal
of Marriage and the Family, 43, 1981, pp. 675-92.
[732] See Cook, Abused Men, p. 121.
[733] Maureen Greene, "Men and Marriage," Woman, 14.1.1984.
[734] See Lucie, "Discrimination Against Males in the USA," p. 220.
[735] Rosemary Tong, Feminist Thought: A Comprehensive Introduction, Boulder, CO, Westview,
1997, p. 93.
[736] Seidenberg, The Father's Emergency Guide, p. 2.
[737] Lucie, "Discrimination Against Males in the USA," p. 225.
[738] Baer, Women in American Law, p.56.
[739] Kant, Women and the Law, pp. 138, 141
[740] E. H. Steury and N. Frank, "Gender Bias and Pretrial Release: More Pieces of the Puzzle,"
Journal of Criminal Justice, 18, 1990, pp. 417-32.
[741] Exodus, 12.36.
[742] See G. R. Watson, The Roman Soldier, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1969, pp. 120-1.
[743] Wunder, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon, p. 17.
[744] See Gabor Agoston, "Ottoman Warfare in Europe, 1453-1826," in Jeremy Black, ed., European
Warfare, 1453-1815, New York, St. Martin's Press, 1999, pp. 122, 138, 155.
[745] Philippe Contamine, War in the Middle Ages, Oxford, Blackwell, 1988, pp. 78-90.
[746] Getzel M. Cohen, The Seleucid Colonies, Wiesbaden, Steiner, 1978, pp. 51-2.
[747] Brian L. Davis, "The Development of Russian Military Power, 1453-1815," in Black, ed.,
European Warfare, p. 165.
[748] Jacques J. Janssen and Rosalind M. Janssen, Growing Up in Ancient Egypt, London,
Stacey/Rubicon, 1996, pp. 103-4.
[749] Cohen, The Seleucid Colonies, p. 51.
[750] Thomas More, Utopia, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin, 1965 [1516], p. 11.
[751] “A Vindication of the Rights of Men,” in Janet Todd and Marylin Butler, eds., The Works of
Mary Wollstonecraft, London, Pickering, vol. 5, p. 15.
[752] John Gooch, Armies in Europe, London, Routledge, 1980, p. 52.
[753] Bebel, Die Frau und der Sozialismus, p. 163.
[754] Uwe M. Schneider, George Grosz: Der Künstler in seiner Gesellschaft, Cologne, Dumont,
1977, p. 123.
[755] See Martin van Creveld, The Sword and the Olive: A Critical History of the Israel Defense
Force, New York, Public Affairs, 1998, pp. 120-3.
[756] David Ben-Gurion, Yichud Ve’yeud: Devarim al Bitchon Yisrael, Tel Aviv, Maarachot, 1971, p.
79.
[757] See on this Martin van Creveld, Men, Women and War, London, Cassell, 2001, p. 208.
[758] See van Creveld, The Sword and the Olive, p. 99.
[759] Yediot Acharonot, 6.8.01, p. 5.
[760] See van Creveld, Men, Women and War, pp. 88-98.
[761] See Rudolf M. Dekker and Lotte C. van de Pol, The Tradition of Female Transvestism in Early
Modern Europe, New York, St. Martin's, 1989.
[762] See Nadezha Durova, The Cavalry Maiden: Journals of a Female Russian Officer in the
Napoleonic Wars, London, Paladin, 1990.
[763] Nancy Loring Goldman and Richard Stites, "Great Britain and the World Wars," in Nancy
Loring Goldman, ed., Female Soldiers, Combatants or Noncombatants? Westport, CT, Greenwood
Press, 1982, p. 24-6.
[764] Data from Jeanne Holm, Women in the Military: An Unfinished Revolution, Novato, CA,
Presidio, 1992, pp. 10-1.
[765] Jean Ebert and Marie-Beth Hall, Crossed Currents: Navy Women from World War II to
Tailhook, London, Brassey's, 1993, p. 14.
[766] See Frederick Pile, Ack Ack, London, Harrap, 1949, p. 186-7, 190-2.
[767] Gerard J. DeGroot, "Whose Finger on the Trigger? Mixed Anti-Aircraft Batteries and the
Female Combat Taboo," War in History, 4, 4, November 1997, p. 441.
[768] See Weatherford, American Women and World War II, p. 57.
[769] See Cf. DeGroot, "Whose Finger on the Trigger?" p. 437; Pile, Ack-Ack, pp. 190-9; Ebert and
Hall, Crossed Currents, 1993, p. 78.
[770] Based on the fact that 624 women, as against 380,000 men, were killed, and that women at
peak formed about 9 percent of the British Armed Forces.
[771] Stephen J. Diensterey, "Women Veterans' Exposure to Combat," Armed Forces and Society, 14,
4, summer 1988, pp. 593, 599.
[772] See Helen Rogan, Mixed Company; Women in the Modern Army, New York, Putnam, 1981, p.
266; also see Linda B. Francke, Ground Zero: The Gender Wars in the Military, New York, Simon &
Schuster, 1997, p. 83 ff..
[773] See van Creveld, Men, Women and War, pp. 140-1.
[774] Gaby Gorodetsky, The Myth of 'Icebreaker' (in Russian), Moscow, Progress Academia, 1995, p.
21. For assistance with the Russian material I wish to thank Mr. Alexander Epstein.
[775] See Ann Griesse and Richard Stites, "Russia: Revolution and War," in Loring Goldman, ed.,
Female Soldiers, pp. 68-78; V. V. Pachlopkin, The Great War and the Peace that did not Come, 1941-
1945 (in Russian), Moscow, Art Center, 1997, p. 96; Anne Noggle, Dance with Death: Soviet
Airwomen in World War II, College Station, TX, Texas University Press, 1994.
[776] Svetlana Alexijewitsch, Der Krieg hat kein weibliches Gesicht, Hamburg, Galgenberg, 1989, p.
138.
[777] See Patrick M. S. Blackett, The Military and Political Consequences of Atomic Energy,
London, Turnstile Press, 1948, chapter 10.
[778] See William B. Breuer, War and American Women, Westport, CT, Praeger, 1997, pp. 72, 76, 82.
[779] For Japan see K. M. Wiegand, "Japan: Cautious Utilization," in Goldman Loring, ed., Female
Soldiers, pp. 184, 187; for Australia see V. H. Billington, "Broadening the Recruiting Base for ARA
Soldiers," Fort Queenscliff Papers, 1991, pp. 56-7; for Sweden see Kurt Tornqvist, "Sweden, the
Neutral Nation," in ibid, p. 208; for Greece see J. Brown and C. Safilios-Rothschild, "Greece:
Reluctant Presence," ibid, p. 168; for Britain see Christopher Dandeker, "New Times for the
Military," British Journal of Sociology, 45, 4, December 1994, p. 649; for The Netherlands see Loes
van Tuyl, "Vrouwen tegen Vergrjizing," ARMEX, December 1997, pp. 16; for Belgium see Seidler,
Frauen zu den Waffen, p. 243; FGR: ibid, p. 223.
[780] For Greece see Brown and Safilios-Rothschild, "Greece: Reluctant Presence," in Goldman, ed.,
Female Soldiers, p. 173; for Belgium see Jeanne Klick, "Utilization of Women in the NATO
Military," p. 675 as well as Moniteur belge, 7.5.1977, p. 62-3; for see Switzerland Seidler, Frauen zu
den Waffen, p. 381; and for Canada Seidler, Frauen zu den Waffen, p. 324.
[781] See van Creveld, The Rise and Decline of the State, pp. 337-53.
[782] See van Creveld, Men, Women and War, pp. 196-97.
[783] News Weekly, 23.8.1997, p. 10; Mike Lynch Testimony to the Presidential Commission on the
Assignment of Women in the Armed Forces, Report to the President, p. 59.
[784] See P. J. Edwards and J. E. Edwards, Incidence of Pregnancy and Single Parenthood Among
Enlisted Personnel in the Navy, San Diego, CA, Navy Personnel Research and Development Center,
Report TN-92-8, February 1992. Other sources give slightly higher figures.
[785] Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Reserve Affairs and Logistics,
Background Review: Women in the Military, Washington, Department of Defense, 10.1981, p. 7.
[786] Levit, The Gender Line, p. 107; Baer, Women in American Law, pp. 39-40; Kaminer, A Fearful
Freedom, p. 2.
[787] Oral communication from Dr. Sergei Rogov, head of the US-Canada Institute, Moscow, Bonn,
22-3.9.1999.
[788] See the examples in Stephanie Guttmann, The Kinder, Gentler Military: Can America's
Gender-Neutral Fighting Force Still Win Wars? New York, Scribner, 2000, pp. 253-66.
[789] For the United States, see the testimony of Lt. John Calgett, USN, Presidential Commission,
15.11.1992; also David Hackworth, "War and the Second Sex," Newsweek, 5.8.1991, p. 26. For Israel
see Yediot Aharonot, 8.5.1996, p. 17, and ibid, 9.5.1996, p. 6.
[790] See Judith H. Stiehm, Arms and the Enlisted Woman, Philadelphia, Temple University Press,
1989, p. 100; Newsweek, 5.8.991; and Laura Miller, "Feminism and the Exclusion of Army Women
from Combat," Harvard University, John M. Olin Institute for Strategic Studies, 1997-8, p. 19.
[791] 6.445-60.
[792] Josephus Flavius, The Jewish War, 7.8.7.
[793] See Glenda Riley, Women and Indians on the Frontier, 1825-1915, Albuquerque, NM,
University of New Mexico Press, 1984.
[794] Magnus Hirschfeld, Sittengeschichte des Weltkrieges, Berlin, Schneider, 1930, vol. 2, pp. 298-
305.
[795] Richard Wrangham and Dale Peterson, Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of Human
Violence, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1996, pp. 167-8.
[796] Lawrence H. Keeley, War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage, New York,
Oxford University Press, 1997, appendix, table 6.2.
[797] Amiram Gonen, ed., The Encyclopedia of the Peoples of the World, New York, Holt, 1993, p.
218.
[798] Genesis, 34.2-3.
[799] See Gerda Lerner, The Creation of Patriarchy, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1986, pp. 81-
4.
[800] The Peloponnesian War, 4.122.
[801] The Peloponnesian War, 5.116.4.
[802] The Peloponnesian War, 3.36.2, 3.50.1
[803] The Peloponnesian War, 3.50.1.
[804] See Robert Ward, The Law of Nations, Dublin, Wogan, 1795, p. 126.
[805] Honoré Bonnet, The Tree of Battles, Liverpool, Liverpool University Press, 1949.
[806] See Philippe Jacomin, War in the Middle Ages, Oxford, Blackwell, 1984, p. 290.
[807] See Peter H. Wilson, "German Women and War, 1500-1800," War in History, 3, 1996, p. 129.
[808] See on these changes van Creveld, The Transformation of War, chapter 2.
[809] Balthazar Ayala, Three Books on the Law of War and on the Duties Connected with War, J.
Westlake ed., Washington, Bate, 1912, p. 7.
[810] Arrian, Anabasis, 2.12.3-8; Livy, The History of Rome, 26.50.
[811] Alberto Pinelli, "Il 'picciol vetro' e il 'maggior vaso': I due grandi cicli profani di Domenico
Beccafumi in Palazzo Venturi," in A.A.V.V, Domenico Beccafumi e il suo tempo, Milan, Electa, 1990,
pp. 626-7.
[812] Luigi Lenzi, "Fanti e cavalieri nelle prime guerre d'Italia, 1494-1527," in Ricerche Storiche, 8,
2, 1978, Club Cooperative Editrice Universitaria, Florence, 1978, p. 359.
[813] The number of victims in Berlin alone has been put at 100,000, comprising some 7 percent of
the entire female population; see Barbara Johr, "Die Ereignisse in Zahlen," in Helke Sander and
Barbara Johr, eds., Befreier und Befreite: Krieg, Vergewaltigungen, Kinder, Munich, Kunstman,
1992, pp. 54-5.
[814] See Wayne E. Dillingham, "The Possibility of American Women Becoming POWs:
Justification for Combat Exclusion Rules?" Federal Bar News and Journal, May 1990, p. 228.
[815] Annale Uladh: Annals of Ulster, William H. Hennessey and Brian MacCarthy, eds., Dublin, A.
Thom, 1887, vol. 1, pp. 482-3, as quoted by Matthew Strickland, War and Chivalry: The Conduct
and Perception of War in England and Normandy, 1066-1217, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1996, p. 306.
[816] Leon Degrelle, Die verlorene Legion, Oldendorff, Schütz, 1972, p. 93.
[817] See Rogan, Mixed Company, p. 266; also Francke, Ground Zero, p. 83 ff.
[818] See R. H. Bainton, Christian Attitudes Toward War and Peace: A Historical Survey and
Critical Re-Evaluation, New York, Abingdon, 1960, p. 207.
[819] See van Creveld, Men, Women and War, pp. 152-3.
[820] Strabo, Geography, 11.5.1-2.
[821] Iliad, 3.184.
[822] See Thomas H. Carpenter, Art and Myth in Ancient Greece, London, Thames & Hudson, 1991,
pp. 125-6.
[823] See Fraser, The Warrior Queens.
[824] See Blundell, Women in Ancient Greece, No. 10.
[825] See Michael Avi Yonah and Israel Shtazman, Illustrated Encyclopaedia of the Classical World,
New York, Harper & Row, 1975, p. 344.
[826] Ta met' homeron, Leizpig, Teubner, 1891, 659-74.
[827] The Tain, pp. 169, 250-1.
[828] Wunder, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon, p. 180.
[829] Jessica A. Salmonson, The Encyclopedia of Amazons, New York, Anchor, 1992, p. 170; Peter
B. Ellis, Celtic Women, n.p., Trans-Atlantic, 1996, p. 14.
[830] Armeebefehl des Oberbefehlhabers der 6. Armee, 10.10.1941, printed in Gerd R. Überschär
and Wolfram Wette, eds., Unternehmen Barbarossa, Paderborn, Schöningh, 1985, p. 33.
[831] Anthony Mackler, The New Mercenaries, London, Sidgwick & Jackson, 1985, pp. 284-6, 335-
6.
[832] Oral communication from IDF Captain (res.) Amit Perl, 23.4.2001.
[833] See Peggy R. Sanday, Female Power and Male Dominance: On the Origin of Sexual
Inequality, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1981, p. 136 ff.
[834] David Courtwright, Violent Land: Single Men and Social Disorder, Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press, 1996, p. 111.
[835] Guttentag and Secord, Too Many Women?, p. 135, figure 5.3.
[836] See Ovesen et al., When Every Household Is an Island, 1996, p. 5.
[837] See Thomas McKeown, The Modern Rise in Population, London, Edward Arnold, 1976.
[838] See Karen J. Colson, Stephanie A. Eisenstadt, Terra Ziporyn, The Harvard Guide to Women's
Health, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1996, pp. 238, 241, 322, 379, 388.
[839] G. Ascasi and J. Neneskeri, History of Human Life Span and Mortality, Budapest, Akadémiai
Kiadó, 1970, p. 184, table 55; p. 213, table 70.
[840] Lawrence Angel, "Neolithic Skeletons from Catal Huyuk," Anatolian Studies, 21, 1971, p. 80.
[841] Ascasi and Neneskeri, History of Human Life Span and Mortality, pp. 194, 197, 202-3.
[842] S. C. Bissel and Lawrence Angel, "Health and Nutrition in Mycenaean Greece," in Nancy C.
Wilkie and William D. E. Coulson, eds., Contributions to Aegean Archaeology, Minneapolis, MI,
University of Minnesota Press, 1985, pp. 197-210.
[843] Ascasi and Neneskeri, History of Human Life Span and Mortality, p. 224, table 78.
[844] Bruce Frier, "Roman Life Expectancy," Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 86, 1982, pp.
232, 238.
[845] Ascasi and Neneskeri, History of Human Life Span and Mortality, p. 232, figure 51, p. 251,
table 91.
[846] See Herlihy and Klapisch-Zuber, Tuscans and their Families, p. 83.
[847] Keith Wrighton and David Levine, Poverty and Piety in an English Village: Teling, 1525-1700,
New York, Academic Press, 1979, p. 59; Alois Bek, Die Bevölkerungsbewegung im ländischen Raum
in den letzten 250 Jahren, Hohenheimm, Landwirtschaftliche Dissertation, n.d., p. 120.
[848]Shachar, The Fourth Estate, p. 119.
[849] Ascasi and Neneskeri, History of Human Life Span and Mortality, pp. 253-4.
[850] Arthur E. Imhof and Helmut Schumacher, "Todesursachen," in Arthur E. Imhof, ed.,
Historische Demographie als Sozialgeschichte: Giessen und Umgebung vom 17. zum 19.
Jahrhundert, Darmstadt, Hessische Historische Kommission, 1975, part I, p. 580.
[851] Lois N. Magner, A History of Medicine, New York, Dekker, 1992, pp. 271-2; Anon. (n.d.) "The
Birth of the Pill,” retrieved from http://www-scf.usc.edu/~nicoleg/history.htm
[852] B. R. Mitchell, Abstract of British Historical Statistics, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1962, p. 6.
[853] William F. Sprague, Women and the West: A Short Social History, Boston, Christopher, 1940, p.
79.
[854] Guttentag and Secord, Too Many Women? p. 115.
[855] J. D. Fage, "The Effect of the Export Slave Trade on African Populations," in R. P. Moss and R.
J. A. R. Rathborne, eds., The Population Factor in African Studies, London, University of London
Press, 1975, p. 19.
[856] Guttentag, and Secord, Too Many Women?, p. 135, figure 5.3.
[857] Anne F. Scott, The Southern Lady: From Pedestal to Politics, 1830-1930, Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, 1970, p. 4.
[858] Kessler-Harris, Out to Work, p. 24.
[859] Guttentag and Secord, Too Many Women?, p. 118.
[860] Guttentag and Secord, Too Many Women?, p. 126, figure 5.1; p. 127, figure 5.2.
[861] See Warren S. Thompson and P. K. Whelpton, Population Trends in the United States, New
York, Gordon and Breach, 1969, pp. 172-5.
[862] See Thompson and Whelpton, Population Trends in the United States, pp. 172-5.
[863] U.S. Census Bureau. (May 2011). "Age and Sex Composition, 2010," retrieved from
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-03.pdf
[864] San Diego, CA, Harcourt Brace, 1962 [1934].
[865] See Pomeroy, Families in Classical and Hellenistic Greece, p. 120.
[866] Britannica Book of the Year, Chicago, Britannica, 1993, p. 697.
[867] Edward E. Evans-Pritchard, The Nuer, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1940, p. 66.
[868] Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, pp. 180-1.
[869] The Rehlah of Ibn Battuta, p. 191.
[870] Genesis, 31.17-8.
[871] Al Bukhari, Sahih, Kitab an-Nikah (Fath al-Bari, 10/454), quoted in Wahiduddin Khan, Women
between Islam and Western Society, p. 135.
[872] The Rehlah of Ibn Battuta, pp. 122, 224.
[873] Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, p. 79.
[874] See Charlotte Furth, A Flourishing Yin: Gender in China's Medical History, 960-1665,
Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1999, pp. 59-60, 63-4, 66, 71, 79.
[875] Sun Simiao, Prescriptions Worth a Thousand, quoted in Furth, A Flourishing Yin, p. 71.
[876] Quoted in Edward Shorter, A History of Women's Bodies, Harmondsworth, Middlesex,
Penguin, 1982, pp. 35-6.
[877] Shorter, A History of Women's Bodies, pp. 37-41.
[878] Fletcher, Sex, Gender and Subordination, p. 238.
[879] Margaret George, One Woman's "Situation": A Study of Mary Wollstonecraft, Urbana, IL,
University of Illinois Press, 1970, p. 129.
[880] Shorter, A History of Women's Bodies, p. 99, table 5.5.
[881] Goody, The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe, p. 64.
[882] See Lester K. Little, "Evangelical Poverty, the New Money Economy and Violence," in David
Flood, ed., Poverty in the Middle Ages, Werl, Coelde, 1975, p. 14.
[883] See Guttentag and Secord, Too Many Women?, p. 65.
[884] Wunder, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon, p. 129-30.
[885] See Ruth Perry, The Celebrated May Astell, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1986, p.
105.
[886] Herms Bahl, Ansbach: Strukturanalyse einer Residenz am Ende des Dreissigjährigen Kriegs
bis zur Mitte des 18. Jahrhunderts, Ansbach, Max Planck Institut, 1974, pp. 169-233, quoted in
Wunder, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon, pp. 138-9.
[887] Anders Brandstorm et al., "Lebenserwartungen in Schweden 1750-1989," in Arthur Imhof, ed.,
Lebenserwatrungen in Deutschland, Norwegen und Schweden im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, Berlin,
Akademie Verlag, 1994, p. 360, figure 12.
[888] William Farr, "Vital Statistics or the Statistics of Health, Sickness, Disease and Death," 1837,
in Richard Wall, ed., Mortality in Nineteenth-Century Britain, Westmead, Gregg, 1974, p. 570, table
3.
[889] Graziella Caselli, "Health Transition and Cause-Specific Mortality," in Schofield et al., eds.,
The Decline of Mortality in Europe, Oxford, Clarendon, 1991, p. 78.
[890] Shorter, A History of Women's Bodies, p. 238, table 9.4.
[891] Tom Segev, One Palestine, Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate, New York,
Holt, 2000, p. 184.
[892] For France see Jacques Vallin, "Mortality in Europe from 1720 to 1914: Long Term Trends and
Changes in Patterns by Age and Sex," in R. Schofield et al., eds., The Decline of Mortality in Europe,
p. 64; for Sweden see A. Holmberg, "A Study of Mortality Among Cohorts Born in the 18th and 19th
Century," in A. M. Bolander, ed., Cohort Mortality of Sweden: Three Studies Describing Past,
Present and Future Trends in Mortality, Stockholm, Commission for Demography, 1970, pp. 71-86.
[893] Arthur Imhof, "Die neue Überlebenden," in Imhof, ed., Lebenserwartungen in Deutschland,
Norwegen und Schweden, p. 50; also Brandstorm et al., "Lebenserwartungen in Schweden 1750-
1989," in ibid, p. 339, figure 3.
[894] Vallin, "Mortality in Europe from 1720 to 1914," p. 64.
[895] Alexander G. Finlaison, Report on the Mortality on the Government Life Annuities, Westmead,
Gregg, 1973 [1860], p. 65.
[896] Government actuary. (10.11.1888). Rockland County Journal, retrieved from
http://news.hrvh.org/cgi-bin/newshrvh?
a=d&d=rocklandctyjournal18881110.2.5&cl=&srpos=0&st=1&e=-------20--1-----all
[897] Robert D. Retherford, The Changing Sex Differential in Mortality, Westport, CT, Greenwood,
1975, p.10.
[898] Imhof, "Die neue Überlebenden," pp. 96-7, 113, figures 32-8, 40-5, 47-9.
[899] Pages 757, 546, 560, 586, 662, 674, 678, 747.
[900] For a list of countries by life expectancy, see “List of countries by life expectancy.” (n.d.)
Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_life_expectancy
[901] For France see Vallin, "Mortality in Europe from 1720 to 1914," p. 47; for Germany see Imhof,
"Die neue Überlebenden," p. 67.
[902] Robert V. Wells, Revolutions in Americans' Lives: A Demographic Perspective, Westport, CT,
Greenwood, 1982, p. 22.
[903] Imhof, "Die Neue Überlebenden," p. 56.
[904] See Retherford, The Changing Sex Differential in Mortality, p. 15.
[905] See Bodil Bergman, Women Among Men: Gender Related Stress and Health Hazards Affecting
Women Working in a Male-Dominated Industry, Goteborg, University of Goteborg, 1997, pp. 31, 33,
43, 45, 47; E. Haavio-Mannila, "Inequalities in Health and Gender," Social Science and Medicine,
22, 1986, pp. 141-9; C. Alfredson et al., "Type of Occupation and Hospitalization for Myocardial
Infraction and some other Diagnoses," International Journal of Epidemiology, 14, 1985, pp. 378-85;
Hilary Graham, "Socio-Economic Change and Inequalities," in Annandale and Hunt, eds., Gender
Inequalities in Health, p. 100.
[906] Shorter, A History of Women's Bodies, pp. 156-7; Magner, A History of Medicine, p. 275.
[907] For Britain see John M. Munro Kerr et al., Historical Review of British Obstetrics and
Gynecology, London, Livingstone, 1954, p. 259, table 1.
[908] See “Country Comparison: Maternal Mortality Rate.” (n.d.) CIA World Factbook, retrieved
from https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2223rank.html
[909] For Britain and Australia see Pringle, Sex and Medicine, pp. 53-61.
[910] Finlaison, Report on the Mortality on the Government Life Annuities, p. 47, table XXIV.
[911] Retherford, The Changing Sex Differential in Mortality, pp. 67-8, 103.
[912] Retherford, The Changing Sex Differential in Mortality, p. 13.
[913] M. Blaxter, Health and Lifestyle, London, Routledge, 1990; M. Whitehead, The Health Divide:
Inequalities in Health in the 1980s, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1988; J. Rodin and J. Ickovics,
"Women's Health: Review and Research Agenda," American Psychologist, 45, 9, 1990, pp. 1018-34.
[914] Londa Schiebinger, Has Feminism Changed Science? Cambridge, MA, Harvard University
Press, 1999, p. 117.
[915] Chronicle of Higher Education, 19.12.1997, quoted in Greer, The Whole Woman, p. 172.
[916] E. E. Bartlett, "NCQA Gender-Specific Standards: Is There a Place for Men's Health?"
Managed Care Quarterly, 8, autumn 2000, p. 50.
[917] J. F. Lauerman, "Chivalry and Science," Harvard Magazine, 11/12.1997, pp. 19-21.
[918] Asian Women's Research and Action Network, Asian Women Speak Out! A 14-Country
Alternative Asian Report on the Impact of the UN Decade for Women, Davao City, The Philippines,
Asian Women's Research and Action Network, 1985, p. 13.
[919] Lesley Doyal, What Makes Women Sick: Gender and the Political Economy of Health, London,
MacMillan, 1995, p. 85.
[920] Headlee and Elfin, The Cost of Being Female, p. 96.
[921] According to Wunder, He Is the Sun, She Is the Moon, p. 117.
[922] Shorter, A History of Women's Bodies, p. 236.
[923] Bebel, Die Frau und der Sozialismus, p. 163.
[924] Graziella Caselli, "Health Transition and Cause-Specific Mortality," p. 74.
[925] Quoted in Caselli, "Health Transition and Cause-Specific Mortality," p. 77.
[926] Henry Ratcliff, "Observations on the Rate of Mortality and Sickness Existing Amongst
Friendly Societies," 1850, in Wall, ed., Mortality in Nineteenth Century Britain, p. 11, table II; p.
101, table LIII.
[927] Ratcliff, "Observations on the Rate of Mortality and Sickness Existing Amongst Friendly
Societies," p. 89, table XLI; p. 90, table XLII; p. 100, table LII; p. 102, table LIV; p. 103, table LV; p.
104, table LVI; p. 109, table LXI; p. 113, table LXV.
[928] See Lance Morrow, "Men: Are They Really that Bad?" Time, 14.1.1994, pp. 56-7.
[929] James B. Given, Society and Homicide, pp. 117, 143.
[930] Levit, The Gender Line, p. 187.
[931] Yvette Ahmad and Peter K. Smith, "Bullying in Schools and the Issue of Sex Differences," in
Archer, ed., Male Violence, pp. 70, 80-1.
[932] Greer, The Whole Woman, p. 285.
[933] Greer, The Whole Woman, p. 285.
[934] Farell, Why Men Are as They Are, p. 362.
[935] See Martin van Creveld, Wargames: From Gladiators to Gigabytes, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 2013, pp. 285-96.
[936] See Laurent Chenet, "Gender and Socio-Economic Inequalities in Mortality," in Annandale and
Hunt, eds., Gender Inequalities in Health, pp. 184-8.
[937] Herlihy and Klapisch-Zuber, Tuscans and Their Families, p. 149.
[938] T. H. Hollingworth, "A Demographic Study of the British Ducal Families," Population Studies,
11, 1957, pp. 3-26.
[939] J. T. Rosenthal, "Medieval Longevity and the Secular Peerage, 1350-1500," Population
Studies, 27, 1973, pp. 287-93.
[940] Charles Ansell, Jr., "On the Rate of Mortality... in the Upper and Professional Classes," 1874,
printed in Benjamin, Rates of Mortality, pp. 73-4, table III.
[941] Ansell, "On the Rate of Mortality," pp. 81-2, table VII.
[942] Robins, Women in Ancient Egypt, p. 101.
[943] Pomeroy, Families in Classical and Hellenistic Greece, p. 54.
[944] Aristotle, Politics, 1270a23-4; Plutarch Agis, 7.3-4.
[945] Shachar, The Fourth Estate, pp. 160-1.
[946] Mertes, The English Noble Household, p. 43.
[947] Heal and Holmes, The Gentry in England, p. 314.
[948] Wye Saltonstal, Picturae Locquentes, 2nd ed., 1635, quoted in Margaret J. M. Ezell, The
Patriarch's Wife: Literary Evidence and the History of the Family, Chapel Hill, NC, University of
North Carolina Press, 1987, p. 38.
[949] Mary Astell, "A Serious Proposal" [1694], quoted in Alice Clark, Working Life of Women in the
Seventeenth Century, London, Routledge, 1982 [1919], p. 38.
[950] See Francesca Bray, Technology and Gender: Fabrics of Power in Late Imperial China,
Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1997, p. 243.
[951] Pang-Mei Natasha Chang, Bound Feet and Western Dress, New York, Anchor, 1997, p. 12.
[952] Michael Maurer, "Ich bin mehr Herz als Kopf": Sophie von La Roche, ein Lebensbild in
Briefen, Munich, Beck, 1983, p. 159.
[953] Count Vasili quoted in Dominic Lieven, The Aristocracy in Europe, 1815-1914, New York,
Columbia University Press, 1992, p. 143.
[954] Miriam Brody, Mary Wollstonecraft: Mother of Women's Rights, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 2000, p. 54.
[955] Sydney Smith, Writings: Female Education, London, n.p., 1810, pp. 118-9.
[956] See Barbara J. Berg, The Remembered Gate: Origins of American Feminism, Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 1978, p. 98.
[957] See Miriam Schneir, ed., Feminism: The Essential Historical Writings, New York, Vintage,
1994, pp. 294-5.
[958] See Bonnie G. Smith, Ladies of the Leisure Class: The Bourgeoisie of Northern France in the
Nineteenth Century, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1981, pp. 4, 6, 11, 21, 23, 63, 67, 71,
74, 79, 81, 84, 86, 129, 133, 138-9, 145, 159.
[959] "At the Pit's Mouth," in Rudyard Kipling, Wee Willie Winkie, Harmondsworth, Middlesex,
Penguin, 1988 [1895], p. 89.
[960] See Bebel, Die Frau und der Sozialismus, p. 171.
[961] Reproduced on the cover of Patricia A. Vertinsky, The Eternally Wounded Woman: Women;
Doctors and Exercise in the Late Nineteenth Century, Urbana, IL, University of Illinois Press, 1994.
[962] Michael R. Haines, "Conditions of Work and Mortality Decline," in Schofield, ed., The Decline
of Mortality in Europe, p. 190 table 10.3.
[963] Briar, Working for Women, p. 73.
[964] Susan A. Ostrander, Women of the Upper Class, Philadelphia, Temple University Press, 1984,
pp. 8, 22, 27-8.
[965] Farrell, Why Men Are The Way They Are, pp. 104, 219.
[966] Torgovaya Gazetta, 29.4.1994, quoted in Lynne Attwood, "Rape and Domestic Violence
Against Women," in, Buckley, ed., Post-Soviet Women, p. 102.
[967] "Once Just a Princess, Suddenly a Feminist," Daily Telegraph, 3.12.1995.
[968] See Angier, Woman, p. 251.
[969] See McKeown, The Modern Rise of Population.
[970] Sandra T. Barnes, "Women, Property and Power," in Peggy Reeves Sanday and Ruth Gallagher
Goodenough, eds., Beyond the Second Sex: New Directions in the Anthropology of Gender,
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990, p. 267.
[971] Barbara Arneil, Politics and Feminism, Oxford, Blackwell, 1999, p. 67; Elizabeth Frazer and
Nicola Lacey, The Politics of Community: A Feminist Critique of the Liberal-Communitarian
Debate, Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 1993, pp. 75-6.
[972] Gena Corea, "The New Reproductive Technologies," in Dortchen Leidtholt and Janice G.
Raymond, eds., The Sexual Liberals, New York, Pergamon, 1990, pp. 85-94.
[973] See Leonie J. Archer, "Notions of Community and the Exclusion of the Female in Jewish
History and Historiography," in Archer et al., eds., Women in Ancient Societies, pp. 58-60.
[974] Edward Shorter, From the Mind into the Body: The Cultural Origins of Psychological
Symptoms, New York, Free Press, 1994, p. 59.
[975] The Second Sex, pp. 46-7; also see Paul Roazen, Freud and His Followers, Harmondsworth,
Middlesex, Penguin, 1971, p. 465.
[976] Sexual Politics, pp. 176-202.
[977] Pringle, Sex and Medicine, pp. 144-5.
[978] "Preface" to The Doctor's Dilemma: A Tragedy, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1946 [1906], p. 76.
[979] See Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason,
New York, New American Library, 1965, pp. 9, 38, 39, 40, 65, 72, 75, 159.
[980] Reproduced in Hans Binnenveld, Om de Geest van Jan Soldaat: Beknopte Geschiedenis van de
Militaire Psychiatrie, Rotterdam, Erasmus, 1995, p. 88.
[981] Edgar Shepard, "The Modern Teaching of Insanity," Journal of Mental Science, 17, 1872, p.
510, quoted in Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 27.
[982] See Klaus Doerner, Madmen and the Bourgeoisie: A Social History of Insanity and Psychiatry,
Oxford, Blackwell, 1981, pp. 74-80.
[983] See Doerner, Madmen and the Bourgeoisie, pp. 127-38; also Dora B. Weiner, "'Le Geste de
Pinel': The History of a Psychiatric Myth," in Mark S. Micale and Roy Porter, eds., Discovering the
History of Psychiatry, New York, Oxford University Press, 1994, pp. 232-47.
[984] Johan C. Reil, Rhaphsodien über die Anwendung der psychischen Curmethode auf
Geisteszerrütungen, Berlin, Ebing, 1936 [1803], p. 209.
[985] See E. E. Hare, "Masturbatory Insanity: The History of an Idea," British Journal of Psychiatry,
108, 1962, pp. 1-25.
[986] See also Foucault, Madness and Civilization, pp. 269-70.
[987] On Cibber see Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1993, vol. 3, p. 312.
[988] Foucault, Madness and Civilization, pp. 221, 223.
[989] Edward Shorter, A History of Psychiatry: From the Era of the Asylum to the Age of Prozac,
New York, Wiley, 1997, p. 45.
[990] Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 17.
[991] Calculated from Chesler, Women and Madness, pp. 42-3, table 1. The figures do not include
alcohol addiction, alcohol intoxication and drug addiction. However, even when these are taken into
account, women still outnumbered men.
[992] Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 52.
[993] Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 52.
[994] See on this above all Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, London,
Penguin, 1979.
[995] See Foucault, Discipline and Punish, chapter 5.
[996] See Shorter, A History of Psychiatry, pp. 130-3; also George F. Drinka, The Birth of Neurosis:
Myth, Malady and the Victorians, New York, Simon & Schuster, 1984, p. 191.
[997] Edward Shorter, From Paralysis to Fatigue: A History of Psychosomatic Illness in the Modern
Era, New York, Free Press, 1992, p. 283.
[998] George Henry Savage and Edwin Goodall, Insanity and Allied Neuroses, London, Cassell,
1907, pp. 96-7.
[999] Shorter, From the Mind into the Body, p. 83.
[1000] See Gerald N. Grob, Mental Illness and American Society, 1875-1940, Princeton, NJ,
Princeton University Press, 1983, pp. 127-31; also David K. Henderson, The Evolution of Psychiatry
in Scotland, Edinburgh, Livingstone, 1964, pp. 156-67.
[1001] John Carlat et al., "Eating Disorders in Meals: A Report on 135 Patients," American Journal
of Psychiatry, 8, 1997, pp. 1127-32.
[1002] Dianne L. Chambless and Alan J. Goldstein, "Anxieties: Agoraphobia and Hysteria," in
Anette M. Brodsky and Rachel T. Hare-Mustin, eds., Women and Psychotherapy, New York,
Guilford, 1980, p. 116.
[1003] Charles K. Mills, "Hysteria," in William Pepper and Louis Starr, eds., A System of Practical
Medicine, Philadelphia, Lea, 1886, vol. 5, p. 215.
[1004] Silas Weir Mitchell, Doctor and Patient, Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1901 [1887] p. 117.
[1005] Hersch Wolowitz, "Hysterical Character and Feminine Identity," in Judith Bardwick, ed.,
Readings on the Psychology of Women, New York, Harper & Row, 1971, p. 309.
[1006] Bruce Rousnaville et al., "Briquest's Syndrome in a Man," Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 167, 1979, pp. 364-67.
[1007] Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 133.
[1008] Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 137.
[1009] Lisa Appiganesi and John Forrester, Die Frauen Sigmund Freuds, Munich, Econ, 2000, p. 93.
The German edition was used because the original English edition is out of print.
[1010] Florence Nightingale, Cassandra [1860], Old Westbury, NY, Feminist Press, 1979, pp. 41-2.
[1011] Robert T. Edes, "The New England Invalid," Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, 133,
1.8.1895, p. 102.
[1012] Shorter, From Paralysis to Fatigue, pp. 73, 81-2, 87, 91.
[1013] Albert Krecke, "Die weibliche Asthenie und die Mania operatoria activa und passiva," Wiener
medizinische Wochenschrift, 72, 24.7.1925, pp. 1231-32.
[1014] Appignanesi and Forrester, Die Frauen Sigmund Freuds, p. 470.
[1015] Shorter, From Paralysis to Fatigue, p. 92.
[1016] See Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 160-1.
[1017] Felix Deutsch, "A Footnote on Freud's Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria,"
Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 26, 1957, pp. 159-67.
[1018] Thomas S. Clouston, Clinical Lectures on Mental Diseases, London, Churchill, 1898, pp.
530-1.
[1019] Cynthia N. Bitter, Good Enough, Penfield, NY, HopeLines, 1998, pp. 91, 143, 165.
[1020] Shorter, From the Mind into the Body, p. 191.
[1021] See Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 181.
[1022] Unsigned, undated note, Bundesarchiv/Militärarchiv, Freiburg i.B., H20/480.
[1023] See Peter Watson, War on the Mind, London, Hutchinson, 1978, p. 235.
[1024] Charles P. Symonds, "Two Cases of Hysterical Paraplegia," Guy's Hospital Gazette, 42, 1928,
quoted in Shorter, From the Mind into the Body, p. 62.
[1025] See Ernst Jones, Free Associations, New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction, 1990 [1959], pp. 124-5.
[1026] See Shorter, From Paralysis to Fatigue, pp. 268-9, 272.
[1027] See Mary Boyle, Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? London, Routledge, 1990, pp. 16-75.
[1028] See Chesler, Women and Madness, pp. 42-4, table 1.
[1029] Shorter, A History of Psychiatry, p. 258.
[1030] In 1966-8 manic-depressive women outnumbered men in American hospitals by just over two
to one; Chesler, Women and Madness, pp. 42-3, table 1.
[1031] Ludmilla J. Jordanova, "Mental Illness, Mental Health: Changing Norms and Expectations,"
in Women in Society: Interdisciplinary Essays, London, Virago, 1981, p. 106.
[1032] See Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women's Development,
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1982, pp. 29, 43, 53-5, 57, 77.
[1033] Appignanesi and Forrester, Die Frauen Sigmund Freuds, p. 235.
[1034] Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 175-6.
[1035] Anna Freud to Freud, 20.7.1922, cited in Gay, Freud, p. 492.
[1036] See Freud's own comment in Wilhelm Reich, The Function of the Orgasm, London, Panther,
1968, p. 68.
[1037] See Regina Morantz, "The Lady and Her Physician," in Mary Hartmann and Lois Banner,
eds., Clio's Consciousness Raised: New Perspectives on the History of Women, New York, Harper &
Row, 1974, pp. 50-1.
[1038] Roazen, Freud and His Followers, pp. 415, 416, 417, 444, 463.
[1039] See Appignanesi and Forrester, Die Frauen Sigmund Freuds, p. 17.
[1040] See Karen Horney, "The Flight from Womanhood" [1926], in Harold Kelman, ed., Feminine
Psychology, New York, Norton, 1967; and, for Freud's reaction, Marie Jo Buhle, Feminism and Its
Discontents: A Century of Struggle with Psychoanalysis, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press,
1998, pp. 70-81.
[1041] "Problems of Femininity" [1931], in Jeanne Lampl de Groot, The Development of the Mind:
Psychoanalytic Papers on Clinical and Theoretical Problems, n.p., International Universities Press,
1965, p. 27.
[1042] "Masochism and Narcissism" [1937], in Lampl de Groot, The Development of the Mind, p. 91.
[1043] "Superego, Ego, Ideal and Masochistic Fantasies" [1963], in Lampl de Groot, The
Development of the Mind, p. 358.
[1044] Roazen, Freud and His Followers, p. 453.
[1045] See Susan Quinn, A Mind of Her Own: The Life of Karen Horney, Reading, MA, AddisonWesley, 1987, p. 218.
[1046] See Shorter, A History of Psychiatry, pp. 166, 180-1.
[1047] See Florence Rush, "The Freudian Cover-up: Sexual Abuse of Children," Chrysalis, 1, 1977,
pp. 39-44; also Jeffrey M. Mason, The Assault on Truth: Freud's Suppression of the Seduction
Theory, New York, Viking, 1985, passim.
[1048] See Nancy Friday, My Mother/My Self: The Daughter's Search for Identity, New York, Delta,
1997, p. xviii.
[1049] See William Coryell and George Winokur, "Course and Outcome," in Eugene Paykel, ed.,
Handbook of Affective Disorders, Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone, 1992, pp. 89-108; Noreen
Coldman and Renee Ravid, "Community Surveys: Sex Differences in Mental Illness," in Guttentag et
al., eds., The Mental Health of Women, pp. 33, 45; Nancy F. Russo, "Women in the Mental Health
Delivery System," in Lenore E. Walker, ed., Women and Mental Health Policy, Beverly Hills, CA,
Sage, 1984, p. 27-8; Myrna M. Weissman, "Depression," in Brodsky and Hare-Mustin, eds., Women
and Psychotherapy, pp. 98-9; Joseph Veroff et al., Mental Health in America: Patterns of HelpSeeking from 1957 to 1976, New York, Basic Books, 1981, pp. 47, 159, 201; Lilli S. Horning,
"Affirmative Action Through Affirmative Attitudes," in Elga Wasserman et al., eds., Women in
Academia, New York, Praeger, 1975, p. 9; Headlee and Elfin, The Cost of Being Female, p. 98;
Greer, The Whole Woman, pp. 181-2, 184; Veroff et al., Mental Health in America, p. 47.
[1050] General Register Office, Morbidity Statistics from General Practice, London, HMSO, 1958,
vol. 1, pp. 72, 86.
[1051] Walter R. Gove and Jeanette F. Tudor, "Adult Sex Roles and Mental Illness," American
Journal of Sociology, 78, 1973, p. 826.
[1052] George Winokur and Ming T. Tsuang, The Natural History of Mania, Depression, and
Schizophrenia, Washington, American Psychiatry Press, 1996, pp. 227, 295.
[1053] Dona Steward, "Unusual Presentations of Psychiatric Disease," Medicine North America, 37,
1989, p. 718.
[1054] Chambles and Goldstein, "Agoraphobia and Hysteria," p. 122. The number of women
suffering from agoraphobia is said to be in excess of 1 million.
[1055] Chesler, Women and Madness, p. 109.
[1056] Gerald L. Klerman and Myrna M. Weissmann, "Depression Among Women," in Guttentag et
al., eds., The Mental Health of Women, p. 75.
[1057] Greer, The Female Eunuch, p. 91.
[1058] Lucia Albino-Gilbert, "Feminist Therapy," in Brodsky and Hare-Mustin, eds., Women and
Psychotherapy, pp. 249-50, 257-9; Linda Gordon, Heroes of Their Own Lives: The Politics and
History of Family Violence, New York, Penguin, 1988, pp. 25, 282-5.
[1059] Shorter, A History of Psychiatry, p. 293.
[1060] Lauren Slater, Prozac Diary, New York, Penguin, 1999, p. 7.
[1061] See Pringle, Sex and Medicine, p. 151.
[1062] Blechman, "Behavior Therapies," p. 235, quoting L. S. Stein et al., "Comparison of Male and
Female Neurotic Depressives," Journal of Clinical Psychology, 32, 1976, pp. 19-21.
[1063] Yediot Acharonot, 11.1.2001, p. 7.
[1064] Pringle, Sex and Medicine, pp. 179-80.
[1065] See Masters and Johnson, Human Sexual Response, p. 138.
[1066] Gay, Freud, p. 513.
[1067] Ovid, The Art of Love, London, Private Edition, 1930, p. 179.
[1068] See Small, Female Choice, pp. 143-7; also see Angier, Woman, pp. 69-70.
[1069] Small, Female Choice, pp. 117-50.
[1070] See Thomas Laqueur, Making Sex: Body and Gender from the Greeks to Freud, Cambridge,
MA, Harvard University Press, 1990, pp. 64-5.
[1071] Porter and Hall, The Facts of Life, p. 75; also Fletcher, Gender, Sex and Subordination, p. 37.
[1072] See Laqueur, Making Sex, p. 233.
[1073] See Laqueur, Making Sex, p. 189.
[1074] See on her Vern L. Bullough, "The Development of Sexology in the USA," in Porter and
Teich, eds., Sexual Knowledge, Sexual Science, pp. 308-9.
[1075] See Laqueur, Making Sex, pp. 190-1.
[1076] Sexual Behavior in the Human Female, Philadelphia, Saunders, 1953, p. 408, table 112.
[1077] See Golombok and Fivush, Gender Development, p. 137.
[1078] For Charcot and Freud see Gay, Freud, pp. 91-2; for Krafft-Ebing, his "Neuropathia sexualis
feminarum," in W. Zülzer, Klinisches Handbuch der Harn- und Sexualorgane, Leipzig, Vogel, 1894,
pp. 80-103; also see Krafft-Ebing, "Über das Zustandkommen der Wollustempfindung und deren
Mangel (Anaprhodisie) beim Sexuellen Akt," Internationales Centralblatt für Psychologie und
Pathologie der Harn und Sexualorgane, 2, 1891, p. 105.
[1079] See Quinn, A Mind of Her Own, p. 255.
[1080] See Gay, Freud, p. 92.
[1081] See Rachel P. Maines, The Technology of Orgasm, Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1999, pp. 3-4, 6, 11.
[1082] See Golombok and Fivush, Gender Development, pp. 137-8.
[1083] Sigmund Freud, Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud,
London, Hogarth Press, 1955-74, vol. 15, p. 155.
[1084] See Gay, Freud, pp. 26, 36, 333, 603.
[1085] See Angier, Woman, pp. 70-5.
[1086] Sigmund Freud, "Femininity," in Sigmund Freud, The Complete Introductory Lectures on
Psychoanalysis, James Strachey ed., New York, Norton, 1966, pp. 580, 596.
[1087] "Masochism and Narcissism," p. 92.
[1088] The Psychology of Women, vol. 1, 233.
[1089] The Second Sex, p. 348.
[1090] Angier, Woman, p. 131.
[1091] Human Sexual Response, pp. 21, 67.
[1092] See Buhle, Feminism and Its Discontents, pp. 212-20; also Small, Female Choices, pp. 137-8;
Laqueur, Making Sex, pp. 234-5; Maines, The Technology of Orgasm, pp. 5-6, 111-24.
[1093] See Angier, Woman, p. 66.
[1094] See Millet, Sexual Politics, pp. 117-8; also see Harriet G. Lerner, "Early Origins of Envy and
Devaluation of Women: Implications of Sex-Role Stereotypes," Bulletin of the Meninger Clinic, 38,
1974, pp. 538-53.
[1095] See Mary J. Sherfey, The Nature and Evolution of Female Sexuality, New York, Random
House, 1972, p. 94.
[1096] See Masters and Johnson, Human Sexual Response, pp. 53, 59, 64.
[1097] Masters and Johnson, Human Sexual Response, pp. 61, 65.
[1098] Fisher, The Sex Contract, p. 96.
[1099] Masters and Johnson, Human Sexual Response, p. 135.
[1100] Masters and Johnson, Human Sexual Response, p. 57.
[1101] Martindale, "What Women Want," p. 28.
[1102] See Rosemary R. Basson et al., "Efficacy and Safety of Sildenafil in Estrogenized Women
with Sexual Disjunction Associated with Female Sexual Arousal Disorder," Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 95, 2000, 4 Suppl. 1: S54.
[1103] Richard Davenport-Hines and Christopher Phipps, "Tainted Love," in Porter and Teich, eds.,
Sexual Knowledge, Sexual Science, p. 371.
[1104] Lucy Iragary, An Ethics of Sexual Difference, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1993, p.
197.
[1105] See Martindale, "What Women Want," pp. 31-2.
[1106] See Appignanesi and Forrester, Die Frauen Sigmund Freuds, pp. 249-50.
[1107] Sigmund Freud, "An Autobiographical Study," in Standard Edition, 1959, vol. 20, p. 34. See
also Gay, Freud, pp. 93-8; and Alan Krohn, Hysteria: The Elusive Neurosis, New York, International
Universities Press, 1978, pp. 19-21.
[1108] Gay, Freud, p. 501; Freud, Standard Edition, vol. 20, p. 212.
[1109] See Porter and Hall, The Facts of Life, pp. 212-6.
[1110] See Hall, "'The English Have Hot-water Bottles': The Morganatic Marriage between Medicine
and Sexology in Britain since William Acton," in Porter and Teich, eds., Sexual Knowledge, Sexual
Science, p. 358.
[1111] Die Welt von Gestern, Frankfurt/Main, Fischer, 2000 [1944] p. 98.
[1112] See Elizabeth Loftus and Katherine Ketcham, The Myth of Repressed Memory: False
Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse, New York, St. Martin's, 1994, passim.
[1113] Julian de Ajuriaguerra, "Le Probleme de hystérie," L'Encephale, 40, 1951, p. 76; Friday, My
Mother/My Self, pp. 5-6, 13, 21-2, 69-72.
[1114] See John d'Emilio and Estelle Freedman, Intimate Matters: A History of Sexuality in America,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1997, p. 71.
[1115] Eliot Slaterand Moya Woodside, Patterns of Marriage: A Study of Marriage Relationships
Among the Urban Working Classes, London, Cassell, 1951, p. 21.
[1116] Sally Cline, Women, Celibacy and Passion, London, Deutsch, 1993.
[1117] Maines, The Technology of Orgasm, pp. 5-6.
[1118] See Barbara Klaw, "Simone de Beauvoir and Nelson Algren," in Melanie C. Hawthorne, ed.,
Contingent Loves; Simone de Beauvoir and Sexuality, Charlottesville, VA, University of Virginia
Press, 2000, pp. 127-8, 142.
[1119] See Edna Nixon, Mary Wollstonecraft, Her Life and Times, London, Dent, 1971, pp. 1-13.
[1120] See The Prime of Life, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin, 1965 [1960], pp. 22-5.
[1121] She Came to Stay, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin, 1959 [1943].
[1122] See Asa Moberg, "Sensuality and Brutality; Contradictions in Simone de Beauvoir's Writings
about Sexuality," in Hawthorne, ed., Contingent Loves, p. 104.
[1123] The Mandarins, London, Fontana, 1960, p. 341.
[1124]The Second Sex, pp. 369, 375.
[1125] D. Claire Hutchins, Five Minutes to Orgasm Every Time You Make Love, n.p., JPS, 2000, p.
21.
[1126] The Second Sex, pp. 417-8, 440.
[1127] Herodotus, The Histories, 8.8.
[1128] Fraser, The Warrior Queens, p. 269.
[1129] See Harriet D. Jump, Mary Wollstonecraft, Writer, New York, Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1994, p.
32.
[1130] Angier, Woman, p. 27.
[1131] Friday, My Mother/My Self, p. 81.
[1132] Oren Harari, "What Do Women Want Anyway?" Management Review, 81, 3, March 1992, p.
43.
[1133] Showalter, The Female Malady, p. 249.
[1134] See Shorter, From the Mind into the Body, pp. 86-7.
[1135] Ptacek, Battered Women in the Courtroom, p. 152.
[1136] See Ptacek, Battered Women in the Courtroom, Chapter 5.
[1137] Angier, Woman, pp. 43-4.
[1138] Friday, My Mother/My Self, pp. 87, 91.
[1139] Julia Wrigley, "Gender and Education in the Welfare State," in Wrigley, ed., Education and
Gender Equality, p. 9.
[1140] Naomi Wolf, Promiscuities: The Secret Struggle for Womanhood, New York, Fascett
Columbine, 1997, p. 81.
[1141]See Ptacek, Battered Women in the Courtroom, p. 173.
[1142] Yvonne Hirdman, "State Policy and Gender Contracts: The Swedish Experience," in Eileen
Drew et al., eds., Women, Work and the Family in Europe, London, Routledge, 1998, p. 44.
[1143] Daliah Moore, Labor Market Segmentation and its Implications, New York, Garland, 1992, p.
78; Dienel, Frauen in Führungspositionen in Europa, pp. 46-7.
[1144] Wendy Kaminer, A Fearful Freedom, pp. 7-8.
[1145] Judith L. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, New York, Basic Books, 1992, p. 165.
[1146] E. Anderson, "The 'Chivalrous' Treatment of the Female Offender in the Arms of the Criminal
Justice System: A Review of the Literature," Social Problems, 3, 23, 1976,
[1147] See (in Hebrew) Haaretz, 15.8.01, page D2.
[1148] Edwin S. Schneidman and Norman L. Farberow, "Statistical Comparisons between Attempted
and Committed Suicide," in Norman L. Farberow and Edwin S. Schneidmann, eds., The Cry for
Help, New York, McGraw Hill, 1965, pp. 26-7, 34-6; Stengel, Suicide and Attempted Suicide, p. 90,
table 11.
[1149] Greer, The Whole Woman, p. 181.
[1150] See Jennie Popeigh and Keleigh Groves, "'Narrative' in Research on Gender Equalities in
Health," in Annandale and Hunt, eds., Gender Inequalities in Health, p. 83.
[1151] Terence Real, I Do not Want to Talk About It: Overcoming the Legacy of Male Depression,
New York, Fireside, 1997.
[1152] Chesler, Women and Madness, pp. 42-3; Gerald L. Kleinman and Myrna M. Weissman,
“Depression Among Women,” in Guttentag et al., eds., The Mental Health of Women, p. 75.
[1153] Emile Durkheim, Suicide, New York, Free Press, 1966 [1897], pp. 70-1, 101
[1154] Erwin Stengel, Suicide and Attempted Suicide, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin, 1973, p.
22, table 2.
[1155] "Gender and Mental Health." (June 2002). World Health Organization, retrieved from
http://www.who.int/gender/other_health/en/genderMH/pdf
[1156] See Valian, Why So Slow?, pp. 164-5.
[1157] See van Creveld, Men, Women and War, pp. 82-3.
[1158] Wolf, Fire with Fire, p. 244.
[1159] Wolf, Fire with Fire, p. 29.
[1160] Friday, My Mother/My Self, p. 109.
[1161] Claude Francis and Fernande Gontier, Simone de Beauvoir, London, Mandarin, 1986, p. 318.
[1162] Politics, 1267b-70a; also Xenophon, Lacedaemonium Politeia, 1.9.
[1163] Aileen S. Kraditor, The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement, 1890-1920, Garden City, NJ,
Anchor Books, 1965, pp. 54, 56, 157.
[1164] Hoff Sommer, The War against Boys, pp. 39, 176.
[1165] Julie Watson. (1.2.2013) "Marine Survey Lists Concerns on Women in Combat," Yahoo News,
retrieved from http://news.yahoo.com/marine-survey-lists-concerns-women-combat-002047180.html
[1166] John O'Leary, "A Level Analysis Finds Boys do Better in Single Sex Schools," Times,
14.7.1997; Rachel Williams, "Single-Sex Schools Help Boys to Enjoy Arts," The Guardian,
20.1.2010.
[1167] Jean Sinoda Bohlen, Goddesses in Everywoman: A New Psychology of Women, New York,
Harper Perennial, 1985, p. 247.
[1168] See Catalyst. (May 2000). "Women and the MBA: Gateway to Opportunity," retrieved from
http://www.catalyst.org/knowledge/women-and-mba-gateway-opportunity
[1169] Danielle Crittenden, What Our Mothers Didn't Tell Us, New York, Touchstone, 1999, pp. 51-
4.
[1170] Kaminer, A Fearful Freedom, p. 5.
[1171] See Phyllis Schafly, The Power of the Positive Woman, New Rochelle, NY, 1977, pp. 68-138;
Jean J. Mansbridge, Why We Lost the Era, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1986, p. 72.
[1172] Baer, Women in American Law, p. 281; Belknap, The Invisible Woman, p. 39; Chesney-Lind,
The Female Offender, pp. 152, 161.
[1173] John Hagan, "Class in the Household: A Power-Control Theory of Gender and Delinquency,"
American Journal of Sociology, 92, 1987, pp. 788-816.
[1174] Friedan, The Second Stage, p. 30.
[1175] Sinoda Bohlen, Goddesses in Everywoman, p. 284; Wolf, Fire with Fire, p. 207.
[1176] Feroza Jussawalla, "Mothers, Work and the Media: How Women Don't Support Other
Women," in Lynne B. Welch, ed., Women in Higher Education: Changes and Challenges, New York,
Praeger, 1990, pp. 84-93.
[1177] Crittenden, The Price of Motherhood, p. 251; Jussawalla, "Mothers, Work and the Media," p.
92; Hakim, Key Issues in Women's Work, pp. 108, 115, 117.
[1178] Marjorie Theobald, Knowing Women: Origins of Women's Education in Nineteenth-Century
Australia, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996, p. 27.
[1179] Millett, Sexual Politics, p. 119.
[1180] Wolf, Fire with Fire, pp. xx, 154, 156, 177, 179, 244.
[1181] See Hawthorne, Contingent Loves, p. 60.
[1182] The Second Stage, p. 46.
[1183] Beyond Good and Evil, p. 83.