William Collins
The
Empathy
Gap
Male Disadvantages and the
Mechanisms of Their Neglect
Testimonials
William Collins is a retired engineer and physicist who blogs on issues relating to
men and boys at The Illustrated Empathy Gap (EmpathyGap.uk).
Testimonials for the paperback edition of this book include:
"The Empathy Gap is a fantastically comprehensive book... if you have a heart,
and that heart is beating, run, do not walk, to your favorite bookstore or internet
device and order this book. You will not regret it."
J Steven Svoboda, founder of Attorneys for the Rights of the Child (1997), to
educate the world that children do not need to have their genitals cut.
"This man is a master. I am in awe of his work."
Janice Fiamengo, Professor of English and author of Sons of Feminism: Men Have
Their Say and Daughters of Feminism: Women Supporting Men's Equality
"The Illustrated Empathy Gap is my 'go to' website for first-class evidence-based
research into the twenty-first century hostility destroying the family unit and
gender-based hostility towards men and boys."
Erin Pizzey, founder of the world's first refuge for domestic violence victims
"William Collins is the most insightful blogger on gender issues in the world, on his
website The Illustrated Empathy Gap. This book will tell you all you need to know
about the devastating impacts of feminism on men and boys directly, and on women
and girls indirectly. A tour de force."
Mike Buchanan, founder and leader (2013-) of the British political party Justice for
Men & Boys (and the women who love them), author of Feminism: The Ugly Truth
and The Glass Ceiling Delusion
"For someone like me who likes facts and figures, finding EmpathyGap.uk was like
stumbling upon an amazing hidden treasure trove. The observations which I had
been building up about the positions of men and women in society, in particular the
difficulties which men faced, suddenly had a mountain of rigorous, dependable, and
authoritative sources to back them up. To focus on the rigour of William's research
does not begin to do it justice. He reminds us of exactly how damaging and
perverse what has been happening is, bringing us down to earth with a bump."
Belinda Brown, researcher, writer and speaker on family, feminism and men
"For some years, William Collins has consistently been writing the most important
journalism that is appearing anywhere in the English-speaking world. His
unmatched powers of analysis and synthesis, together with an unswerving
intellectual rigour and devotion to evidence-based reason, make his output a
genuine treasure. Nobody on earth is doing more to demolish the wicked myths,
pernicious fictions and poisonous superstitions of the modern feminist creed."
Neil Lyndon, journalist, author of No More Sex War and Sexual Impolitics
"The Empathy Gap should have been an academic text. However, being the most
significant, comprehensive and serious book to be published on gender – quite probably
bar none – academe's loss is wider society's gain."
Elizabeth Hobson, former leader (2020/21), Justice for Men & Boys (and the
women who love them)
The Empathy Gap
Male Disadvantages and the
Mechanisms of Their Neglect
William Collins
LPS publishing
Publisher's note: While every possible effort has been made to ensure that the
information contained in this book is accurate, neither the publisher nor the author
can accept responsibility for any errors or omissions, however caused. No
responsibility for loss or damage occasioned to any person acting, or refraining
from action, as a result of the material in this publication can be accepted by the
publisher or the author.
First edition published July 2019
This ebook edition published July 2021
Copyright © 2021 William Collins: The right of the author to be identified as the
author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, distributed, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronics, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted
by the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of
the publisher.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 9780957168893
Cover design by rawb
LPS publishing
Contents
Testimonials
Preface to the 2021 eBook Edition
1. The Differently Gendered Society
1.1 Purpose of this Book
1.2 Equality?
1.3 What is the Origin of the Empathy Gap?
1.3.1 The Nine Factors Underlying the Empathy Gap
1.3.2 Discussion of the Factors Underlying the Empathy Gap
1.4 Aims and Limitations
2. Education
2.1 Primary School Attainment
2.2 Secondary School Attainment Aged 16
2.3 A Levels
2.4 University Entry
2.5 Gender Gap and the Nature of the Award
2.6 Innate Gender Difference? Adult Competencies
2.7 School Staff and Stereotyping
2.8 University Staff, STEMM and Athena Swan
2.9 Gender Skew in Provision
2.10 Perceptions and Expectations
2.11 Worldwide
2.12 Summary: The Education Empathy Gap
3. Physical Health and Longevity
3.1 Gender Disparity in Premature and Early Death
3.2 The Leading Causes of Premature Death (<75)
3.2.1 Cardiovascular Diseases
3.2.2 Cancers
3.2.3 HIV-AIDS
3.3 The Leading Causes of Early Death (<45)
3.4 Occupational Health and Workplace Injuries and Deaths
3.4.1 Workplace Deaths in History
3.4.2 Workplace Deaths Now
3.4.3 Non-Fatal Injuries at Work
3.4.4 Occupational Health Issues
4. Men's Access to Healthcare and Health Spending by Sex
4.1 Men's Access to Healthcare
4.2 Global Health of Men
4.3 Healthcare and Health Research Spending
4.3.1 USA Healthcare Spending by Sex
4.3.2 USA Health Research Spending by Sex
4.4 The Empathy Gap in Men's Health
5. Male Genital Mutilation: History and Harm
5.1 Anatomy, Histology and Function of the Foreskin
5.1.1 Foreskin Development: Retraction
5.2 The History of MGM
5.3 MGM Procedures, Practitioners and Risk
5.3.1 Risks of the Procedure
5.4 Prevalence and Incidence of MGM
5.5 The Harmful Effects of MGM
5.5.1 Studies of Sensitivity
5.5.2 Studies of Men's Sexual Experience after Circumcision
5.5.3 Survey Evidence: Men's Subjective Experience of Circumcision
6. MGM: Claimed Benefits and Legality
6.1 Background to the 2017 review of Morris et al
6.2 Critique of the claims of Morris et al, 2017.
6.2.1 Urinary Tract Infections
6.2.2 Phimosis
6.2.3 Balanitis / Candidiasis
6.2.4 Human Papilloma Virus (HPV)
6.2.5 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
6.2.6 Other Diseases
6.3 The Opinion of Medical Bodies Worldwide
6.4 Legal Issues
6.4.1 The Illegality of MGM in the UK
6.4.2 Attempts to Make MGM Illegal in Other Countries
6.5 The Male Genital Mutilation Empathy Gap
7. Work, Pay, Tax, Spending and Pensions
7.1 UK Unemployment Data
7.2 UK Economic Inactivity
7.3 Gendered Occupations
7.3.1 The Public Sector
7.3.2 Armed Forces
7.3.3 Apprenticeships
7.3.4 The Gender Equality "Paradox"
7.3.5 Diversity?
7.4 The UK Gender Pay Gap
7.5 Gender Pay Gap Reporting: Company Submissions
7.6 Working Hours: The Gender Pay Gap is a Work Gap
7.7 Spending and Wealth by Sex
7.7.1 UK in Year 1993/4
7.7.2 Wealth and Spending, UK and USA, 2008 to 2018
7.8 Income Taxes
7.9 Pensions
7.9.1 Occupational and Personal Pensions; the Private and Public Sectors
7.9.2 The State Pension
7.9.3 Numbers of Payees and Recipients
7.9.4 Gender Pension Inequality?
7.10 Housework and Unpaid Caring
7.10.1 Men and Housework
7.10.2 Men as Unpaid Carers
7.11 The Empathy Gap in Work, Pay, Wealth, Spending and Taxes
8. Imprisonment
8.1 Harsher Treatment for Men
8.1.1 Harsher Treatment Over Time
8.1.2 Harsher Treatment by Sex
8.2 Pop Goes the Woozle
8.3 Characteristics of Prisoners
8.3.1 Children in Prison
8.3.2 Prisoners' IQ
8.4 Male Prisoners and Their Families
8.5 Self-Harming in Prison
8.6 Deaths in Prison
8.6.1 Suicide in Prison
8.6.2 Deaths in Prison from 'Natural' Causes
8.7 The Empathy Gap in Imprisonment
9. Violence and Abuse
9.1 All Violence
9.1.1 Victims
9.1.2 Perpetrators
9.2 Violence and Abuse Within the Home: Men as Victims
9.2.1 Incidence of Male Victims: Survey Data
9.2.2 Severe Force
9.2.3 Demographic Dependence of DA
9.2.4 Domestic Violence and Marital Status
9.2.5. Repeated Domestic Abuse
9.2.6 Reports to Police, Prosecutions and Convictions
9.2.7 Domestic Homicides
9.2.8 International Studies of Domestic Abuse
9.2.9 Dads as Victims of Domestic Violence
9.2.10 Domestic Abuse Services: The Sexes Compared
9.2.11 Perpetrator Programmes
9.3 The Empathy Gap for Men as Victims of Violence
10. Family Court Statistics
10.1 Family Court Statistics (England and Wales)
10.2 The Paramountcy Principle and the Perception of Risk
10.3 Legal Aid, LASPO and the Role of False Allegations
10.3.1 Legal Aid and LASPO
10.3.2 The Domestic Violence Legal Aid Gateway
10.3.3 Prevalence of Allegations of Domestic Abuse
10.3.4 Which Sex Gets Legal Aid in the Family Courts?
10.3.5 Routes through the Gateway
10.3.6 Statistics of Domestic Violence Remedy Orders
10.4 Lobbying and Serious Case Reviews
10.5 The Empathy Gap Against Fathers in the Family Courts
11. Are the Family Courts Biased Against Fathers?
11.1. Introduction
11.2 The 2008 Study of Hunt & MacLeod
11.3 Lawyers', Judges' and Court Officers' Opinions
11.4 The 2015 Study of Harding and Newnham
11.5 Enforcement
11.6 What Proportion of Separating Couples Apply to Court?
11.7 Actual Contact Outcomes
11.8 Financial Issues
11.9 The Empathy Gap Against Non-Resident Fathers
12. Parental Alienation, ACEs and the Woozling of Shared Parenting
12.1 What is Parental Alienation?
12.1.1 Prevalence of Alienation
12.2 Adverse Childhood Experiences
12.2.1 Behaviour and Health Outcomes of ACEs
12.2.2 ACEs and Parental Involvement
12.3 Woozling Shared Parenting
12.4 Parental Conflict and the Benefit of Contact
12.5 Empathy Gap in Alienation and Shared Care
13. The Drivers of Fatherlessness
13.1 Marriage, Divorce, Cohabitation and Single Living: the Data
13.2 Statistics on Children's Living Arrangements
13.3 The Decline of Marriage Drives Fatherlessness
13.4 The Socioeconomics of Marriage: The Marriage Gap
13.5 Summary of the Drivers of Fatherlessness
14. The Effect of Fatherlessness on Outcomes for Children
14.1 The Differing Perspectives on Fatherhood
14.2 Families Without Fatherhood, Dennis & Erdos, 1992
14.3 The Big Picture - A Selection of Studies
14.4 The Study of Radl, Salazar and Cebolla-Boado, 2017
14.5 The Study of McLanahan, Tach and Schneider, 2013
14.6 The Indirect Empathy Gap for Fatherless Children
15. Paternity and Its Enemies
15.1 Men's Control Over Their Own Fertility
15.1.1 Male Contraception
15.1.2 Option Denied?
15.1.3 Men's Fertility
15.2 Mispaternity and Paternity Fraud
15.2.1 Terminology and Perception
15.2.2 The Prevalence of Mispaternity
15.2.3 Men are Not Legally Entitled to Know if a Child is Theirs (UK)
15.2.4 A "Thin View" of Fatherhood?
15.3 The Empathy Gap Against Paternity and Male Fertility
16. Homelessness and Loneliness
16.1 Statutory Homelessness and "Single" Homelessness
16.1.1 Statutory Homelessness in England
16.1.2 Statutory Homelessness in Scotland
16.1.3 Statutory Homelessness in Wales
16.1.4 Statutory Homelessness in Northern Ireland
16.1.5 Statutory Homelessness: The Big Picture on Gender
16.2 Rough Sleepers
16.2.1 Rough Sleeper Counts in England
16.2.2 CHAIN Data for London
16.2.3 Rough Sleeper Counts in Wales
16.3 Deaths of Rough Sleepers
16.3.1 Bethany Thomas 2012 Data
16.3.2 ONS Data
16.3.3 Data from the Bureau of Investigative Journalism
16.4 Loneliness
16.4.1 Loneliness Survey in England
16.4.2 Loneliness Survey in Wales
16.5 The Empathy Gap in Homelessness and Loneliness
17. Mental Ill-Health and Substance Abuse
17.1 Mental Ill Health in Adults
17.1.1 Common Mental Disorders
17.1.2 Personality Disorders
17.1.3 Autism Spectrum Disorders
17.1.4 Psychotic Disorders
17.1.5 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
17.1.6 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
17.1.7 Bipolar Disorder
17.1.8 Mental Disorders and Employment
17.1.9 Access to Treatment by Demographic
17.2 Mental Ill Health in Children and Young Adults
17.2.1 All Disorders
17.2.2 Emotional Disorders
17.2.3 Behavioural Disorders
17.2.4 Hyperactivity Disorders
17.2.5 Autism, Eating Disorders and Less Common Disorders
17.2.6 Mental Health Medication of Children
17.2.7 Demographic, Lifestyle and Sexuality Factors
17.2.8 Teenagers and Students in the USA
17.3 Substance Abuse
17.3.1 Alcohol Abuse
17.3.2 Drug Abuse
17.4 People Detained under the Mental Health Act
17.5 APA and BPS Guidelines for the Psychological Practice with Boys and Men
17.5.1 APA Versus Data
17.6 The Empathy Gap in Mental Health Perceptions
18. Suicide, Suicidality and Self-Harm
18.1 Self-Harm, Suicidality and Suicide Attempts (England)
18.2 Suicide
18.2.1 UK Suicide Statistics and Trends
18.2.2 The Suicide Paradox
18.2.3 Reasons for the High Male Suicide Rate
18.2.4 Methods of Suicide and Suicide Attempts
18.3 Male Suicide: Narratives, Rationalisations and Blaming
18.4 The Empathy Gap in Suicide
19. Rape and False Allegations
19.1 Definition of Sexual Offences
19.2 Prevalence of Rape and Police Reports
19.3 Conviction Statistics for Rape
19.3.1 Sex of Rape Victims and Defendants
19.4 Attrition
19.5 Rape Trials and Juries
19.5.1 Video Evidence by Complainants
19.5.2 "Training" Rape Trial Juries
19.5.3 Rape Trials Without Juries?
19.6 False Allegations of Rape
19.6.1 The Harm Done by False Allegations
19.7 Disclosure
19.8 The Empathy Gap in Accusations of Sexual Assault
20. Sexual Assault: The Story Less Told
20.1 Sex Offender Prisoner Statistics (UK)
20.2 Examples of Women's Sexual Abuse of Minors
20.3 The Prevalence of Female Sexual Abuse of Minors (UK)
20.4 Male Offenders' History of Childhood Sexual Abuse
20.5 Perceptions of Female Perpetration and the Damage Done
20.6 The Sex of the Victim
20.7 Female Offender Sentencing
20.8 Female Sexual Offending in Correctional Facilities in the USA
20.9 Sexual Assault of Adult Men by Women
20.10 Adult Prison Sexual Assault
20.11 War Rape
20.12 The Empathy Gap in Sexual Assault
21. Reprise: The Case for the Empathy Gap
21.1 Education
21.2 Health and Longevity
21.3 Male Genital Mutilation
21.4 Work, Pay, Tax and Pensions
21.5 Imprisonment
21.6 Violence and Abuse
21.7 Family Courts
21.8 Alienation, ACES and Shared Care
21.9 Drivers of Fatherlessness
21.10 Effects of Fatherlessness on Children
21.11 Men's Fertility and Paternity Fraud
21.12 Homelessness and Loneliness
21.13 Mental Health
21.14 Suicide
21.15 Rape and False Allegations
21.16 Sexual Assault: The Story Less Told
21.17 In Conclusion
Acronyms
References
Index
Preface to the 2021 eBook Edition
The disadvantages or inequalities suffered by men and boys are substantial and to
be found across all aspects of life: education, accidents, health and longevity,
domestic abuse, suicide, imprisonment, substance abuse, and as victims of crime, as
parents and in respect of the impact of family break-down. To some this may seem
quixotic. "Inequality" is so often linked with women and girls, or with minorities,
that it has become an unchallenged axiom that we need not be concerned about
males qua males. Yet the evidence suggests this is misguided. The observation that
senior positions are still occupied more by men than women – politicians,
professors, consultants, high court judges – is not apposite. It is not these men who
bring down the average male longevity or populate the prisons or swell the ranks
of the under-educated. The intersection of men-plus-deprivation is a more virulent
combination even than women-plus-deprivation, as the data to be presented herein
will demonstrate.
The primary purpose of this book is to present the evidence of male disadvantages,
with extensive referencing of sources, drawing on national statistics or data of
comparable provenance as much as possible. This review will identify the broad
factors that can negatively affect men and boys. Their impact on male health and
well-being will be starkly clear across a range of metrics.
However, there is a further purpose. It is not only the evidence supporting claims
of male disadvantage which needs to be expounded, but also the reasons for this
compelling case being granted so little attention. Indeed, in some quarters, the
notion that males may suffer disadvantage will be greeted with incredulity (Flood,
2004), even mockery (Phillips, 2015). The secondary purpose of the book is
therefore to expose the mechanisms which distract attention from the male
disadvantages, including outright denial. Regrettably, the problem of
misinformation will loom large. The author has done his best not to add to it.
An explicatory theory is offered as a unifying principle for both the male
disadvantages and their societal neglect. This will be a counter-narrative to the
hegemonic paradigm which is usually invoked in the context of the male social
position.
For the most part, quoted data will refer to the UK. In fact, most often this will be
confined to England and Wales, which reflects how national statistics are collated.
However, data from other countries, especially the USA, will also be deployed,
either for comparison or when UK data is not available. Despite the predominant
focus on the UK, it is likely that the qualitative features of the male disadvantages
will be replicated to varying degrees in all other Western or Anglophone countries.
Style Issues
I confess my sin in using "male" and "female" as nouns, at least in the plural
"males" and "females". Blame the English language for having no alternative for
the cumbersome "men and boys" and "women and girls". I apologise to those
whose grammatical sensibilities are offended. I use English spelling. However, in
quotes from non-UK authors, their original spelling is retained without confusing
the text with "(sic)". Quotes use the single quote. Double quotes are used when
making reference to a word or phrase, for example, when critiquing the use of the
phrase "male privilege". I may descend so far as to use scare quotes, for which I
am only falsely apologetic. Acronyms are generally explained in each chapter in
which they are used, but for readers' convenience I gather them together after the
main text (hyperlinked from the Contents).
Referencing
In this ebook version, hypertext links are provided for all references which are
accessible online (almost all). The ONS has a habit of replacing the contents of a
given URL with updated material, which is beyond my control. In such cases the
reader may sometimes have to do a little hunting to find the previous datasets. Full
written citations may still be found in the References list at the end of the book, in
alphabetical order. The reference may by cited by author or by organisation, e.g.,
UK Government (listed under "u"). Authors may be cited only by surname, or
using both forename and surname, but are always listed in the References in
alphabetical order of the first author's surname.
Tables and Figures
This book majors on the presentation of empirical evidence in the form of data.
The most digestible form for communicating such material is through the use of
Tables and Figures, generally graphs. Consequently, the book has a great many
Tables and Figures and the latter are often in colour. Viewing on a device capable
of rendering colours is therefore recommended although monochrome will be
adequate in most cases.
It was judged important that captions (some of them lengthy, of necessity) were
not separated from the Tables and Figures to which they apply, for maximum
comprehensibility. To ensure this, all Tables and Figures start at the top of new
pages, along with their captions. One inevitable consequence is that there will
often be a blank space on the preceding page.
How To Find Things
This is a big book. Finding things, even things you know are in there somewhere,
can be a challenge. The place to start is with the Contents list (above). It is an
unusually detailed and lengthy Contents list, and runs to sub-sub-headings. If this
fails, use the Index at the end. The Index has been completely rewritten for this
ebook edition and is hyperlinked to the relevant sections. Finally, your device will
almost certainly provide a search facility – so you can use that to find such things
as specific authors or other things identifiable by a known word or phrase.
This is Not an Update
The text, Tables and Figures of the book are largely unchanged from the
paperback edition in 2019. Some minor updates of the text have been made here
and there but this is not a substantive update. New datasets, studies, legislation,
etc., are being published all the time, so an update will eventually be motivated but
this is not it. For the present I am content that the message has not changed. In as
far as there have been significant changes they can almost always be summarised
simply as "it's got worse". However, it is appropriate to make some remarks about
the more significant events of the last couple of years, linking to articles in my blog
for details in lieu of inclusion within the book itself.
In respect of education, any future update would certainly include an account of
the debacle that was the A Level awards in the "plague year" of 2020, which has
provided further unambiguous evidence of sex bias in teachers' assessments. The
effects of the intersection of race and sex would also feature.
In respect of health, the book was written before Covid-19, so that pandemic is not
mentioned (for which the reader may well be grateful). But I note that Covid-19
has further underwritten the claims in chapter 3 that males are, in respect of
disease, the weaker sex. In the previous edition I resisted the temptation to regale
the reader with the evolutionary origins of this which stretch back to the dawn of
anisogamous sexual reproduction several hundred million years ago. I cannot
promise I will continue to desist from doing so in any future revision.
In regard to unemployment (chapter 6) I am glad to have avoided the topic during
Covid-19 lockdowns as this would have made the matter rather problematic, with
huge numbers of people idle at home, though not on the unemployment statistics,
though some would later join them. Some further delay is required before the
effects of the lockdowns on unemployment (and the economy generally) become
manifest.
A discussion about UK domestic abuse legislation was, perhaps, an excusable
omission previously, but the passing of the Domestic Abuse Act 2020/21 provides
additional impetus to expose these issues. There has been intense activity on these
matters over the last year, in Parliament, in Government, and by the judiciary
which will be a challenge to render coherent. But the extreme prejudice that was
the MOJ's "harm report" issued in June 2020 would certainly feature in a future
update. There are several articles relating to these matters on EmpathyGap.uk,
and no doubt more will appear in due course.
I now realise I fell short over the issue of fathers' access to their children after
separation. The family courts are a damnable issue for those intent on getting
decent data due to being both secret and not bothering to collect data themselves.
But I could, and should in a future update, address where the bias principally lies,
and that is Cafcass/Cafcass Cymru and the social worker function.
Likewise there has been significant water under the bridge on the matter of rape,
and specifically rape trials, since 2018/19, so chapters 19 and 20 could do with
bringing up-to-date, though, yet again, the overall story will not have changed in its
essentials. The latest (2020/21) analysis of rape trial jury performance by
Professor Cheryl Thomas would feature, for now see this.
Victimology
I wish to emphasise what the book does not seek to achieve – indeed, seeks to
avoid – namely to encourage men to join in the destructive fraud that is
victimhood. This is made clear in chapter 1, but bears emphasising by repetition
here. Anyone who makes the mistake of thinking that men could participate in the
victimhood Olympics, even if they wished to, has failed to understand that the very
possibility is precluded by the empathy gap. Victimhood trades on societal
sympathies which do not apply to men.
The purpose of forcing the male disadvantages upon your attention is precisely to
contrast the empirical reality with the societal reality that almost no one cares
about them. It is not the male disadvantages themselves which are truly being
revealed in these pages, so much as the extremely prejudicial societal perception
of them.
I am glad that victimhood is unlikely to work for men. Victimhood is socially
divisive and personally diminishing. I would be mortified if I were to contribute to
encouraging men to attempt the path of victimhood. Men, including myself, would
never have taken to mentioning these male disadvantages were it not for the social
and political environment in which we now find ourselves. Men would have been
content to 'suck up' the disadvantages indefinitely were it not for one thing: the
withdrawal of respect. It is not the male disadvantages themselves which invoke
our fury, but their reality coupled with the vilification of men which has now
become de rigueur. The two things are linked. Denigration is the handmaiden of
discrimination.
Stoicism is not a character flaw, it is not damaging to your mental health, and it is
not a sign of toxic masculinity. But acquiescing meekly to the myriad situational
aggressions and the overarching strategy of vilification would indeed be
psychologically damaging and should not be countenanced.
Acknowledgements
I take the usual cop-out that there are too many people to whom acknowledgement
is due to attempt to name them all, which has the merit of being true. 'It is easy to
acknowledge, but almost impossible to realize for long, that we are mirrors whose
brightness, if we are bright, is wholly derived from the sun that shines upon us'
,
(C.S.Lewis, 1960). Most happily I acknowledge all readers of this book, without
whom it would have been pointless.
William Collins, July 2021.
1. The Differently Gendered Society
The last thing one knows in constructing a work is what to put first.
Blaise Pascal (1623 - 1662)
1.1 Purpose of this Book
The primary purpose of this book is to present the evidence for men and boys being
disadvantaged across a wide range of areas, including education, health, criminal
justice, parenthood and safeguarding. Most data apply to the UK, so unless
otherwise specified it is the UK to which I refer. Inferences from the situation in
this country can then be drawn for other Western and Anglophone nations.
A secondary purpose is to examine why there is currently such a disconnect
between what the evidence suggests and the popular and academic perception of
the status of males. These two features - the male disadvantages together with the
minimal societal concern which they provoke – constitute the Empathy Gap. Both
women and men display this muted empathy towards males.
Detailed elucidation of the psychosocial, political, evolutionary, neuroscientific or
ideological causes of the empathy gap is beyond the scope of this review. However,
later in this introductory chapter I shall present a perspective on the origins of the
empathy gap which will, I hope, both motivate and illuminate the chapters which
follow.
I permit myself however to voice one opinion immediately: the empathy gap is a
remnant of the old gendered mindset. This paradigm holds that men are strong,
powerful, agentic, independent and responsible; whereas women are weak,
vulnerable, passive, dependent and thus in need of protection, (Friedan, 1963)
(Hughes, 2014). On the contrary, the evidence presented here suggests that it is
not a person's sex which primarily determines these things, but other factors. Most
men are not powerful, and some men are vulnerable, as this book serves to
demonstrate. Moreover, women are as generically agentic and powerful as men.
That being so, one purpose of this book is to ask, 'why should compassion be
unevenly distributed?' From this perspective, the empathy gap may be seen as a
major equality issue. However, one of the problems is that the concept of equality
has itself become corrupted.
1.2 Equality?
It has become axiomatic that issues of gender equality deserve social and
governmental attention. For this reason the UK's Equality Act 2010 was
introduced, (UK Government, 2010). It recognises nine protected characteristics.
The protected characteristics of greatest relevance in this book are sex and
marital status. The other protected characteristics are sexuality, age, race,
religion, disability, gender reassignment and pregnancy/maternity. The Act
prohibits certain types of conduct relating to discrimination, harassment,
victimisation or general disadvantage based on these protected characteristics.
The Act requires public bodies to ensure that people with protected characteristics
are not unfairly discriminated against in the context of public service provision and
employment. Public bodies are also subject to a general duty to promote equality,
eliminate unlawful discrimination and promote good relations across all protected
characteristics. Sex is a protected characteristic that applies to both men and
women.
It is not appropriate to attempt here a complete account of this large and complex
Act. However, an appreciation of some of its key aspects is pertinent because the
focus of this book is upon one sex, itself a protected characteristic. Informally, the
provisions of the Act are intended, at least ostensibly, to promote fairness. The
provisions of the Act will be familiar to many as the basis of claims of
discrimination against women or racial minorities. The manifold disadvantages
suffered by males in the UK, to be made explicit in this book, raise an obvious
question: are these disadvantages in violation of the Equality Act? Is society
ignoring the issues associated with equality relating to the protected characteristic
of being male? In examining these questions the reader may wish to bear in mind
the following extracts from the Act.
Discrimination
Direct discrimination is prohibited: Quote, 'a person A discriminates against
another person B if, because of a protected characteristic, A treats B less
favourably than A treats or would treat others'. Thus, for example, discrimination
on grounds of sex or marital status is prohibited. Exceptions may occur. For
example, a man may not complain of being treated differently from a woman if the
woman's different treatment resulted directly from her pregnancy or childbirth,
which is also a protected characteristic.
Provision of services
'A person concerned with the provision of a service to the public must not
discriminate against a person requiring the service by not providing the person with
the service'.
Education
The responsible body of a school must not 'discriminate against a pupil (e.g., on
grounds of sex, sexuality, religion or race) in the way it provides education for the
pupil, in the way it affords the pupil access to a benefit, facility or service, or by
excluding the pupil from the school'. This does not prohibit single sex schools.
Public sector equality duty
Quote: 'The need to advance equality of opportunity between persons who share a
relevant protected characteristic and persons who do not share it involves having
due regard to encouraging persons who share a relevant protected characteristic
to participate in public life or in any other activity in which participation by such
persons is disproportionately low'. Note how this clause confuses equality of
opportunity with equality of outcome by asserting that "the need to advance
equality of opportunity" involves encouraging the elimination of inequalities of
outcome.
Positive action (affirmative action)
Quote: 'If participation in an activity by persons who share a protected
characteristic is disproportionately low, the Act does not prohibit taking any action
which is a proportionate means of achieving the aim of enabling or encouraging
persons who share the protected characteristic to overcome or minimise that
disadvantage'. In effect, the Act enables policies aimed at producing equality of
outcome.
Marital arrangements
The Act abolished a husband's duty to maintain his wife: Quote, 'The rule of
common law that a husband must maintain his wife is abolished'.
The Government's Quick Start Guide to the 2010 Equality Act cautions against
"treating everyone the same" in relation to the Public Sector Equality Duty, thus,
'The Equality Duty does not require public bodies to treat everyone the same.
Rather, it requires public bodies to think about people's different needs and how
these can be met. So the Equality Duty does not prevent public bodies providing
women-only services - for example, for female victims of sexual violence or
domestic violence. Indeed, such services may be necessary in order to ensure
women have access to the services they need.' (UK Government Equalities Office,
2011).
In respect of the last issue, the alert reader may be concerned about a principle in
which 'equality does not mean treating everyone the same'. This is justified in the
legislation by the concept of "need". In the explicit case of provision of services to
women due to a need resulting from pregnancy or childbirth, a need which men
cannot share, the matter is clear. However, the reader may have a concern that the
concept of "need" may permit inequality to be introduced unwittingly if the
claimed "need" is not justifiable. This is especially a risk if there is a cultural norm
which perceives "need" in a gendered manner. The example of domestic violence is
a case in point, because men also suffer from domestic violence and the prevailing
dearth of provision for male victims may be a result of a gender-biased perception
of need being misaligned with the objective need (addressed further in Chapter 9).
The same phenomenon presents a risk of unequal treatment in many areas, for
example in respect of criminal justice, as discussed further below and in chapter 8.
There has been considerable focus on gender equality in relation to women and
girls. There has been less focus in the past on equality issues for men and boys.
This is exemplified by arrangements within the UK Parliament. The relevant
Parliamentary Select Committee is called the 'Women and Equalities Committee'
(UK Parliament, 2018a), a title which reflects its focus of concern. The UK
government has a 'Minister for Women and Equalities', a Minister for Equalities,
and a Minister for Women (UK Government, 2018d), all the incumbents at present
(2021) being women. Their remit is policy on women, sexual orientation,
transgender equality, and cross-government equality strategy and legislation. The
focus on just a subset of the Equality Act's protected characteristics seems
peculiarly at odds with the objective of equality. Similarly, the EHRC (Equality and
Human Rights Commission) spends only a tiny proportion of its funds on men's
issues. In 2010 to 2013 just 2.5% of EHRC grants went towards men's issues,
compared with 26% to women, 28% to ethnic minorities, 18% to the disabled and
9% to LGBT (Collins W, 2016).
This skewed focus on some protected characteristics rather than others,
particularly the male sex, stems from an implicit assumption about the prevailing
direction of inequality. The purpose of this book is to demonstrate, with evidence,
that this presumption is largely false.
One of the key issues, to be explored here, is that social disadvantage affects
outcomes for males even more than it indubitably affects females. This is
consistent with what is typically found in the social sciences: whatever attribute or
characteristic is being discussed, the distribution for males will most often have a
greater variance than that for females, (Stevens and Haidt, 2017). From this
statistical vantage, it is to be expected that the extreme end of the distribution of
deprivation will feature males disproportionately. It will be shown that the effects
of this are evident in mortality data and other measures. It can be seen by all of us
on the streets in the form of rough sleepers, who are predominantly men (Ministry
of Housing, Communities and Local Government, 2018c).
This observation is sometimes obscured by a concentration on the other end of the
same distribution: the relatively privileged. But the man who is under-educated, or
unemployed, or socially isolated, or mentally or physically afflicted, hardly gains
much succour from the thought that other men are quite the opposite: in high
status employment and in rude good health. Unfortunately, the former are far more
numerous, (The Equality Trust, 2016).
It will be seen that this conflict between public perception and factual evidence is
played out across the whole range of male disadvantages. Consider, for example,
the criminal justice system. Over 95% of prisoners in the UK are men, (Office for
National Statistics, 2018a). The trend in the UK since the end of the second world
war has been to incarcerate increasing numbers of men, both in absolute numbers
and in terms of the percentage of the population. Yet the totality of crime has
fallen dramatically since its peak in 1995, the number of crimes in England and
Wales having reduced to about one-third of its peak by September 2017 (Office for
National Statistics, 2018b). Moreover, the same source shows that violent crime
has also been reducing since 1995 (despite the recent rise in knife crime). Why is
the number, and the percentage, of men in prison increasing against a background
of decreasing crime? And why does this odd anomaly not receive greater public
attention?
It will be shown in Chapter 8 that men are more readily incarcerated, and for
longer, than women, for the same offence category. In contrast, there is a strong
lobby to imprison fewer women, exemplified by Baroness Jean Corston's 2007
Corston Report, whose dictum was 'equality does not mean treating everyone the
same', (Corston, 2007). In the context of crime and punishment, one wonders why
not. Is not the equality of all before the law an established and inviolate principle?
It seems no longer. The lobby against imprisonment of women has now succeeded
in becoming a Government policy to treat the two sexes differently in respect of
punishment, emphasising rehabilitation and compassion based on the disadvantages
which lead women into crime to motivate a presumption against imprisonment of
women. But, by omission, none of this applies to men.
Prisoners are not a representative cross-section of society. Overwhelmingly,
prisoners, of either sex, are disadvantaged, often in multiple ways. Self-harm and
suicide rates are horribly high in prisons. There is also a far larger number of older
male prisoners, over 60, than there used to be. As a result, the non-self-inflicted
death rate in men's prisons is also rising alarmingly. Moreover, these older male
prisoners are particularly disadvantaged, often by limited mobility, or even
dementia (Hill, 2017). The contrast between the way our society treats men and
women is becoming greater, but this excites no societal concern. This is the
empathy gap.
1.3 What is the Origin of the Empathy Gap?
This book will present an overview of the male disadvantages, or inequalities, in
education, health and longevity, suicide, criminal justice, parental rights,
homelessness, and as victims of violence and abuse. In tackling a subject of such
enormous scope, it is not possible in a single work to be truly comprehensive.
Nevertheless, the evidence of male disadvantage across this broad range of issues
is voluminous and compelling. It is inevitable that the subject matter will place this
work in antithesis with prevailing perceptions which may be represented, or
perhaps caricatured, by terms and phrases such as "patriarchy", or "male
privilege", or "hegemonic masculinity" – in other words, feminist theory. Such
ideas will hardly seem an appropriate description of men and boys as presented
here.
The attempt is sometimes made to resolve the conflict between the evidence of
male disadvantages and these gender-theoretical ideas by appeal to explanations
such as "patriarchy hurts men too" or "toxic masculinity". It is not the primary
purpose of this book to discuss gender-theoretical ideas. But it would be
disingenuous to pretend that the subject matter of the book is not an implicit
challenge to these prevailing "explanations". In this context, it is important to note
that these proffered explanations are always a variant on "it's men's own fault".
Well, maybe it is, in part – but which men? And do women have no role in shaping
society and society's impositions upon individuals, including upon men?
Underlying the insistence on the relevance of the above gender-theoretical terms is
a mindset – or perhaps an argument of convenience - that men form an
undifferentiated, monolithic section of humanity: that all men are the same. From
such an improbable axiom, no sense can follow. If patriarchy does indeed hurt men
too, which men constitute the patriarchy and which men are hurt? Not the same
men, that is the salient fact. If the gender-political mantra were re-expressed as
"men in power do no favours to disadvantaged men" then I think the two sides
would find themselves much closer to agreement. That being so, is it not merely
misleading to concentrate upon an identity group defined by being male?
This is a peculiar thing to assert in a book whose purpose is specifically male
disadvantages. It is as well to expose the paradox that one faces in countering an
invalid, but insistent, identity group based critical theory. One seems forced to
adopt an equal and opposite identity group response, even though one knows it to
be just as invalid. It is not "all men this" and "all women that". The only morally
justifiable, and socially constructive, stance is to recognise that individuals are to
be judged on their own merits as individuals, not defined by a tribal allegiance.
Unfortunately, even that seemingly innocuous statement is now regarded as
reprehensible by the dominant lobby on "identity" issues.
Some will see any discussion of male disadvantages as an attempt to gain a
victimhood bonus, a mere play in the victimhood Olympics. This is not only wrong
but it would be an act of folly for anyone to try to claim victimhood benefit for men
as a class. The empathy gap itself precludes the possibility. Men as a class have
been disenfranchised from the empathy needed to make victimology applicable.
This book does not set out to prove that all men are disadvantaged. The author
himself has suffered none of the disadvantages he discusses. Rather, the implicit
purpose of this book is to demonstrate a negative: that it is false to claim that all
men are privileged. In that form the book aligns with an anti-identity-group
perspective, not a pro-male-identity-group perspective. This is a crucial distinction
which I would urge the reader to bear in mind.
The main purposes of the book are thus to provide empirical evidence of the many
male disadvantages – albeit not all suffered by all men - and to provide examples of
how these are neglected, minimised and hidden away, thus establishing the
existence of an empathy gap. The inevitable question is: whence cometh this
empathy gap?
On the one hand, to propose an explicit theory regarding the origin of the empathy
gap is to risk prejudicing the main objective, namely to convince the reader that
the empathy gap is real and pervasive. Any proffered theory regarding the origin
of the empathy gap must be more tentative and less well established than the
reality of the empathy gap itself, the latter being more closely tied to empirical
evidence. There is a danger, then, of weaknesses in the explicatory theory being
conflated with weaknesses in the case for the empathy gap itself.
However, it is of some importance to propose an explicatory set of ideas because a
subsidiary purpose of the book is to examine the mechanisms by which the male
disadvantages are tolerated and neglected. Consequently, I offer a set of
perspectives on the issue with this end in mind. In so doing, I emphasise that the
empirical support for the existence of the empathy gap remains valid even if the
hypotheses prove unconvincing. The advantage of offering a theoretical
perspective, however limited, is that it will form a conceptual backcloth to the
tsunami of facts that will follow in the other chapters.
The first challenge I present to the reader is couched in a negative. It is often the
case in science that, before progress can be made, the shortcomings of existing
ideas must be accepted, (Kuhn, 2012). There is a negative to be demonstrated. The
challenge to the reader is to critique currently dominant gender-theoretical ideas
as explanations of the empathy gap. The reader may like to consider how well
concepts like "patriarchy hurts men too", or "male privilege" or "traditional or
hegemonic or toxic masculinity" perform as explanations of the disadvantages
discussed, especially when confronted with the specific examples of how these
inequalities are neglected. As observed above, all these ideas reduce to variants of
"it's men's own fault".
Consider, then, whether "it's men's own fault" is itself a sentiment essentially
based on the empathy gap. The dismissal of material disadvantage based on the
victim-blaming stance that "he brought it on himself" is intrinsically lacking in
empathy. This class of proffered explanations for the empathy gap is therefore a
manifestation of the empathy gap. And it is logically invalid as an explanation of
the empathy gap to appeal to ideas which implicitly assume the empathy gap. If
there is an empathy gap, blaming men will not cut it as an explanation. Blaming
men is the empathy gap.
As an example of how blaming men for their own disadvantage works in practice,
consider male suicide. In the UK between 3 and 4 times more men than women kill
themselves. This is now widely recognised and does receive some attention, for
example in debates in Parliament on International Men's Day, (UK Parliament,
2017a). However, it is invariably the case that the reason for men's high suicide
rate is blamed on some variant of pathological masculinity, or men not being in
touch with their emotions, or men being reluctant to talk or to seek help, etc. All
these explanations fall into the "it's men's own fault" category. And yet male
suicide is known to peak after separation/divorce, especially if child contact is
involved, as discussed further in Chapter 18. Is it these men's own fault that the
Family Courts operate as they do? Would it be acceptable to blame a woman's
suicide entirely on generic shortcomings in female behaviour? Or would it be a
glaring admission of lack of compassion? In the context of female suicide we will
suspect social and personal environment to be at least a contributory factor. Men
do talk, but society does not listen. Society does not want men to talk, as the
reaction to this book will no doubt testify.
Male suicide rates, longer prison sentences for men, shorter male life expectancy,
men as rough sleepers, boys' failure in education, men's alienation from their
children: I suggest it is unhelpful to "explain" these phenomena solely in terms
which reduce to "it's men's own fault". In reality, men are impacted by the
constraints and obligations imposed on them by society and the State. If you prick
us, do we not bleed? But society requires men to be agentic, autonomous and selfreliant, and hence the societal prejudice is that any problems from which men
suffer can only be self-induced. Such problems are a measure of a man's failure to
perform; not a justification for assistance, but an indication that he needs to get his
act together. It is not men upon whom society should be squandering resources to
assist. This message is conveyed to men by the simple expedient of ensuring that
resources which specifically preference men are a relative rarity, whilst those
targeted at women and girls abound. The message is conveyed by the very evident
empathy gap.
The readiness with which victim blaming has been adopted to rationalise male
disadvantages is facilitated by the empathy gap. We are content with explanations
which reduce to "it's men's own fault" only because of the empathy gap. Society
has a deep-seated need to continue to believe in men's self-sufficiency, and the
empathy gap is a psychological disposition, in both sexes, which facilitates it. This
has always been the case. It formed a key psychological underpinning of the
gendered society. The move away from the gendered society, had it been truly
egalitarian, should have involved dissolution of this empathy gap every bit as much
as it needed to involve women's greater independence and entry into the
professions. Instead the changes have all concentrated upon the latter, whilst the
empathy gap and the related male disadvantages have deepened. Indeed, it is the
existence of the empathy gap which has encouraged this skewed approach.
1.3.1 The Nine Factors Underlying the Empathy Gap
I offer nine factors as an explanation of how the empathy gap arises and is then
deepened. I make no claim for originality, except perhaps in manner of expression.
Highly controversial to some, incomprehensible to others, to many the ideas set
down here have in recent years become a familiar perspective.
I emphasise three things. Firstly, this view of gender relations is inevitably highly
simplified and incomplete. Human behaviour is far more varied and nuanced than
can be captured by such an overarching theory. Secondly, there is, of course, a
more familiar and radically different perspective on gender, namely the feminist
perspective. The ideas presented below are, in almost every respect, diametrically
opposed to the feminist position. My contention is that the ideas below provide a
far more coherent and convincing account of the male disadvantages, and their
neglect, than feminist theories – but the reader shall decide. Nevertheless, no one
having the monopoly on truth, and human affairs being so complex, it is likely that
some aspects of the feminist view will be valid. Much of the dispute relates to
human motivations, which can never be pinned down and put under the microscope
as one might like. However, the uncontested and unfettered feminist perspective is,
I insist, intellectually fraudulent, divisive and currently proving socially corrosive.
A radically different alternative is a long overdue corrective. Both are in dire need
of empirical dissection.
Lastly, and most importantly, the reality of the male disadvantages, and the
empathy gap, do not depend upon the veracity of this perspective. The rest of the
book will stand independently of this gender theory. I offer it mainly to provide a
narrative thread through the rest of the book, and a possible explicative basis. This
is offered in the spirit of hypothesis. The scientific method consists, after all, of
conjecture and refutation. To all but the logical purists we may rephrase that as
"conjecture and confirmation". Hence, these ideas are offered as conjecture.
Unlike the rest of the book, which is heavy with source references, I offer little in
the way of support. That is the nature of hypothesis. Its credibility, or otherwise,
rests upon its success in providing an explicative basis for what follows: the male
disadvantages and their neglect. That is not to say that these ideas, essentially
those of the mainstream men's human rights movement (MHRM), could not be the
subject of direct empirical investigation. They could, and should. It is long overdue.
Initially I make just a brief statement introducing each of the nine factors. In the
sections which follow I expand further upon some of these matters.
Matricentrism and Gynocentrism
Gynocentrism is the mindset which promotes a dominant focus on women. It is of
ancient evolutionary lineage but has been culturally enhanced, both historically and
recently. It is culturally transmitted and socially reinforced. Here I shall emphasise
the distinction between the ancient gynocentrism which results from evolution, and
its later cultural enhancements, by referring to the former as "matricentrism".
This terminology is appropriate because the evolved condition relates to a
preferencing, not of women per se, but of mothers as surrogates for their children.
Matricentrism is an evolutionary adaptation which is positive in the sense that
Homo sapiens would probably not exist without it. I shall reserve the term
"gynocentrism" to mean the cultural intensifications of evolved matricentrism. The
historical social benefit of this intensified gynocentrism is debatable and its current
social effects are destructive.
Matricentrism/gynocentrism is a psychological asymmetry in the perception of the
two sexes. Despite the huge societal changes over the last century, the
psychologies of both men and women are still controlled by sentiments of female
vulnerability, need of protection, and preferencing by society. This contrasts with
assumed male independence, strength, autonomy and lack of neediness. This
psychological orientation involves an attitude of deference by men towards women.
It leads to a flow of resources, whether material or other forms of preferencing,
from male to female. From the man's perspective, matricentrism is manifest by
what Belinda Brown has referred to as "responsive masculinity", (Brown, 2019b):
an emotionally based inclination towards a provider role as a precursor to
nurturing and paternal investment. The relationship between this disposition and
the human pair bond is obvious (and expounded further below). It leads to women's
needs controlling men's efforts. What women say is good becomes men's definition
of good – a ceding of moral authority to women. This is the most important feature
of gender relations, but it goes unnoticed by feminists because they place
patriarchy in its stead.
Matricentrism preferences women only as a surrogate for the child. The
evolutionary function (I dare not say "purpose") of matricentrism is reproductive
success. Evolution wastes no more sentiment on females than upon males.
Evolution favours only genetic transmission, manifest in successful child raising.
But the mechanism by which evolution enacts matricentrism is very much via
sentiment. Indeed, a whole constellation of emotions are involved in attracting a
man to a woman and keeping him there.
Whilst there have been enormous changes in the externalities in the last 50 years,
for example women's entry into the professions, our underlying psychology has not
kept pace. Society, which consists of both sexes, continues to police conformance
with the gender scripts which promote matricentrism and its enhanced form,
gynocentrism. The cultural intensification of gynocentrism, particularly that due to
feminism, is (I contend) socially disbeneficial, divisive, and a contributory cause of
male disadvantages and their neglect.
Critics sometimes misrepresent this perspective as "men's rights activists believe
that women oppress men". This is actually a projection of the feminist theory of
patriarchy: that men oppress women. But the idea of matricentrism/gynocentrism
does not posit any conspiracy, only a set of psychosocial proclivities, in both sexes,
which promote preferencing of women and hence, inevitably, the disadvantaging of
men. It is a sociodynamic phenomenon, not a conspiracy, and the word
"oppression" is not appropriate, though it could become so if this dynamic
continues to amplify.
Male Utility / Male Disposability
"Be a man!" is an exhortation which carries a meaning which every man will
understand. It is a reminder to a man that he has fallen short of expectations and
that he needs to pull his socks up, pronto. Say to a woman "be a woman!" and she
will merely look at you bemused. She may simply say, "I am a woman" and wonder
what you were getting at. Absorb the lesson of those different reactions and you
will understand what is meant by the aphorism 'women are human beings, men are
human doings'. Women are valued in themselves, not for services they are required
to perform. Men, in contrast, are valued for what they do, as opposed from having
intrinsic value. Male utility is Brown's "responsive masculinity", translated from
the individual recipient to society as a whole, although it has its psychological origin
in the biology of reproduction. Men's trivial biological investment in the process of
creating, and nurturing, a baby puts them in a different category from women,
whose investment is huge. Men achieve evolutionary worth by services rendered
after birth. This imbues evolutionarily successful men with a psychology oriented
towards being useful. Hence, men are human doings. This is male utility. Note how
this is the flipside of matricentrism. Men's utility for the benefit of women is an
expectation under evolved matricentrism: the inclination to give is matched by the
expectation to receive. A man's right to be regarded by society as "a man" is
dependent upon utility. To quote Geoff Dench (1996),
'A man who does not become a provider in one way or another fails to become a
proper adult, and faces reduced life chances in almost every dimension. The
community cares little about such men, because they make little input to it; and in
turn this renders them prone to self-neglect.'
The hypothesis of male disposability is the extreme case of utility. Matricentrism
gives us "women and children first", which is virtually explicit male disposability.
War is the obvious example of male disposability. But "disposability" need not
literally mean death. More generally it may refer to the potential harms arising
from the relative disadvantage to men originating from
matricentrism/gynocentrism. Hence, male disposability is essentially a corollary of
gynocentrism rather than an entirely separate phenomenon. It is the inevitable
adjunct of gynocentrism: preferencing women is the disfavouring of men. The
institution of male disposability is facilitated by societal equanimity at male
disadvantage, even at the risk of death. The empathy gap is precisely this
equanimity. Just as gynocentrism is a psychological orientation of both men and
women, so also is male disposability. Men willingly acquiesce to their own
disposability.
Respect and Shame
Why would a man willingly collaborate with his own disposability? As always with
altruistic proclivities, male disposability is motivated in the individual by an
emotional reward, in this case the social emotion connected with the respect a man
garners for fulfilling society's expectations. This is why, I presume, men are
particularly sensitive to respect (or honour). Men's sensitivity to perceptions of
honour is now mocked, but its function as a facilitator of disposability, and hence of
gynocentrism, goes unremarked. This bears repetition: if men were not so
concerned about respect (or honour) they would be less inclined to accept their
disposability, for which respect is the reward, and as a result gynocentrism would
flounder. The disrespect for men which feminism promulgates may therefore be the
instrument of its demise.
Women are not required to be disposable and hence have less need to be motivated
by respect or honour. But winning respect is a powerful motivator for men. Equally,
the withdrawal of society's respect in the form of shaming is extremely
psychologically harmful to men. This is why men accused of sexual misdemeanours
frequently kill themselves, even if the accusation is entirely false. It is why men
subject to being "white feathered" during World War 1 would inevitably be
scarred by the fact for the rest of their lives (sometimes to the surprise of women).
It is also why the heresy being expressed in these pages may be in the heads of
many but spoken by very few. To speak against feminism or gynocentrism is to
invite severe social censure, which few wish to risk.
Lack of Male In-Group Preference
Men as a class have little, or no, in-group preference. This frustrates any genderspecific movements by men. In contrast, women do display in-group preference and
readily form gender-specific groups to promote their interests. This is apparent in
the uncountable number of charities and support groups specific to women and
girls, but the relative rarity of such charities and support groups specific to men or
boys. Even those which exist are generally run mostly by women. In part this
reflects the skew in concern resulting from gynocentrism and male disposability.
Feminism
Matricentrism/gynocentrism, male disposability and lack of male in-group
preference are all psychological characteristics. But when we turn to feminism we
pass from the psychological to the political. I use the term "feminism" as an
umbrella term for the highly influential lobby advocating for women and girls.
There is no lobby advocating for men and boys which could currently be described
as influential. The gynocentric psychological disposition lends great strength to the
lobby for women and girls, but at the same time tends to delegitimise any similar
claims for men and boys. In any case, the lack of male in-group preference
frustrates a similar strong lobby for men and boys. As a result, the perception that
women and girls deserve special assistance, stemming from gynocentrism, has been
hugely amplified by successful lobbying and positioning. In turn, the relentless focus
on claimed harms to, or needs of, females further enhances gynocentrism itself.
Thus, gynocentrism and feminism are in a positive feedback loop, both reinforcing
and amplifying each other. In contrast, men and boys do not deserve any particular
consideration because male utility/disposability demotes such concern, and lack of
in-group preference among men ensures there is no collective push-back. Feminism
rationalises the absence of focus on males by claiming that they are already
powerful and privileged. But the claim of male power and privilege is a delusion
which provides spurious legitimacy to inclinations actually arising from
gynocentrism and male disposability. That male power and privilege are delusions
is evidenced by the male disadvantages: the subject of this book.
Patriarchy
Patriarchy is a central concept in feminist theory. Here I present, extremely
briefly, the feminist idea of patriarchy. It exists in two forms, in the domestic world
and in the external world of affairs, though the two are aspects of the same
phenomenon. To feminists, patriarchy is a conspiracy amongst men to oppress
women for their own advantage and satisfaction. Men oppress women domestically
by lording it over them, by dominating them physically, sexually and financially.
The traditional gendered world of affairs, business and politics, was a male world
from which women were largely excluded. This was, to feminists, obviously a form
of oppression of women, and its purpose was to maintain male control over finance.
Power and control are the essence of man in feminist patriarchy theory. Under
patriarchy theory, men's resource provision to the family – even if very hard won
through endless back-breaking labour – is recast as financial oppression. Given
such an opinion, it naturally follows that feminists' priority would be to make
women financially independent of men. They would also want to make men
unnecessary in raising a family. Both these objectives follow from the feminist
assumption regarding the nature of the human pair bond, namely that it is simple
outright oppression. Financial independence and ejection of men from the family
home are the central objectives feminism has always pursued. The rather
impressive constancy of these objectives, passed from generation to generation of
feminists, arises because of their fundamental relationship with the principle credo
of feminism: the oppressive patriarchy.
It is never explained why men should want to oppress women in this way. Even
assuming all men are psychopaths is insufficient to explain it. Psychopaths are not
noted for spending their lives in hard toil to provide hard-won resources to those
whom they are supposed to be oppressing. They would surely be drummed out of
the psychopaths' union for such behaviour. As feminists are generally hard-line
social determinists, they can have no recourse to evolution to explain this
behaviour. They regard patriarchal oppression as a learnt behaviour, passed from
the current patriarchy to the next generation. That those young men who display
the most reprehensible behaviour, most similar to the patriarchal caricature, are
those raised with minimal exposure to adult male influence is one of the many
embarrassing problems with feminist theory which we are not supposed to mention.
It is only possible to believe in patriarchy theory if you are profoundly ignorant of
history, or wilfully distort history into the predetermined shape of this ideological
conviction. It is also necessary to be able to distort the present into this shape,
which appears to be achievable simply by the exercise of prejudice.
The views being presented here are sometimes accused of being a conspiracy
theory. But I hypothesise no conspiracy, only a social dynamic with evolved
elements. Feminist patriarchy theory is, on the other hand, explicitly a conspiracy
theory. There is such a thing as patriarchy, but it is not what the feminists believe. I
discuss an alternative view of patriarchy below.
Misandry
Misandry may be defined as dislike of, contempt for, or even hatred of, men, or
ingrained prejudice against men. It is manifest by the bad-mouthing of men and the
representation of men as stupid or vile. Misandry is both a psychological disposition
which motivates certain feminists, and also a methodology which feminism deploys.
By depicting men as villainous it renders men as undeserving, hence giving further
succour to the gynocentric mindset, which, in turn, promotes feminism. Denigration
is the handmaiden of discrimination.
Identity Politics
I have no intention of straying into general politics. The scope of this work is
already great enough. However, the part which wider politics now plays in gender
issues is too important to go completely unremarked. Identity politics places
primacy on the identity group to which an individual belongs and makes subsidiary
that individual's personal nature, biography or competence. Identity politics is
ostensibly promoting social justice. But the approach taken in this philosophy is
that entire identity groups are "owed" due to past oppressions, whilst other
identity groups are to be suppressed due to their past guilt in being oppressors. It is
identity politics which has made it acceptable to disparage, and discriminate
against, white males, something which is now done openly in seats of power or
influence. It is identity politics which has promoted the abusive and discriminatory
expression "male, pale and stale". Identity politics is intrinsically divisive, though it
wears the clothes of diversity. This truth is captured in the aphorism, "diversity is
divisity".
There is nothing wrong with diversity per se. What is pernicious is giving primacy
to identity group membership. At one time an attitude in which a person's sex or
race was deemed unimportant, even unnoticed, was generally regarded as the
morally correct orientation, avoiding sexism and racism. Under identity politics,
this attitude is recast as sexism or racism. Under identity politics, not only are you
obliged to notice a person's sex and race (and other identity characteristics), but
you are obliged to treat people differently according to their identity group:
"equality does not mean treating everyone the same". The two schools of thought
therefore transpose sexism and the avoidance of sexism, ditto racism, etc. Identity
politics is therefore a form of moral corruption.
To identity politicians, Martin Luther King's dictum that one should judge a man by
the content of his character not by the colour of his skin is a racist opinion. The
relationship of identity politics to gender is that gender (or sex) forms an identity
characteristic, and feminism provides the archetype of an identity political stance.
Their further relationship lies in both being connected to so-called left-wing
politics, for example the Labour Party in the UK. An excellent exposition of the
operation of identity politics in this context has been given by Ben Cobley (2018).
The key feature of identity politics is not compassion for members of the identity
groups apparently favoured, but a cynical exploitation of humans' capacity for
envy and resentment in order to harvest political power via promoting division.
This applies to feminism in particular and identity politics in general. The
submerging of the individual, and the promotion of identity group membership to be
of primary significance, results in conflict between different identity groups.
Individual identity groups are also prone to schism ("I'm more oppressed than
you") and escalating division. This can be seen in practice throughout the West. A
catastrophic outcome of identity politics is inevitable, (Bradford R. , 2019).
Political Correctness
Politics is the pursuit of power. Power is the ability to impose your will on others.
Power is achieved by maximising the number of your allies, or those who will vote
for you. Human societies contain an in-built mechanism for promoting cooperation
and harmony: a moral sense. By this means, almost everyone in a given, stable
culture will agree on what behaviour is desirable and what is reprehensible. It
follows that the shared moral sense is a very effective medium through which to
attain influence, and hence political power. If a political opinion can be given the
aura of a moral obligation, then a fast track to winning hearts and minds has been
achieved. Once this has happened, it is no longer publicly acceptable to question
the opinion, because it is no longer perceived as an opinion but as a moral
imperative. This is political correctness. It is a form of propaganda and a form of
social control. A society which has become infected with political correctness has
already had some of its freedoms removed. An antidote to political correctness is
freedom of speech. One of the symptoms of endemic political correctness is the
erosion of freedom of speech. Political correctness is a tool deployed by all forms
of identity politics. The claimed oppression of the favoured identity group is readily
presented as a moral issue, which can then be used to lever political power. I will
say no more about identity politics or political correctness, but both play a major
part in feminism and the operation of the feminist State.
1.3.2 Discussion of the Factors Underlying the Empathy Gap
1.3.2.1 Matricentrism, Male Disposability and the Role of Emotions
"Matricentrism" may sound like a pejorative term. But the correct perspective on
matricentrism – the original evolutionary form of gynocentrism - is that it is a
psychological orientation, in both sexes, which facilitates the formation of pair
bonds. The feminist insistence on patriarchy theory has blinded us to the obvious:
the man's role in the pair bond is altruistic. Instead, feminists present the male
inclination to pair bond as a wish to dominate and control women. It is
understandable that some women might misunderstand a man's motivation.
Matricentrism creates a profound asymmetry in the psychologies of the two sexes.
This issue is of such central importance that a short digression is in order.
A discussion of what underlies human social behaviour would be too long a
digression, even if the author were capable of writing it. One of its major features
is the extremely large, cooperative, societies which humans form. It is particularly
noteworthy that these large social structures do not depend upon kinship. Two
phenomena contributing to human social behaviour can be distinguished: reciprocal
altruism and genetic altruism. The first of these does not depend upon kinship.
Instead Homo sapiens have the capacity to act in an apparently altruistic manner
towards another human in the hope and expectation that he (or she) will be the
recipient of similar largesse at some future date. Such behaviour requires sufficient
cognitive capacity to be able to conceptualise the future, and to recognise
individuals and remember their past behaviour. This type of social cooperation is
essentially enlightened self-interest: it is based on the ability to conceive of reward
integrated over time. It requires intelligence to exceed a certain minimum and the
ability to delay gratification (accepting a cost now for a greater reward later).
Some humans are more skilled at this behavioural practice than others. It is
probably no coincidence that prisoners have IQs extremely skewed to low
intelligence.
Reciprocal altruism can, at least in part, be modelled using game theory. However,
a complete understanding necessarily involves appreciating the part played by the
social emotions, such as shame and guilt, (Boyd and Richerson, 2009), as well as
other forms of socially imposed retributions. These play a crucial role in controlling
the prevalence of "free loaders" who might be inclined to take the benefits of a
cooperative society without making the required contributions in turn. Thus, shame
and social disgrace become powerful factors by which individuals are coerced to
obey the diktats of society. Unfortunately, game theoretical modelling shows that
any such diktats may be stabilised as long as the punishment of renegades is
sufficiently severe, (Boyd and Richerson, 1992). Thus, a stable cooperative society
need not be very nice: it might be a tyranny. Even tyrannous norms can be
stabilised by shaming and social sanction. The success of a culture, defined as its
support for extremely large numbers of people over very long periods of time, does
not require it to be nice: it might be monstrous. The achievement of a decent
culture which offers its people a reasonable degree of personal freedom requires
features beyond what mere game theoretical modelling can address (and is also
beyond my present ambition to elucidate).
But in addition to the form of enlightened self-interest known as reciprocal
altruism, there is also what I am tempted to call "genuine altruism". This occurs
when a mother or a father sacrifice themselves to save a child. Clearly this is not
reciprocal altruism: the dead parent is no longer in a position to reap future
benefit. Such behaviours are stabilised by evolutionary benefit. It is the gene line
of the father which benefits from his proclivity to protect his child, even if it means
his own death. It is a most intriguing phenomenon: the selfishness of genes leads to
the ultimate lack of selfishness of the organism.
By what means is a father motivated to sacrifice himself to save his child? Does he
think coolly to himself, as his child flounders, drowning, "I must maximise the
chances of my gene line persisting by being willing to die"? No, the motivation is
mediated entirely by emotion. The man's susceptibility to such an emotional pull
has been inculcated in him by evolution. The genes of men who callously allowed
their progeny to die due to their lack of care did not end up well represented in the
gene pool. Evolution positively selects for parents who make the care of their
children their paramount concern, even if it might mean self-sacrifice. This is not
hard to understand. But the implications are profound as regards innate
behaviours.
The purpose of this digression is to emphasise the central importance of innate
emotional orientation. Such innate emotional proclivities are the means by which
our genetic inheritance influences our individual behaviour. And we must allow that
our genes can manipulate our behaviour, and hence influence our reproductive
success, or else how would they have evolved? To feminists this is "biologism", and
heresy. To me it is little more than common sense. The point I have been
approaching, rather laboriously, is that matricentrism is an evolved trait. That, at
least, is my hypothesis. Moreover, matricentrism is seated in the human emotional
psyche.
In other words, the pair bond is mediated by emotion. Can this possibly be
controversial? But emotions are, at least in part, the servants of genetic
inheritance. The emotions surrounding sexuality are certainly an important part of
this, though lust is not the only concomitant of sexual longing. More importantly,
there is more to the emotional basis of the pair bond than just sex. The importance
of sex diminishes significantly in marriages which persist long term. The man is
emotionally bonded to the woman by more than sex. The keen desire in a man to be
a resource provider and help-mate is emotionally situated. It is an altruistic
proclivity, dreadfully maligned by the feminist theory of hegemonic patriarchy.
Matricentrism subsumes a whole constellation of emotions underlying the pair
bond, but their purpose is not "oppression".
Because matricentrism originates from the pair bond, whose evolutionary
significance is (inevitably) successful reproduction, matricentrism can also be
interpreted as a family-centric theory. This is extremely important. Nature has no
particular interest in favouring females. Evolution is driven entirely by
reproductive success. In that sense, nature cares about children. Whilst
matricentrism directly favours females, this is only because females are a proxy for
children. The woman, as mother, is a proxy for her children. This perspective may
soften the apparently pejorative nature of the idea of matricentrism, which, in its
original evolved form, is indirect infant-centricity. It is appropriate that the word is
gender-skewed because the pair bond is itself asymmetric (one sex gives, the other
receives) and this asymmetry is ultimately based in biology (only one sex gives
birth).
1.3.2.2 Gynocentrism
Gynocentrism is derived from matricentrism by processes of cultural
intensification. But it is more than just intensification. Crucially it marks a
corruption of matricentrism, whose "purpose" (evolutionary function) was to
direct care and resources to children. Gynocentrism misappropriates the benefits
intended for children. Whereas in matricentrism the woman is a surrogate for the
child (actual or potential), in gynocentrism the child disappears from the picture. In
gynocentrism, the directed flow of care and resources towards females has become
divorced from its matricentric function. Under gynocentrism the preferencing of
females is perceived as a good in itself, though it has become decoupled from its
evolutionary "purpose".
Gynocentrism is culturally created by enhancement of natural matricentrism. In
recent decades, feminism has been the mechanism by which gynocentrism has been
enhanced (and vice-versa). But this is not the first time in history that this has
occurred. Peter Wright (2014) refers to the intensification of naturally evolved
matricentrism ("gynocentrism 1:0" in his terminology) which occurred in the
Medieval period as "gynocentrism 2:0". Initially within the province of the court
and the lordly classes, ladies became elevated to the pedestals upon which they still
perch.
This cultural appropriation of the evolved trait was the start of gynocentrism
drifting away from its original purpose of benefitting the offspring through the
proxy of the mother, towards benefitting the woman per se. The extent to which
this Medieval intensification of gynocentrism was socially beneficial or harmful is
debatable. However, the trend has continued in recent decades with its further
appropriation and intensification by feminism. These deflections of gynocentrism
from its original matricentric purpose, namely to facilitate child rearing, is
effectively an appropriation of benefit by women of benefit truly intended for the
children. This distortion of intent is recognisable today in the lauding of abortion
and in the manner in which divorce, child arrangements and the family courts are
conducted (see chapters 10-14). These arrangements, and the associated social
services, conflate the interests of the child with the interests of the mother. We can
see the origin of this in the appropriation of evolved matricentrism as far back as
the 12th century, but given much greater emphasis since the rise of twentieth
century feminism: "gynocentrism 3:0" in Peter Wright's parlance. The persistence
of these intensified forms of gynocentrism is now via cultural transmission and
social conditioning.
However, we have seen that the psychological asymmetry of gynocentrism had its
origin in biology. Women are the critical path in reproduction. In evolutionary
terms, women's existence is fully justified by their ability to incubate and nurture
babies. But one man could keep a large number of women permanently pregnant,
so a man's existence is not fully justified by his role in conception. Moreover, he
plays no part in gestation and no direct part in the nurturing of babies.
Nevertheless, elementary arguments show why roughly equal numbers of males
and females are born, (Fisher R. , 1930). Evolution hit upon a neat way of making
use of what might otherwise have been a waste of human resource: a load of
underemployed males. This is the pair bond, implemented via matricentric emotion,
which directs male effort in the socially useful direction of benefitting the family.
Its basis in evolution is not hard to understand given that such benefit can only
increase the likelihood of the offsprings' survival to reproduce in their turn.
The psychosocial asymmetry of gynocentrism is consistent with the gendered
society in which the two sexes had distinct roles. It is also consistent with the male
function within the family being provisioning: the now-disparaged inclination of
men to be the main breadwinner. This, in turn, is consistent with the inclination of
women to feel entitled to receive such consideration and material support from
their heterosexual partners. When a woman expects a man to pay on their first
date, she is checking that his gynocentrism is still in place.
The working of the original matricentrism, as an evolved adaptation, was socially
beneficial when confined to the domestic arena. However, as we have seen, this
original evolutionary purpose has been hijacked by waves of cultural
appropriations, latterly feminism. This has both intensified gynocentrism and also
extended its sphere of applicability from the domestic to everything. The inevitable
result is to focus concern on those perceived under gynocentrism as requiring
concern, and that isn't men or boys. Worse, it can result in compassion being
actively denied men and boys, of which we shall see many examples.
Furthermore, the operation of intensified gynocentrism, now virtually identified
with feminism, has become destructive. Workplaces tend to involve hierarchies
based broadly on merit. The sex-based preferencing arising from gynocentrism,
and now being enacted by identity politics, does not sit well with this structure. The
resulting conflicts are becoming increasingly evident. Even the general public are
now aware of a rift opening between the sexes. The cause is gynocentric feminism.
A meaningful equality, what you might call egalitarianism, would have
concentrated as much on the dismantling of gynocentrism as upon those issues
normally listed under "women's equality". Instead, gynocentric impulses have been
used to motivate only action to address "women's equality" issues but to exclude
broader issues related to the male sex. The gynocentric basis of feminism
precludes the possibility of an egalitarian perspective. The result is a feminism
which thrives upon, and ever intensifies, gynocentrism. Feminism is explicitly sexist
as it concerns itself only with the issues troubling one sex. But the response to
anyone pointing out this readily apparent fact will be, "women cannot be sexist".
The claim that women have suffered centuries of oppression at the hands of men
conjures the impression that women have so much victimhood credit in the bank of
grievance that whatever they say about men, or impose upon men, is justified.
They write books filled with the most extreme anti-male bigotry and receive no
public censure. Instead they obtain tenured positions in universities from which to
spread their misandry.
I'll not regale the reader with quotes from feminist writings demonstrating their
extreme anti-male position, there is no shortage of such material, see for example
O'Pie (2012) or Purdy (2016). For a quarter of a century, people have been calling
out feminism for its bigotry, dishonesty and intellectual incoherence. Many of those
who have done so are women who call themselves feminists, e.g., Daphne Patai and
Noretta Koertge (1994), Christina Hoff Sommers (1994), and Donna Laframboise
(1996). But the gynocentric carapace around society's collective psyche remains
intact.
Feminist protestations that feminism is for men too is dissembling. The universal
cure they offer for men's ills is that men stop being masculine. Feminism tells us
that we just need to be more like women and then we might be acceptable. Such
prejudice would be palpable if translated to a race context. "The only thing wrong
with black people is that they are not white. If only they could try to be whiter,
they'd be so much better". But prejudice is not perceived as prejudice when it is
the approved societal norm.
It may be tempting to think of the traditional world of affairs, business and politics,
as it was years ago in the gendered society, to have been androcentric. On the face
of it this would provide an appealingly balanced picture: the matricentric domestic
environment balanced against the androcentric world of work. But the picture is
false. One cannot invert one's psychology during the commute to work. An all-male
space does not imply an androcentric psychology. Men at work may have many
apparent motivations, including ambition, for example, and the desire for status.
More prosaically, and universally, men are there to earn a crust. These disparate
motivations can generally be traced back to a psychological origin in
matricentrism: the desire to support wife and family, or to attain the status
required to have a wife and family.
The view of the human pair bond presented above is very different from that of
feminism which regards marriage as patriarchal dominance and control of women
by men. Thus, the feminist view of traditional marriage is oppression of women by
men. Indeed, feminists see the whole of our society as being oppression of women
by men, even now, and in the West. This perspective sees marriage as being
entirely for the benefit of men and the disbenefit of women. (Oddly, this has not
stopped leading feminists getting married, sometimes more than once). The
traditional perspective, in contrast, is of an emotionally mediated relationship
which is perceived by the participants to be of mutual benefit and in which the two
sexes have complementary but distinct roles.
It is quite chilling when one realises for the first time how firm a grip the
gynocentric mindset has upon people who are basically decent. Many people will
read, say, the Corston Report, and see in it nothing but good. They will see it only
as arguing for a compassionate approach to female offenders. And compassion
towards women is precisely what is promoted by gynocentrism. What's not to like?
They will read,
'prison is disproportionably (sic) harsher for women because prisons and the
practices within them have for the most part been designed for men'
and see in it nothing but an admirable call for a kinder treatment of women. Their
gynocentric mindset blinds them to the corollary, the implied male disposability:
that it is acceptable to treat one sex more harshly for no reason other than their
sex. Yet the very same people would readily agree with the principle that everyone
should be treated equally before the law!
If challenged as to why men should be treated more harshly than women in regard
to prison sentencing, what will emerge, in one form or another, is a view that men
should indeed be treated more harshly. Further challenging will reveal either an
inchoate view of men as dangerous, so locking them up is the best thing to do, or an
attempt to rationalise the different treatment of the sexes, for example by claiming
that a greater proportion of male prisoners are violent. Pushing your antagonist
yet further, by regaling them with the statistics on prisoners, will probably meet
with a flat refusal to listen or believe you. The ultimate end point of this
conversational cul-de-sac is the accusation that you are just a misogynistic old
reactionary. But what such a conversation actually reveals is the impenetrable
cognitive wall thrown up by the gynocentric mindset.
Note also how the above quote from the Corston Report demonstrates the verbal
legerdemain which abounds in feminist expositions. The claim is made that prison is
harsher for women because it's the same as it is for men. Let the illogic of that sink
in. This is where society ends up when we adopt a philosophy that 'equality does
not mean treating everyone the same'. This is the philosophy which tells us that
inequality of treatment is the true equality. This is "some animals are more equal
than others". So why is it that the less equal animals have for so long been content
to tolerate this position? The answer is male disposability, that corollary of
gynocentrism. Through the lens of gynocentrism and male disposability, the harsher
treatment of males is right and proper. It aligns with male sacrifice. It aligns with
male utility because, in being criminal, a man has violated his obligation to social
utility – and hence deserves particular punishment. Simply put, under
gynocentrism, women will always be preferenced.
The sentiment that 'equality does not mean treating everyone the same', when
applied to the sexes, is an expression of gynocentrism. In feminism, this sentiment
is rationalised by claiming historic female disadvantage. This is done quite
explicitly within policy statements. For example, in the Istanbul Convention,
(Council of Europe, 2011), we read,
'violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations
between women and men, which have led to domination over, and discrimination
against, women by men'
Staggeringly, no one whose voice will be heard ever objects that claiming present
advantage based on disadvantage to someone else in history is morally illiterate
and intellectually incoherent (even if the representation of history were accurate,
which it is not). Such protestations would, in any case, fall on deaf ears because the
purported historical justification is just a smokescreen for gynocentrism, which is
emotionally based. Claims of present benefit based on historical oppression are an
example of identity groups extending even to those long dead. It is morally
fraudulent.
1.3.2.3 Lack of Male In-Group Preference
Many people may be surprised at the claim that men have little or no in-group
preference. The presumption of traditional cultural dominance by men might
suggest to some people that men must enjoy considerable in-group preference.
This is a key ingredient of patriarchy theory. But a little reflection reveals that this
assumption runs counter to what we know about typical male behaviour: men tend
to be competitive and hierarchical. If you are competitive, you are more likely to
succeed – but it's not because you have been assisted by those against whom you
compete. What tends to be forgotten is that, in a competitive environment, there
are more losers than winners. Once again we have fallen victim to the identitygroup fallacy: perceiving "men" as an undifferentiated class.
What is regarded as "cultural dominance of men" is actually cultural dominance of
a few men, those who have been successful in life's competition. These are not
typically the men who are the educational failures, the imprisoned, the homeless,
the prematurely dead or those most likely to have been fatherless. Yet even the
men who are ultimately disadvantaged tend to be competitive; they merely fail.
Roy Baumeister has argued that this competitive and hierarchical social style of
men is key to the formation of very large scale human social structures
(Baumeister, 2010). The more cooperative, intimate social style favoured by
women works well in small groups, but is not conducive to large scale societal
cohesion - so Baumeister argues. He is not alone. Vigil for example, concludes:
'Divergent social styles may reflect trade-offs between behaviors selected to
maintain large, functional coalitions in men and intimate, secure relationships in
women', (Vigil, 2007).
Men's strong sexual desire is also their weakness and provides another barrier to
men forming sex-specific coalitions to promote their interests (and you will note
the evolutionary relationship between the formation of male hierarchies and the
sex drive). Quoting Dench (1996) again,
'The more powerful men's sexual impulses are, the stronger the bargaining position
of women, and the smaller men's chances of coming together in a mutually
regulatory system at the expense of women.'
In this we see the reason for women tending to be against porn and prostitution. It
is because alternative outlets for the male sex drive diminish female power. It is
also the reason why priests in many religions are required to be celibate. It is to
avoid them having two masters: God and wife.
Hence, it is reasonable to argue that male hierarchies mitigate against strong ingroup preference among men. Having in-group preference themselves, women
naturally assume that the same must be true of men. This is a serious
misunderstanding of men. It causes women to assume, for example, that the
greater number of male than female MPs must mean that men's issues are
disproportionately represented in Parliament. But this rests upon the presumption
that men will preferentially represent men's issues. In fact, the operation of
gynocentrism and the absence of male in-group preference ensures that this is not
so. Men tend not to give preference to other men. There is approbation to be had
in preferencing women and girls; there is only disapprobation to be had for any
politician so brave – or so foolhardy – as to dare to claim equality for men or boys.
Hence, it is de rigueur to support explicitly sexist policies such as those relating to
violence against women and girls, but there is no political will to do anything about
boys' increasingly serious educational failure. Thanks to the operation of
gynocentrism, male disposability and lack of male in-group preference, "equality
for males" is interpreted as reprehensibly reactionary. In truth it is radical and far
more progressive than those who style themselves as progressive whilst clinging to
their ancient gendered psychology. But it is too radical for men in power, who
steadfastly turn away from addressing the issues of men and boys, with only a very
few honourable exceptions.
1.3.2.4 Feminism
The gender revolution of the last 50 years was promoted as an attempt to
overthrow the gendered society. But there was never any recognition by the
feminists pursuing this project that the gendered society resulted from gynocentric
psychology. The feminist revolution was presented to us as the pursuit of a more
egalitarian society. But it is not so easy to overcome deep psychological proclivities
as many would like to believe, especially when they remain unacknowledged and
socially enforced. And the feminist project was tainted from the start as it drew its
strength from the very thing it should really have been defeating: gynocentrism.
Feminism argues for preferencing of women and girls over men and boys and
rationalises this by claiming that males are privileged. This insistence on male
privilege then further reinforces society's tendency to view men through the
masculine gender script, namely that men are agentic, powerful and independent.
This inevitably renders incredible any claims of male disadvantage. How can the
powerful and independent and privileged also be disadvantaged (Phillips, 2015)? By
presenting men as privileged, the preferencing of women can be made to appear as
a project for equality. In the gendered society, it was easy to present feminism as
an equality project by shining a spotlight on areas of female disadvantage, which
certainly then existed. As gender roles have converged, this disguise has become
harder to maintain. Female disadvantages have markedly diminished whilst male
disadvantages remain in their primitive state: lacking recognition or concern.
Claims of blanket male privilege are actually prejudice but are not perceived as
such. The effect of feminism has been to disenfranchise men from empathy
because men are presented as privileged, incapable of disadvantage and
undeserving of concern. It is extremely dangerous to disenfranchise a group from
empathy because of the opportunity it presents for escalating prejudice, free from
the social brake of shame.
Feminism has been the main social and political force behind the attempt to
overturn the gendered society, and this attempt has been female led. It has
concentrated upon those areas where women were historically disadvantaged
compared to men – primarily in the workplace. One of the main aims of that
movement was to seek women's financial independence from men. In this they
have been highly successful, both due to greater female penetration of higher paid
work areas, including the professions, and due to the expansion of the welfare
state. This has weakened women's need to ally with men domestically, a tendency
enhanced by feminism's ideological emphasis on making men optional in a family.
This has been accompanied by divorce and separation arrangements which distance
men from their children, a new reality of which young people are now well aware.
The old marriage contract, crudely the exchange of resource provision for children,
has been eroded. Women have less need of resource provisioning directly by men
(though no less need indirectly), and men now have no secure means of attaining
fatherhood. Being a father has become a temporary status conferred upon a man
on sufferance by the mother. These are changes which have been deliberately
wrought, purposefully to increase women's power. The result has been a steep
decline in marriage and decline in birth rates. The average fertility in all Western
and Anglophone countries has fallen well below replacement level.
Feminism was billed as a movement for equality of the sexes. But feminism has
been driven by the ancient, and culturally enhanced, psychosocial biases of
gynocentrism and male disposability and consequently was doomed to be
inequitable because these tendencies are themselves skewed. This has led to a
perversion of the very concept of equality which is evident in the mathematically
nonsensical, but universally deployed, phrase "women's equality", the equality of
one thing. It is enshrined in policy in the form of "equality does not mean treating
everyone the same", which we have seen is implicit in the 2010 Equality Act (and is
explicit in the formal guidance given to judges, as we shall see in chapter 8).
Feminism has never been about equality. The feminist project is about making
women independent of men. First and foremost this means financial independence.
But it also means domestic independence and making men optional within the
family. In public discourse, feminists are less than frank about these objectives. But
the policies they pursue have always been single-mindedly to these ends. This is the
reason for the relentless focus on the so-called gender pay gap. The feminists, at
least the better-informed feminists, know very well what lies behind the pay gap:
that it is not "less pay for the same work", though they will happily present it as
such for public consumption. They know very well that, in order to achieve their
objectives, they must get women working more hours, as well as in more senior
positions – because that is the cause of the pay gap and that is the route to female
financial independence.
This is a project which is divisive at its core. The rift opening between the sexes, of
which the public are now becoming aware, is of long-term and deliberate feminist
construction.
Feminism encourages a false perception of the past, as well as the present. The
analogy that "the pendulum has swung too far" is misleading. The "pendulum" was
never far over the other side, but used to be reasonably central, contrary to
popular belief. The representation of history as centuries of men oppressing
women is a distortion so egregious as to be merely a calumny. Yet it is now almost
universally accepted without demur, despite the most cursory acquaintance with
historical fact being sufficient to discredit the idea.
Feminism has moved us ever further away from equality. Some women perceive
this and wonder why men do not form their own counter-movement. I have known
women say, "we women have been active for a long time, it's time for men to do
the same". But what such women fail to appreciate is that men in general are not
psychologically capable of the gender-based coordinated movement of which
women have proved so very adept. (Incidentally, that is why the concept of
"patriarchy", as it is usually understood in feminism, is not only false but
impossible).
Moreover, those few men who do attempt a pushback – men's rights activists – are
very successfully neutralised by the dominant lobby which is now overwhelmingly
politically and socially powerful and omnipresent. The reluctance by men, even
those who quietly understand the problem, to actively promote men's interests and
oppose the feminist hegemony results from gynocentrism which creates prohibitive
public disapproval of men who attempt such a thing. Men are terrified of female
disapproval. This is the power of moral authority. The fires of disapproval are
further stoked by the feminist lobby whose interests are served by keeping
gynocentrism firmly in place. This is done by public shaming and active opposition
to any nascent men's groups (such as the many cases of NUS officers and activists
opposing men's groups at universities).
Other women may perceive the absence of resistance from men as confirmation of
continuing female disadvantage. So long as men do not push back, they may reason,
the female army needs to continue to advance, just as an unresisting object subject
to a force will continue to accelerate indefinitely.
Feminists will opine "women have come a long way, but we still have a long way to
go". This sentiment ignores the entire raft of male disadvantage which is the
subject matter of this book. Just as history can be misrepresented as men's
oppression of women by selecting only the advantages to one sex and only the
disadvantages to the other, so the present can be misrepresented in the same
manner. But this is now wearing rather thin.
The key to understanding why a movement ostensibly about equality has gone so
badly off the rails is to appreciate that it was always powered by gynocentrism, and
hence carried the innate gender bias along with it. As a result, its every move for
"equality" was actually a move for "women's equality": male disadvantages have
always gone unnoticed or dismissed as "men's own fault". Thus, male
disadvantages are never perceived as arising from society or imposed by the State.
Male disadvantages are always recast as evidence of male brokenness: compassion
unnecessary / blame appropriate.
The feminist depiction of men en masse as a villainous patriarchy, when coupled
with gynocentrism and male disposability, produced a dynamical system with
positive feedback. The feminist lobby keeps the fires of gynocentrism burning by
promoting victimhood and demanding protection and preferencing. Virtually all
men are inclined to oblige the feminists in their demands. And men in power are
especially inclined to oblige them, including through legislation, even though their
actions might disadvantage men as a class (men have no in-group preference).
The key to understanding male feminists is simplicity itself: it is gynocentrism
combined with pandering to the prevailing power and fear of female disapproval. If
women say they want feminism, then feminism is good and the good man is the man
who helps deliver it. The decent man, keen to avoid the shaming that feminists will
so readily pour upon his head, obliges them. He follows his natural inclination
determined by gynocentrism and male utility. He knows that to be a good man,
which is what he wishes to be, he must give women what they want – and they tell
him they want feminism. So he becomes a male feminist. In doing so, he sets
himself against those nasty men who oppose feminism, and he becomes the One
Good Man who will protect women from these nasty men, (Tieman, 2011). The
male feminist acolyte can comfort himself with the thought that the misandry does
not apply to him. But it does. There is no escape. To quote Dench (1996) on how
gynocentrism motivates the male feminist,
'Men are primed in all cultures to be responsive to women's needs and wishes, and
to the values espoused by women. Feminism has confused this impulse considerably
by introducing the notion that women would prefer to do for themselves many of
the things which men were traditionally expected to do for them; and a halfhearted New Chivalry has consequently tried to articulate around the paradoxical
project of helping women to be more independent of men.'
Since the 90s, the "half-hearted New Chivalry" has become a fully enthusiastic
embracing of the doctrine of toxic masculinity by the male feminists. When men
ceded moral authority to women, back in the mists of evolutionary time, no limits
were placed on the direction women's moral power might take. This evolved
matricentric proclivity can be deployed for whatever purposes women desire,
including subverting its original purpose, and men are programmed to assist. It is a
psychosocial pathology which has always been inherent in Homo sapiens, but lay
dormant while social, economic and technological conditions kept women
predominantly within the domestic sphere. Feminism – or gynocentrism:3.0 – is a
disease of affluence.
Moral authority is the true hegemony, and it belongs to women. It always did. And
this is the reason why feminism has been so successful and become so dominant
within my lifetime without the need to win any elections. Women were always
powerful, and much of their power was always expended on controlling men. Once
one understands this, the feminist doctrine of a hegemonic patriarchy deploying
power and control over women is seen to be a classic case of projection.
Instead of eradicating the gender bias explicit within gynocentrism, as is truly
required, the gender revolution of the last 50 years has reinforced it. The feminist
lobby – to the despair of many women themselves – has presented women as
perpetual victims, and men as irredeemably toxic. This has come about because the
feminists deployed what women have long known: that shaming is an effective
weapon to use to coerce men into doing their bidding. Do note that shame can be
deployed only by those who possess moral authority. Men's shame was easily
created by presenting women as victims of men's bad behaviour, and thus a
violation of men's duty of care inherent in male utility. This feminist power
strategy has continually fed upon gynocentrism and male disposability sans merci.
Consequently, the old gendered society, rather than being rendered gender-equal,
has given rise to a differently gendered society in which men may be freely
denigrated with impunity and men's disadvantages no more recognised than ever,
even though their extent has been deepened by feminism.
1.3.2.5 Patriarchy
In section 1.3.1 I gave an account of patriarchy as it is represented in feminism:
men's oppression of women. Here I give my account of patriarchy, which is rather
different. In the feminist view, the patriarchal pair bond is a result of men's desire
to oppress women. In the evolutionary view, the pair bond is an adaptation which
benefits gene line propagation. The psychological-emotional implementation of this
adaptation is evolved matricentrism. However, this mechanism is personal: it acts
on the individual. In contrast, patriarchy is a social phenomenon. A view of
patriarchy which is consistent with the evolutionary view of the pair bond is that
patriarchy is a sociological phenomenon which reinforces the pair bond by imbuing
the arrangement with social respect and status. We have seen above that men are
particularly influenced by respect and status, due to the association of these social
rewards with male utility (which, in turn, is a reflection of evolved matricentrism,
to which all these phenomena ultimately relate).
In reality, the pair bond implements men's provisioning to his female partner as a
proxy for the children. But there is a danger that this would be seen, socially, as
servitude (because, taking a narrow view, it is). The importance to men of respect
and status would then act as a powerful disincentive against conforming to this
arrangement. As a dynamical system, this is negative feedback which would
weaken the pair bond. Patriarchy is the cultural adaptation which neutralises this
negative feedback and hence reinforces the pair bond. Patriarchy consists of
bestowing respect and status on men who fulfil their allotted role in entering into a
pair bond. Patriarchy is essentially a piece of theatre, a con trick.
Whilst there are abusive men who do not conform to the norm, in the typical
heterosexual relationship it is not the man who is the domestic power. This used to
be perfectly well understood by all, though a man's blushes were spared by mutual
agreement never to mention that it was his wife who was boss. In certain
ceremonial matters, formal deference may have been paid to the man. But in
everyday affairs, everyone knows who is the power in the home. Harmonious
domestic life virtually demands that the man acquiesce to his partner's lead in a
myriad of small matters, though no doubt there are exceptions and, occasionally,
the need for resistance. Here's how Dench (1996) expressed it,
'Patriarchal exaggeration of men's importance obscures the deeper power of
women, and behind the theatre of male dominion the palace holds many secrets.'
'It seems very likely that feminist promulgation of ideas that family life mainly
serves men, and that women are "doing it all for men", is in part, at least, a
reworking of traditional devices for exerting more leverage over men. The
appearance of male control and benefit is a cover which permits women
considerable moral power in practice. Hera, goddess of marriage and a jealous
wife, is also the power behind the throne.'
One sees here the origins of the instinct towards victimhood. The patriarchal playacting was itself a form of laying claim to victimhood by the wife. It has long been
the case that such victimhood, or seeming subservience, worked as a source of
women's moral leverage.
Dench used the fairy tale 'The Frog Prince' as an allegory for this view of
patriarchy as a piece of cultural theatre, designed to tie men into socially useful
provisioning. One could use 'Beauty and the Beast' in much the same way. The
Frog, or the Beast, are socially disconnected. They have not yet fulfilled their role
in the pair bond. Their transformation into a "prince" results from the acceptance
by the "princess" of the Frog-Beast as an intimate partner. Her previous
reluctance has been overcome by – what else – provisioning and evidence of
gynocentric consideration. The status of "prince" is the allegorical analogue of the
social respect bestowed upon a man as a reward for entering into a pair bond.
Patriarchy is the bestowing of this status; a little respect is a cheap price to pay for
the associated service. This is how Dench (1996) expressed the patriarchal con,
'The frog, knowing no dependents, is largely self-sufficient in his pool, and can find
little reason to abandon freedom and precious playing time just to become a
domestic help. To be tempted from the pleasures of the forest, men need to be
flattered by an important sounding title, and by the hint – which becomes absurd as
soon as it is examined closely – that all of this business of child rearing and
reproducing society is in some way being done for them and takes place under their
indispensable management. Want to be my helper? Well, maybe; I'll let you know.
How about head of household, domestic monarch? Now that's more like it!'
Modern feminism thrives on misandry and the denigration of men, but this is not
new. Dench opines that this has long been used to coerce men. Misandry is the
stick, and the patriarchy illusion is the carrot. Both are required because men,
ultimately, can always just walk away,
'What 'The Frog Prince' and its ilk have done in the past is to sell the path of
matrimony and responsible fatherhood. Patriarchal cultures teach boys that their
nature is evil and they must rebuild themselves around a sense of duty.'
'A man's pride and independence may be greater than his need for domestication.
This underlines men's original power, very different from and far older than
patriarchy, of being freer than women to walk away from relationships and
situations that don't suit them….it is this raw power of men to care less than
women which brings about patriarchy, rather than vice-versa. While one aspect of
this cultural response to male offhandedness is to denigrate irresponsibility as
childish, or a place of banishment and eventual failure – the forest – this probably
will not be enough to convince all men. Some carrot is needed as well, some pull
factors as well as push.' (Dench, 1996)
One of the intriguing things about 'The Frog Prince' and 'Beauty and the Beast' is
that the Frog and the Beast were originally "princes" but had been under a spell
which made them appear to be a Frog or a Beast. It was a wicked witch who made
them appear thus. Here we have the analogue of misandry and shaming (the spell)
and the compliance with gynocentric wishes being required to lift the spell and be
rewarded with the illusion of patriarchal status. Dench writes,
'The whole plot existed first in the mind of the Witch. It was, I suspect, the
mothers who conjured up the prince in their efforts to turn men into more reliable
helpers; and it is the arrangements they invented which feminism now seeks to
blame on men.'
'Patriarchy is a system that may well have been largely devised and promoted by
primordial matriarchs in order to even out the burden on their children.'
Feminists want to "smash the patriarchy", but they have a false perception of what
it is they are smashing. They no longer appreciate that the patriarchy delusion was
a piece of theatre of their own making. Feminists are women who have lost contact
with their own power. As patriarchy is an enchantment upon men, smashing the
patriarchy potentially liberates men, not women. But it is a liberty men did not
seek.
1.3.2.6 Misandry
Any discussion of the origins of the empathy gap is not complete without mention
of misandry: the systemic vilification and shaming of males. Misandry is both a
source and a consequence of the empathy gap. Misandry will not be addressed in
this book, but only because the scope is already huge. Indeed, Paul Nathanson and
Katherine Young have spent two decades compiling a four-volume epic on the
subject: Spreading, Legalising, Sanctifying and Replacing Misandry, e.g.,
(Nathanson and Young, 2006).
Misandry appears in the unthinking acceptance without demur of sentiments like
"men are violent". Misandry occurs in popular culture in the representation of men
in comedies as bumbling fools, to the despair of their women folks' unfailing
competence. In dramas, misandry is displayed in the relentless depiction of men as
wife beaters, rapists and psychopaths. Perhaps more pernicious than misandry
itself are the messages subliminally advising how a man may escape it. Good men
are invariably portrayed by their service to women. Rescuing the damsel in distress
is still a universal trope, even if it appears in disguised form. This is pernicious
because it promulgates the message that men can only escape the blame and shame
of misandry by continuing to be ruled by gynocentrism.
Once one is attuned to detecting misandry, it becomes clear that it is endemic in
the output of TV and cinema, (Nathanson and Young, 2001). In current affairs,
misandry is evident in a myriad of ways, not least the acceptability of portraying
masculinity as intrinsically pathological, even in so august a place as Parliament.
The invention of terms like mansplaining and manspreading is essentially a product
of misandry.
Generic misandry has given way to targeted misandry. Social media is now used by
women to advertise their mistreatment by men, often named men, making the
shame as public as possible. No evidence is required, and the irreversible
destruction of men's reputation is easily accomplished with no risk at all to the
women themselves. This is the one-way operation of gynocentricity and male
disposability in action. Many men – perhaps virtually all men, including myself –
could claim similar infringements upon their person as are the subject of most
women's complaints. But gynocentricity and male disposability ensures that no one
cares about that. The ancient bias ensures that concern is only one-way, and this
has been weaponised by feminism. In a culture which presents men in such a light,
an empathy gap is hardly surprising.
Labelling an entire class of people as powerful and privileged causes individuals
who are disadvantaged rather than privileged to be unjustly estranged from
empathy or assistance. Based upon gynocentrism and male disposability, feminism
has constructed a narrative of men as undeserving, dangerous, predatory, and
undesirable, with associated social castigation. Individual men attempt to escape
the blame and shame by distancing themselves as emphatically as possible from any
alleged bad behaviour or contrary views. The result is a retreat from masculinity
which is now presented to us as poisonous.
1.4 Aims and Limitations
To reiterate: the set of ideas outlined in section 1.3 is offered as hypothesis, not as
established fact. This opening chapter differs from the rest of the book, which is
about presenting empirical evidence on a range of topics relevant to sex/gender.
My purpose in presenting the theoretical ideas of section 1.3 is to challenge the
dominant narrative on gender, the feminist position, and to present an alternative
conceptual framework within which to assimilate the empirical evidence which
follows. All this theorising you may reject. What cannot be rejected however is the
empirical evidence supporting the existence of an empathy gap. This stands quite
independently of any theory about its origin. Reject my explanations if you will, but
the evidence for the empathy gap remains. To this, the rest of this book now turns.
2. Education
This boy is Ignorance. This girl is Want. Beware them both, and all of their degree,
but most of all beware this boy.
Charles Dickens (1812 – 1870), A Christmas Carol
A general State education is a mere contrivance for moulding people to be exactly
like one another; and as the mould in which it casts them is that which pleases the
dominant power in the government, whether this be a monarch, an aristocracy, or a
majority of the existing generation; in proportion as it is efficient and successful, it
establishes a despotism over the mind, leading by a natural tendency to one over
the body.
John Stuart Mill (1806 – 1873), On Liberty
Few would doubt the importance of education. Historically, the masses were
permanently disadvantaged by lack of education. Arguably, class, with all its
concomitants of advantage or disadvantage, is defined at least as much by
education as by wealth.
In view of this importance, educational attainment in the UK is reviewed in this
chapter, at primary, secondary and tertiary levels. This overview of education in
respect of the relative achievement of the two sexes reveals a shortfall in the
attainment of boys which grows with age throughout formal education. It will be
shown that male educational disadvantage in primary school becomes an even
greater disadvantage at secondary school (age 16) and a greater disadvantage still
at age 18 and university entrance.
The sex-ratio of teaching staff is also reviewed. Examples from the research
literature illustrate the relevance of the gender of both staff and student, and their
perceptions and expectations of each other.
The educational underperformance of boys and young men is widely recognised,
but that does not mean there is any great concern about addressing it. Examples
are given of how the extent of this male disadvantage is elided and minimised, both
by government agencies and in the popular narrative.
The empathy gap is evident in the fact that the main concerns in education policy,
despite clear male disadvantage, are "women in STEMM" (defined in Section 2.4),
regional variations in educational attainment, and the gender pay gap – even
though the latter is not an education issue. An issue that will not be tackled in any
depth is the quality of education, past and present, except indirectly as it relates to
exam grade inflation.
This chapter will refer to the following key stages in the UK education system,
Table 2.1: Key Stages in the UK Education System
Institution Typical Ages
Final Exam or Award used here
to gauge attainment
Primary School 5 - 11 Key Stage 2 SATS
Secondary School 11 - 16 GCSEs
"Sixth Form" or further education
college
17 - 18 A Levels
University or other Higher Education
Institution
18 - 22 First Degree (Bachelors or Masters)
Entry into universities or other higher education institutions is generally dependent
on good performance at A Level.
2.1 Primary School Attainment
Primary school attainment can usefully be measured by the National Curriculum
assessments carried out at Key Stage Two (colloquially known as the SATS, or
standard attainment tests). These consist of both tests and teacher assessments
and are taken in Year Six at age 10 or 11. In recent years, based on teachers'
assessments, girls have outperformed boys on all subjects, in 2016 by the following
percentages: reading (9%), writing (12%), science (4%) and mathematics (2%),
(UK Government, 2016a). These percentages indicate the difference between the
percentage of the female cohort reaching the expected standard and the
percentage of the male cohort reaching the expected standard.
Based on testing, the gender gap in attainment is somewhat smaller. It is
interesting that there is a consistent trend for the gender gap based on teachers'
assessments to be larger than the gender gap based on tests. This is sometimes
expressed as "girls underperform on tests". But if the tests are assumed to be an
objective measure, whilst the teachers' assessments might potentially be prone to
subjectivity, then the gender bias in teachers' assessments can be defined as (Ag –
Tg) – (Ab – Tb), where A and T refer to the teachers' assessments and the test
results respectively, and g and b refer to girls and boys. A positive bias indicates a
relative favouring of girls; a negative bias indicates a relative favouring of boys.
(For this purpose, the teachers' writing assessments have been paired with tests on
"grammar, punctuation and spelling", which was the nearest equivalent). Figure 2.1
shows a persistent trend for teachers to mark girls up compared with boys, relative
to tests, (UK Government, 2015b). A similar bias is apparent in mathematics, see
(Collins W. , 2018e).
Figure 2.1: Teacher Bias in Reading and Writing KS2 SATS (girls minus boys)
Christopher Cornwell and co-workers in the USA may have discovered the basis of
this teacher bias. Their paper 'Non-Cognitive Skills and the Gender Disparities in
Test Scores and Teacher Assessments: Evidence from Primary School' (Cornwell et
al, 2013) identifies "non-cognitive skills" as the cause. This study found that, in
every subject at primary school, boys are represented in teacher-specified grade
distributions below where their test scores would predict. The Abstract of the paper
reads as follows:
'Using data from the 1998–99 ECLS-K cohort, we show that the grades awarded by
teachers are not aligned with test scores. Girls in every racial category outperform
boys on reading tests, while boys score at least as well on math and science tests as
girls. However, boys in all racial categories across all subject areas are not
represented in grade distributions where their test scores would predict. Boys who
perform equally as well as girls on reading, math, and science tests are graded less
favourably by their teachers, but this less favourable treatment essentially vanishes
when non-cognitive skills are taken into account. For some specifications there is
evidence of a grade "bonus" for boys with test scores and behaviour like their girl
counterparts.'
Cornwell et al attribute the marking-down of boys to the teachers awarding credit
for "non-cognitive development". This is defined as attentiveness, task persistence,
eagerness to learn, learning independence, flexibility and organisation. These
phrases essentially mean "well behaved". Simply put, the gender disparity in this
US study is largely due to boys being marked down for behavioural characteristics
less common in girls. Cornwell commented on his research findings as follows
(White, 2013),
'Eliminating the factor of "non-cognitive skills" almost eliminates the estimated
gender gap in reading grades. He said he found it surprising that although boys outperform girls on math and science test scores, girls out-perform boys on teacherassigned grades. In science and general knowledge, as in math skills, the data
showed that kindergarten and first grade white boys' grades "are lower by 0.11 and
0.06 standard deviations, even though their test scores are higher." This disparity
continues and grows through to the fifth grade, with white boys and girls being
graded similarly, "but the disparity between their test performance and teacher
assessment grows." The disparity between the sexes in school achievement also far
outstrips the disparity between ethnicities. "From kindergarten to fifth grade," he
found, "the top half of the test-score distribution among whites is increasingly
populated by boys, while the grade distribution provides no corresponding evidence
that boys are out-performing girls".'
Notwithstanding any bias in the assessment, the test evidence in the UK clearly
shows that boys genuinely underperform significantly in verbal skills compared with
girls, both in the written and the spoken word. The persistence of boys'
underperformance on verbal issues across most countries and cultures suggests a
large part of this underperformance is likely to be innate sex differences, though
researchers tend to ignore this possibility, e.g., (Moss and Washbrook, 2016). Any
contribution to this male underperformance due to other, non-innate, factors
becomes clearer at secondary school.
2.2 Secondary School Attainment Aged 16
At GCSE the gender gap in mathematics remains negligible, as it was at primary
school. But the gender gap in English has increased, to as much as 19% (see Table
2.2). There are 7% more girls attaining pass grades in both English and Maths, and
5% more girls getting a pass at any science subject, (UK Government, 2018e).
It has been reported many times in the literature that teacher bias plays a part in
boys' lower assessment grades at secondary school, as was seen for primary
schools. The Programme for International Student Assessment (OECD, 2015) has
reported that, 'teachers generally award girls higher marks than boys, given what
would be expected after considering their performance in PISA (i.e., in tests)'.
"PISA" is explained below.
In a comprehensive meta-analysis, Voyer and Voyer (2014) note that males
outperform females in mathematics and science, quoting several references in
support of this finding. In contrast they observe that, 'Although gender differences
follow essentially stereotypical patterns on achievement tests, for whatever
reasons, females generally have the advantage on teacher-assigned school marks
regardless of the material. This gender difference has been known to exist for
many years and has persisted in recent years, for both college students and
primary school pupils.' (page 1174)
Table 2.2: GCSE Gender Gap by Individual Subject, 2016/17 (Differences of
percentages of cohort of same sex, girls minus boys)
Subject Grades 5 to 9 Grades 4 to 9
English language 19% 16%
English literature 17% 14%
Mathematics 0% 1%
Both English and Maths 6% 7%
Any science - 5%
Whilst there may be a certain amount of discussion over boys' deteriorating
educational performance, that there is no great political motive to tackle the issue
is proved by a question raised by the political party 'Justice for Men & Boys' under
the Freedom of Information Act in 2015. Addressed to the Department for
Education (DfE), the question was 'does the DfE recognise boys'
underachievement as a problem to be addressed, and if so, what initiatives are in
place, and how much is budgeted for them in 2015/16?'. The Department for
Education responded thus, 'The Department does not fund any initiatives that just
focus on addressing boys' underachievement', (Buchanan M. , 2015).
An indication of how government discourse ignores the underperformance of boys
is provided by the report from Anne Longfield, then the Children's Commissioner
of England, 'Growing Up North – Look North: A generation of children await the
powerhouse promise' (Longfield, 2018a). The report highlights the better
educational attainment of children in London compared to elsewhere in England. It
is perfectly valid to do so, as it would also be valid to point to the socioeconomic
dependence of educational attainment. But it is strange not to mention the sex
dependence of educational attainment because sex dependence is the dominant
factor, as illustrated by Figure 2.2. It is in the intersection of demographic and
being male where educational disadvantage is greatest. Yet the only mention of
gender in the report is (on page 14),
'Differences between boys and girls: Throughout our work we encountered
significant differences between boys and girls, both in terms of their career
aspirations and what they believed their local area offered them. Within the
context of regeneration we think this is important. We know girls outperform boys
throughout school but are paid less as adults. This is a particular issue in many
Northern areas where traditional industries have been very male-dominated. It is
very important that regeneration strategies tackle this and speak to girls'
aspirations, particularly if the regeneration is focused on industries which are
perceived as male.'
This is odd for several reasons. Firstly, it confuses education with pay and
employment, which betrays a political motivation beyond education. Secondly, it is
very peculiar to refer to the decline of traditional industries, which impacts men
particularly, in order to motivate a focus on "speaking to girls' aspirations". But
oddest of all, this appears to be an attempt to deflect attention away from boys in a
report which is specifically about education attainment gaps.
Figure 2.2: Gender Gap in English KS2 SATS cf Regional Variations (girls minus
boys)
2.3 A Levels
The trend of worsening educational achievement by boys, compared with girls,
persists at A Level (age 18). As an illustration of how this is obscured consider the
newspaper headlines on A Level results day in England in 2017. The Guardian
headline read, 'boys get more A*/A grades than girls for the first time in at least
seven years', (Adams, Bengtsson and Weale, 2017), whilst in the Telegraph we
could read, 'boys beat girls to top grades for first time in 17 years', (Turner and
Kirk, 2017). Similar headlines were used in previous years.
These headlines are, however, grossly misleading. They refer only to the
percentage of those of the same sex taking the exam who got top grades. To see
how meaningless this statistic is, consider an extreme example. If 10 boys took the
exam and all got the top A* grade, they would be considered as doing twice as well
as a million girls getting A*s together with a million girls getting the lower A or B
grades.
The issue is absolute numbers. There were 81,000 (22%) more female than male A
Level candidates in 2017, and the trend in this gender gap has been upwards for
decades, see Figure 2.3, (Stubbs, 2017). If we look at the top A*/A/B grades, the
excess of girls over boys was 60,500 (32%) and 54,900 (29%) in 2016 and 2017
respectively. This is a very different picture from that provided by the news
headlines. The gender gap in A Level attainment is larger even than the gaps at
earlier stages of school education.
Figure 2.3: Excess of Girls Over Boys as A Level Candidates
2.4 University Entry
The gender gap in A Level performance is inevitably reflected in higher education
entrance numbers. In 2016 and 2017 about 100,000 more women than men applied
to UK universities and colleges (UCAS, 2017a). In terms of acceptances there
were 71,100 (36%) more women than men approved to start at UK HE institutions
in 2017. Entry rates were 27.8% and 37.7% for men and women respectively
(UCAS, 2017b).
The gender gap to the disadvantage of males has thus gradually increased through
their school career, being up to 12% in primary school, up to 19% by GCSE,
22%-29% by A Level and 36% in terms of university entrance.
Women have outnumbered men as undergraduates in the UK since 1993, over a
quarter of a century ago. 70% of subjects at UK universities are now dominated by
women undergraduates. (Because the division into subjects may be arbitrary, a
more precise statement is that 70% of undergraduates are studying subjects
dominated by women students).
A clear distinction must be made between STEM and STEMM. The former refers
to science, technology, engineering and mathematics. In STEMM the second M
adds medicine and subjects allied to medicine. Contrary to popular belief, there are
more women than men undergraduates in STEMM. Based on the JACS3 subject
classification this first occurred in 2015 and reached 6% excess women by 2017,
see Figure 2.4 (UCAS, 2017b). As of 2020, women also dominate in STEMM based
on the alternative HECoS subjection classification system.
Figure 2.4: Ratio of Women to Men Undergraduates in STEMM Subjects (Science,
Technology, Engineering, Maths, Medicine and Subjects Allied to Medicine)
Those whose business it is to track equality issues know full well that women have
become dominant in STEMM, despite being content to promote the opposite
impression to the public. For example, the University of Bristol Annual Equality
Monitoring Report (2014) whilst concentrating mostly on issues pertinent to that
university, contains the statement,
'Across the sector as a whole, a slightly higher proportion of female students were
studying STEMM subjects (51%)'
In fact, men dominate only in the "TEM" part of STEMM, since women also
dominate in the pure sciences (due to their dominance in biological sciences
outweighing men's dominance in physical sciences). Men's dominance in technology
and engineering is well known, there being about five men to every woman
undergraduate in these subjects. There are only two other subjects dominated by
men: mathematics and architecture, where the ratio of women to men is about 0.6.
Less well known is the emphatic extent of women's dominance in almost all other
subjects, as follows,
In medicine and dentistry women outnumber men by nearly 50%;
In the social sciences women outnumber men by about 60%;
In art and design women outnumber men by about 80%;
In law there are twice as many women undergraduates as men;
In languages and literature women are approaching three times more numerous
than men;
In veterinary science there are four times as many women, and women even
outnumber men in agricultural sciences;
In educational studies there are six times as many women as men;
In "subjects allied to medicine" there are four and a half times more women than
men, and the nursing component of this is in excess of nine times.
The subject area gender dominance aligns with great precision against the division
into things (men) versus people or animals (women).
Despite the large and growing disadvantage to males in educational attainment at
primary, secondary and tertiary level, the White Paper 'Education Excellence
Everywhere' (Department for Education, 2016), which sets out Government policy
on education, makes absolutely no mention of it. The Foreword to the report was
provided by Nicky Morgan who was then both the Secretary of State for Education
and also Minister for Women and Equalities. The only mention of gender in the
White Paper was this (page 93),
'We will continue to address the gender gap in STEM subjects – supporting our
ambition to narrow the gender pay gap – and are committed to increasing the
proportion of entries by girls in science and maths subjects by 20% during this
Parliament through our support for high quality teaching, the employer-led Your
Life campaign and a wide range of STEM programmes in schools.'
Recall that women already dominate in the pure sciences at university. Once again
there is a conflation of education with pay and employment. At best this is a
confusion. Could it be an attempt to hide a politically inconvenient reality behind an
approved political agenda item? (The pay gap is addressed in Chapter 7).
However, not everyone was content with the Government's policy position.
Certainly not the Higher Education Policy Institute (HEPI), whose report 'Boys to
Men: The underachievement of young men in higher education – and how to start
tackling it' was highly critical of ignoring the plight of boys (Robinson, 2016). The
former head of the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (UCAS), Mary
Curnock Cook, provided the Foreword to the HEPI report. The salient extract is
this (page 3),
'The recent Department for Education white paper, "Education, Excellence,
Everywhere" makes no mention of the chronic underperformance of boys in
primary and secondary education. As the white paper title indicates, the
Department is more exercised by geographical inequality in education outcomes and
the document is peppered with maps to underline the point. There may be pockets
of poor standards of education across the country, but the underperformance of
boys is pervasive throughout social strata, geographies and phases. This (HEPI)
report is compelling reading as it peels the onion of male underperformance in
higher education, and it proposes some imaginative interventions. But its real value
is in highlighting the sheer scale of the problem.'
While Curnock Cook was head of UCAS, the underperformance of boys was made
explicit in their annual reports. For example, Figure 2.5 was taken from the UCAS,
End of Cycle Report 2015 page 130 (Curnock Cook, 2015). This histogram gives the
percentage of the population of each demographic who started at university
between 2011 and 2015. The sample population comprised English 18-year-old
former state school pupils between 2011 and 2015 who live in POLAR3 quintile 3
areas. (This classification represents a geographical average participation rate in
higher education). Twenty demographic classes are used in Figure 2.5, representing
various combinations of sex, race and socioeconomic class. The poorer demographic
is indicated by the receipt of free school meals (FSM). Salient features are,
Eight of the top nine demographics in Figure 2.5 are female;
The lowest ranked non-FSM demographic is white males at 14th position out of 20;
Poor (FSM) white males are bottom of the list of 20 – though FSM white females
are second to the bottom;
An FSM black woman is three times more likely to go to university than an FSM
white boy.
In terms of education, the intersectional disadvantage is white-plus-male, the
opposite of public perception.
Figure 2.5: Entry Rates for English 18 Year Old State School Pupils in POLAR3
quintile 3 by Ethnic Group, Sex and FSM Status at Age 15 (2011-2015), taken from
(Curnock Cook, 2015) p.130
Since Curnock Cook left UCAS, they no longer report higher education entry in
the form of Figure 2.5, which used to make male disadvantage clear. Instead a
'Multiple Equality Measure' (MEM) is used, which is claimed to 'facilitate more
accurate identification of those individuals most and least likely to enter HE'
,
(UCAS Analysis & Research, 2017), page 4. In my opinion it serves to obscure the
dominant issue, i.e., gender.
2.5 Gender Gap and the Nature of the Award
No measure of educational attainment is perfect, and there are suggestions that
part of the gender difference might be due to the nature of the awards. At age 16,
the gender gap arose suddenly when the old O Levels were replaced by GCSEs,
Figure 2.6, (Department for Education and Skills, 2007). Some have traced the
ultimate under-representation of men in university to this poorer performance at
GCSE, though its significance has been hotly debated.
Figure 2.6: Percentage of School Leavers Achieving 5+ A-C (or Pass) O levels or
A*-C GCSEs, by Gender (1962 – 2006) from (Department for Education and Skills,
2007)
Further independent support for the contention that boys' underperformance at
GCSE may be largely a result of the nature of these awards. is obtained by
comparison with the OECD 2006 PISA study. PISA is the Programme for
International Student Assessment organised by the OECD and, in the UK, by the
National Foundation for Educational Research. The following account is based on
the report by Bradshaw et al, (Achievement of 15-year-olds in England: PISA 2006
National Report, 2007).
The PISA involved assessment of 15-year-olds in reading, mathematics and science
via tests developed for the PISA exercise and intended to provide, amongst other
things, a standard by which different nations can compare the effectiveness of their
education arrangements. The UK component involved 502 schools and over 13,000
pupils.
In the science PISA males significantly outperformed females. In contrast with
these PISA results, girls get more top grades (A*, A and B) in GCSE science than
boys. In the maths PISA males also did significantly better than females. The
difference of 17 scale points between females and males in maths was higher than
the OECD average of 11 scale points difference. This was one of the highest
differences within the 44 comparison countries with only three countries having a
higher figure. The 2006 PISA report itself remarks on the contrast between this and
the GCSE results in maths, thus:
'It is interesting to compare this pattern of male advantage (i.e., in the PISA tests)
with that found in other assessments in England…. The GCSE mathematics
qualification in 2007 showed no gender difference. 14 per cent of both males and
females achieved grade A* or A… It seems then that results from measures that
are used regularly in England do not tell the same story about gender differences as
the PISA survey.'
These PISA results add to the suspicion that the gender gap in GCSE attainment
may be at least partly an artefact of the nature of the award.
Similar observations have been made about A Levels. Kirkup et al (2008) have
compared A level performance against the results of a Standard Attainment Test
(SAT). It involved approximately 8000 students (46% male) in English schools and
Further Education colleges, who took the SAT Reasoning Test in autumn 2005
during the final year of their two-year A Level courses. For most students this is the
academic year in which their 18th birthday occurs. The SAT comprised three main
components: Critical Reading, Mathematics and Writing.
Female students had higher total GCSE and A Level points scores and achieved
significantly higher scores on the SAT Writing component than male students.
There was no significant difference in the scores for male and female students on
the SAT Reading component. Male students performed significantly better on the
SAT Mathematics component and on the SAT as a whole.
That males performed better on the SAT as a whole is remarkable given that the
three tests, Critical Reading, Mathematics and Writing, might have been supposed
to consist of two playing to female strengths and just one playing to male strengths.
The other main male strength, science, was not represented in the SAT.
Males did better on the SAT than expected based on their A Level attainment. In
contrast, female students, some ethnic minorities, students with special educational
needs (SEN) and students learning English as an additional language appeared to
perform less well on the SAT than expected based on GCSE and A Level
attainment.
As was the case for GCSEs, these results suggest that female dominance in A
Levels may be partly to do with the nature of the UK award process itself rather
than the candidates' merits. If true, this female dominance could be reduced, or
even over-turned, by an alternative award or examination system. This could have
substantial implications for the relative numbers of men and women attending
universities in the UK. However, I doubt that this is the whole story. There are
social and economic components to boys' relative educational failure which are
beyond the direct influence of the education system itself, especially in respect of
the lower socioeconomic classes.
However, that there is a deliberate feminisation of curricula and award systems in
the UK is beyond doubt. The A Level physics syllabus and course structure has been
altered explicitly in order to have greater appeal to girls, (Collins W. , 2015b).
One school of thought is that much, if not all, of the gender gap in attainment is a
result of exams becoming easier. It is an hypothesis which is hard to deny when even
the elite universities with the highest academic traditions are openly dumbing-down
degrees explicitly to overturn a currently superior male performance. Oxford has
been a major culprit.
In 2018 the Oxford Philosophy Faculty introduced "feminist philosophy" into their
curriculum, (Turner, 2018). Am I the only one to whom "feminist philosophy" sounds
ominously like "Aryan science"? Faculty guidance is now that 40% of
recommended authors on philosophy reading lists should be women, and that first
names must be included so that the sex of the author is clear. You might have
thought that the content of the work was all that mattered, but it seems not.
Students are being encouraged, by Faculty, to adopt an overtly sexist attitude by
giving primacy to the sex of the author.
As of February 2019, the Faculty of Classics at Oxford is considering how their
world-famous classics degree (known as Literae Humaniores or "Greats") might be
modified, (Turner, 2019a). The motivation is consternation at the fact that, in 2018,
46.8% of men achieved a first in their finals compared to only 12.5% of their female
peers. This might reasonably motivate some attention to female students of the
subject, perhaps examining whether the same acceptance standard was being
applied to both sexes. But dumbing-down the award itself has now become
acceptable in the guise of being "female friendly". This is an insult to women, it
fails to give the strongest candidates a chance to be recognised as such, and
ultimately it will undermine Oxford's reputation for academic excellence.
In 2017, in response to men obtaining more first class history degrees than women,
one of the final exams at Oxford was replaced by a take-home exam, again
specifically with the intent of boosting the number of women getting firsts, (Turner,
2017). Prior to 2017, the percentage of men at Oxford achieving first class degrees
in maths or computer science had been double that for women. It being axiomatic
that this is a problem that must be fixed, students were given an extra 15 minutes in
their exams, because (for reasons which escape me, other than outright misogyny)
Faculty thought that 'female candidates might be more likely to be adversely
affected by time pressure', (Diver, 2018).
Meanwhile, Cambridge University, at which the average gender gap in attainment
in 2016 was nearly 9% in favour of men across all subjects, is also reviewing its
exam system 'in order to understand fully any variations and how we can mitigate
them effectively'. It is now an unchallenged axiom that any gender difference to
women's disadvantage must be eliminated, by any means that may work, including
the destruction of the subject itself.
Figure 2.7: Trend in Percentage Achieving A/A* Grades at A Level
Evidence of a reduced standard in school exams comes from the marked grade
inflation, evident at GCSE from Figure 2.6. A similar grade inflation has occurred at
A Level. Before 1987, grade inflation was prevented by the requirement that not
more than 10% of candidates would get an A, 15% a B, 10% a C, etc. This capping
was abolished in 1987. Since then there has been a marked grade inflation as shown
by Figure 2.7, (Full Fact, 2015). In 1982 the A grade was awarded to only 8.9% of
entrants (there was no A* grade then, because there was no need for it). By 2012
26.6% of students were achieving A or A* grades. The result is that too many
candidates now achieve straight-A/A* grades, thus failing to provide universities
with sufficient discrimination. Some universities have instigated entrance exams to
supplement A Levels, (Clark, 2008). There was evidence from a UK Clinical
Aptitude test started for this purpose that men do relatively better than their
performance at A Level would predict. However, such results may be reported
instead as implying that the new test is biased in favour of men, (Devlin, 2010).
A remarkable observation by (Olson, 2014) is that, in the USA, there is a clear
correlation between the average IQ of students studying a given subject and the
gender ratio of that subject. Subjects dominated by men have high IQ averaged
across all people studying the subject, whilst subjects dominated by women have
relatively lower IQ averaged across all those studying the subject, see Figure 2.8.
Note that "relatively lower" means closer to the national population average, but
still above average (>100) because we are dealing with college students in all cases.
Figure 2.8: Average IQ of USA Students by College Major Gender Ratio
I cannot emphasise strongly enough that Figure 2.8 should not be taken to imply a
difference in male and female average IQ. There is none. There are a number of
possible explanations for how the correlation evident in Figure 2.8 arises. I refer
you to the comment by Deborah Dixon in (Olson, 2014) for a good discussion of
some of these factors. One issue is the possibility that men in the lower IQ bracket
opt not to go to college but to learn a trade instead. This is perfectly possible, and
Dixon also notes, in contrast, that those who might be considered the women who
match these nascent tradesmen, women who are training to be nurses or teachers,
do feature in the graph because these subjects have now been elevated to degree
status. I could add, if only to be argumentative, that highly intelligent women might
opt not to go to college, prioritising marriage and family instead. No, I have no
data, but why should the hypothesis be automatically excluded?
A final caution to which Olson himself refers is that his data relate to students in
their last year of undergraduate studies or to those who have already graduated. In
the latter case the data refer to the subject chosen for postgraduate application.
This creates scope for a Darwinian process in which the harder subjects retain only
the brighter students. However, this does not explain the correlation with sex. A
possible explanation for the gender effect is that it arises from the greater
variance in male IQ, which leads to more men at the very high IQ end of the
distribution, and hence more men in the harder subjects.
2.6 Innate Gender Difference? Adult Competencies
In the context of verbal competency at the primary school level, it was noted that
boys' underachievement compared with girls may be innate, at least in part.
However, this does not necessarily mean that such sex differences will persist. The
innate difference might relate to different rates of cognitive maturation, for
example. If so, the male underperformance compared with females might be
expected to ameliorate with age. There is evidence in favour of this suggestion,
i.e., that male underperformance at school in matters verbal does not persist as
adults.
Figures 2.9 and 2.10 compare the gender gap in competencies at age 15 (y axes)
with that at age 16 to 29 (x axes). The former is obtained from the 2012
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), whilst the latter is
derived from the 2012 Programme for International Assessment of Adult
Competencies (PIAAC). The graphics have been taken from Figure 4.16 of 'The
ABC of Gender Equality in Education' (OECD, 2015). In these graphics the gender
gap is defined as "b-g" (male minus female), so a negative value indicates female
advantage. Both show results for a range of OECD countries.
Figure 2.9 shows the gender gap in reading attainment at age 15 versus the gender
gap in literacy attainment in the adult age range 16-29. At age 15 the gender gap is
emphatically in favour of girls across all countries. In contrast, the gender gap in
literacy amongst young adults is insignificant for most of the countries plotted. In
the case of 8 countries, the gender gap in adult literacy is in favour of young men, a
reversal of the position at age 15 – and this includes the UK. The competency
measures at the two ages are not the same. Nevertheless, one might expect
attainment at reading to be strongly correlated with a meaningful measure of
literacy. The turnaround therefore seems remarkable and noteworthy. One may
speculate on the reasons for it. Possibly school pedagogy does not appeal to boys.
Equally likely, perhaps, is that young men are better motivated when 'literacy'
becomes relevant in the world of work, earning a living, and competitive financial
success.
Figure 2.9: Gender Differences (b-g) in Reading from the 2012 PISA for 15 year olds
(y axis) Versus Gender Differences (b-g) in Literacy from the 2012 PIAAC for 16-29
year olds (x axis)
Figure 2.10 shows the gender gap in mathematics attainment at age 15 versus the
gender gap in numeracy attainment in the adult age range 16-29. At age 15 the
gender gap is either small or in favour of boys across all countries. This remains
the case for young adults, i.e., males maintain their advantage in numeracy, in
contrast to Figure 2.9 for which men appear to catch up, or overtake, women in
literacy.
Figure 2.10: Gender Differences (b-g) in Maths from the 2012 PISA for 15 year
olds (y axis) Versus Gender Differences (b-g) in Numeracy from the 2012 PIAAC
for 16-29 year olds (x axis)
2.7 School Staff and Stereotyping
Over all grades and all schools, women teachers outnumber men three to one. Only
one in eight primary classroom teachers is a man. In secondary schools, women
classroom teachers outnumber men two to one. Women headteachers in primary
schools outnumber men three to one. Headteachers in secondary schools are
almost equally likely to be either sex. School teaching assistants are 93% female
and other school support staff 54% female. The numbers of men in all categories of
teaching have declined markedly over the last 50 years, Figure 2.11, (Department
for Education and Skills, 2007), (UK Government, 2013), (UK Government,
2017b), (Department for Education, 2013).
A search conducted by Bradford (2015) failed to identify any concern by any of the
teaching unions in the UK regarding the extent to which men are underrepresented in teaching, nor any concern that this situation is becoming worse. In
view of the importance attached to role models and the avoidance of stereotyping
in other contexts, this seems peculiar.
Figure 2.11: The Disappearing Male Teacher (England)
An example of the double standards which can be found is provided by this quote
from 'Gender and Education: An NUT Policy Statement' (National Union of
Teachers, 2001), page 1,
'At present, women are approximately four times less likely to become heads in
primary schools than their male colleagues'.
The NUT claimed that this was indicative of disadvantage to women, an inequality
which should be corrected by the appointment of more female heads. But this was
written at a time when there were already twice as many female heads of primary
schools as male heads. So to what does the claim that 'women are four times less
likely to become heads in primary schools than their male colleagues' refer? It
refers to the fact that there are eight times as many female classroom teachers as
male classroom teachers in primary schools. The implicit argument is that, if all
were fair, there should also be eight times as many female heads. This is where
"women's equality" takes you.
Clearly, further exaggerating a large numerical inequality cannot be interpreted as
a drive towards equality in any sense whatsoever. The contrast between this odd
view from the NUT and the view in respect of, say, encouraging more women into
STEM, is stark and unsettling. To explain the small numbers of male teachers, the
NUT Policy Statement refers to low pay and men feeling 'unsure of their roles'.
Graham Holley, the former Chief Executive of the Training and Development
Agency for Schools, was more direct. In his 2008 letter 'The Quiet Conspiracy: men
in primary schools', (Holley, 2008), he stated bluntly (pages 2/3),
'Men are deterred, partly because there is a prurient element of society that
questions the motivation when men wish to work closely with young children.
Recent NCH research supports this view. That is an immensely sad indictment of
the way, in this so-called enlightened century, we can still be so uncritically
suspicious of people who share the most selfless of motives: to help improve young
lives. This fear of being labelled a paedophile is the single biggest deterrent to men
who would otherwise consider teaching in our primary schools. Yet there is no
evidence that our children are at widespread risk from men who want to teach.'
Holley was correct: there is indeed a widespread fear amongst men that a desire to
work with children will expose them to accusations of paedophilia, what Anderson
et al have called 'pedohysteria' (Anderson and Magrath, 2019).
2.8 University Staff, STEMM and Athena Swan
The staff in UK higher education (HE) institutions are reasonably close to gender
parity overall. Women comprise 46% of academic staff and 63% of non-academic
staff, or 53% of all staff. However, there are greater proportions of women who
work part time, and smaller proportions who work full time – see Table 2.3 (Higher
Education Statistics Authority, 2014/15).
Table 2.3: Gender Breakdown of UK HE Staff, 2014/15 from HESA (Higher
Education Statistics Authority, 2014/15)
Employment Category female male female as %
Academic staff, full time 53,120 79,745 40%
Academic staff, part time 36,105 29,365 55%
Academic staff, atypical 35,695 39,865 47%
Academic staff, total 124,920 148,975 46%
Non-academic staff, full
time
76,095 63,285 55%
Non-academic staff, part
time
52,705 13,410 80%
Non-academic staff, total 128,800 76,695 63%
Allstaff, full time/atypical 164,910 182,895 47%
Allstaff, part time 88,810 42,775 67%
All staff, total 253,720 225,670 53%
These headline figures provide no immediate motivation for concern regarding the
numbers of women HE staff. The concern in some quarters focusses upon STEMM
subjects and on the most senior staff. The drive to get more women into senior
staff posts in STEMM is being headed by Athena SWAN, which is part of the
charity Equality Challenge Unit (ECU).
The ECU is a private charity but is funded predominantly by the Higher Education
Funding Councils and various Government departments. Consequently, despite its
formal status as a private charity, the ECU is effectively an arm of Government. It
also receives funding from various professional institutes and the universities
themselves. Whilst making token mention of male HE staff in recent years, the
true focus of attention for Athena SWAN remains as it was at its inception in 2005;
namely, to 'encourage and recognise commitment to advancing the careers of
women in science, technology, engineering, maths and medicine (STEMM)
employment in higher education and research' (Athena SWAN Charter, 2018).
Athena SWAN operates a three-tier system of awards at institutional and
departmental level (bronze, silver and gold standards). Achieving these awards
requires more than promises or aspirations. It is necessary to provide evidence of
increasing numbers of women in senior positions. This requirement may override
the usual criterion of "the best person for the job". Recall that this form of
affirmative action can be sanctioned by the 2010 Equalities Act, provided that a
group defined by a protected characteristic is underrepresented.
Failure to achieve Athena SWAN awards may hit academics' funding streams. In
2011, the Chief Medical Officer for England, Professor Dame Sally Davies,
stipulated that National Institute for Health Research funding of the Biomedical
Research Centre and the Biomedical Research Unit would be dependent on their
achieving at least a silver Athena SWAN award. In 2012 this ruling was extended
to patient safety research funding. Not surprisingly, Athena SWAN then saw an
increase in membership from medical and dental schools.
Although not yet obligatory for all research institutions, Research Councils UK
(RCUK) have set out a Statement of Expectations (Research Councils UK, 2013)
for equality and diversity for those receiving research council funding. RCUK
expects the recipients to 'provide evidence of ways in which equality and diversity
issues are managed at both an institutional and department level'. Moreover, the
Statement recommends that, 'the evidence includes participation in schemes such
as Athena SWAN, Project Juno, etc….to demonstrate departmental level action'.
Bluntly put, meeting Athena SWAN expectations in terms of female staff ratios
becomes essential if you wish RCUK funding to continue. This is a quota system
enacted by financial blackmail in which the usual criteria of competence and
contribution are ignored.
The next Research Excellence Framework, which will report in 2021, is likely to
include a requirement not only that universities participate in Athena SWAN, but
that individual departments have at least a bronze award. The implications of this
in the longer term may be that it will be inadequate to have a staff gender balance
across, say, all pure sciences, where an excess of women in biological sciences may
balance with an excess of men in the physical sciences. Instead, a gender balance
will be required in the physical sciences alone. Taking schoolteachers as our guide,
it is unlikely that Athena SWAN, or anyone else, will exert pressure to gain more
male staff in the biological sciences in order to maintain overall balance. At
present, Athena SWAN is uninterested in those subjects where female staff
predominate.
Women academics have been calling for some time for all research funding to be
made conditional upon Athena SWAN accreditation, for example calls from Janet
Beer, vice-chancellor of the University of Liverpool, (Beer, 2016), and from
Professor Louise Morley, University of Sussex, (Morley, 2013).
Universities in the Republic of Ireland had to achieve recognition by the end of
2019 to continue to be eligible for funding from the Science Foundation Ireland, the
Irish Research Council and the Health Research Board (Times Higher Education,
2016).
Clearly there is some very effective lobbying to get more women HE staff in
STEMM. The reader might reasonably assume that HE staff must currently be
strongly dominated by men – in contrast to the broadly equitable position across all
subjects as indicated by Table 2.3. But this is not so.
Athena SWAN have carried out their own survey, 'ASSET 2016: experiences of
gender equality in STEMM academia and their intersections with ethnicity, sexual
orientation, disability and age' (Athena SWAN, 2017). The survey covered only
STEMM academic staff. The reader is referred to the report for a description of
the pains taken to ensure the survey sampling was representative. The numbers of
men and women in each post category are given in Table 5.1.1 of 'ASSET 2016'.
The numbers of respondents to the question regarding their current post were
2821 women and 2050 men. However, to adjust for sampling bias the responses
were re-weighted to an effective 2368 women and 2484 men. Results given in
Table 5.1.1 of the report, and in Table 2.4 below, refer to the weight-adjusted
results. (Note that without the weight adjustment the numbers of women would be
greater, and the numbers of men fewer).
The results may be collated into three seniority bands. Junior posts are "teaching
fellow" and below. Senior posts are "function head" and above, including
professors. Middle ranking posts are lecturer, senior lecturer, reader, principal
research fellow and their clinical equivalents. Table 2.4 gives the numbers of
(weighted) survey respondents in each post band.
Table 2.4: Athena SWAN's ASSET 2016 Survey Results of HE Staff in STEMM
(Athena SWAN, 2017) Table 5.1.1
Post Band Women Men
Junior Posts 826 476
Middle Rank Posts 1126 1173
Senior Posts 416 835
All Posts 2368 2484
Recall that these results apply only to STEMM subjects, which subsumes all
subject areas dominated by male undergraduates other than architecture. All other
subjects are dominated by women, at undergraduate level. Women are far more
numerous at junior staff levels. At middle ranking staff level the numbers of men
and women are essentially equal. Only at the senior level are there more men:
twice as many as women. The senior ranks account for only 26% of the total.
Moreover, if just 210 senior males (4.3% of the sample) were replaced by women,
there would be equality at both senior and middle ranks, with women still dominant
at the junior level.
The efforts of Athena SWAN, and all the funding and lobbying which surrounds the
issue of "women academics in STEMM", is to achieve just a 4.3% sex rebalance at
the senior level. Moreover, this is just in STEMM, which accounts for only about
30% of HE staff. One can reasonably question the value of the exercise, especially
if it is at the expense of promotion on merit. Moreover, and of greater concern, is
that the focus on the most senior staff levels in STEMM deflects attention from
the overwhelming extent of male disadvantage as customers of the education
system in all other subjects (bar architecture). Athena SWAN is focussing on a
small island of remnant male dominance whilst ignoring the bigger picture in which
women are very well represented and most often dominant.
There continues to be suggestions of hiring bias against women in STEMM
academic posts. A rather emphatic refutation of this claim in the USA comes from
the study of (Williams and Ceci, 2015). National randomized experiments were
conducted on 873 tenure-track faculty (439 male, 434 female) from four different
disciplines at 371 universities/colleges from 50 US states and the District of
Columbia. Each faculty member assessed hypothetical applications to advise the
lead candidate. The significance of the findings was reported thus,
'The underrepresentation of women in academic science is typically attributed,
both in scientific literature and in the media, to sexist hiring. Here we report five
hiring experiments in which faculty evaluated hypothetical female and male
applicants, using systematically varied profiles disguising identical scholarship, for
assistant professorships in biology, engineering, economics, and psychology.
Contrary to prevailing assumptions, men and women faculty members from all four
fields preferred female applicants 2:1 over identically qualified males with
matching lifestyles (single, married, divorced), with the exception of male
economists, who showed no gender preference. Comparing different lifestyles
revealed that women preferred divorced mothers to married fathers and that men
preferred mothers who took parental leave to mothers who did not. Our findings,
supported by real-world academic hiring data, suggest advantages for women
launching academic science careers.'
These findings explode a whole cluster of shibboleths regarding academic hiring.
The results in histogram form are shown in Figure 2.12. The women faculty
members' bias in favour of women applicants was actually greater than a factor of
two in all subjects, being a factor of three in the case of psychology. Inevitably, the
study has come in for criticism and I link to one such for completeness, by LSE
sociologist and social justice blogger Zuleyka Zevallos (2015).
A study in France has also indicated that women are favoured rather than the
opposite in academic hiring in STEM fields. (Breda and Hillion, 2016) conclude as
follows,
'Discrimination against women is seen as one of the possible causes behind their
underrepresentation in certain STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) subjects. We show that this is not the case for the competitive exams
used to recruit almost all French secondary and postsecondary teachers and
professors. Comparisons of oral non–gender-blind tests with written gender-blind
tests for about 100,000 individuals observed in 11 different fields over the period
2006–2013 reveal a bias in favor of women that is strongly increasing with the
extent of a field's male-domination.'
Results like these cause a small ripple of interest when they are published, then the
narrative reverts to the usual story: bias against women. Being myself a veteran
job interviewer (though not in academia) I can understand how Figure 2.12 arises.
If you need to reject a male applicant, no problem. No one will question whether
the rejection is justified based on insufficient merit. Rejecting a female candidate,
however, is something one tries to avoid, because one knows that a third-degree
interrogation from HR may well result. You will need to be especially sure that all
formal procedures have been followed to perfection and that no questions were
asked which could be regarded as politically incorrect. There is inevitably a
temptation to exercise positive discrimination in favour of a female candidate,
simply to avoid the hassle.
Figure 2.12: Percentage of Faculty Members Ranking the Applicant Number One,
by Sex of Applicant and Sex of Assessing Faculty (Williams and Ceci, 2015)
2.9 Gender Skew in Provision
Bradford (2015) reviewed initiatives to encourage women into mechanical
engineering and physics. The review was confined to initiatives promoted by the
professional bodies in these two subjects. An exhaustive list was prohibitively
difficult to compile, due to the sheer volume of such initiatives. Had projects,
support groups, etc., within universities and schools been included, it would have
become quite unwieldy as virtually every university will have Women in
Engineering and Women in Physics societies, for example. Even confining attention
to the professional institutes there were many pages of female-specific awards,
female-specific support groups, female-only bursaries, female-specific training, and
many millions of pounds of funding to facilitate these activities.
The purpose of the review by Bradford (2015) was to contrast this with what is
done for men in a discipline where they are under-represented: teaching. The
answer in this case is far easier to summarise: nothing. Instead, the teaching unions
are concerned only about "women's equality" issues and have no concern at all
about their minority staff: men. The disappearance of the male teacher, as
illustrated by Figure 2.11, excites not the slightest ripple of interest from the
teaching unions. If men were treated with the same concern as women, here are
some of things that would exist, as they do for women in engineering and physics,
A campaign for "Men into Primary Teaching";
Men-only bursaries to facilitate and encourage men into teaching;
An annual award for the "Young Man Primary Teacher of the Year";
A "Men First Award" to celebrate the achievements of ground-breaking men in
primary teaching;
A Male Primary Teachers Conference;
A National Men in Teaching Day;
An equivalent of the Juno Initiative for male teachers;
An obligation on primary schools to acquire the equivalent of "Juno Champion"
status in respect of male teachers;
An equivalent of Athena Swan for male teachers;
An obligation on schools to acquire the equivalent of Athena Swan accreditation in
respect of male teachers;
A calendar celebrating male primary school teachers, and reminding us that they
are just 13% of primary teachers;
An enquiry by a House of Commons Select Committee on gender equality in
teaching;
A requirement on teachers to submit evidence to such an inquiry, as has been the
case in engineering.
As far as I am aware, none of the above exist. The drive to encourage more women
into STEM often takes the form of financial assistance: scholarships, bursaries,
etc. For example, in the USA, Tucker (2018) lists 36 scholarships exclusive to
women in engineering, science, technology and business. Such sex-specific
scholarships are being challenged on both sides of the Atlantic. In the USA, Kursat
Pekgoz, a doctoral student in English literature at the University of Southern
California, has filed complaints against three universities using the federal Title IX
statute, which relates to gender equality in education. He is leading a coalition for
the purposes of raising similar complaints at further universities. Under the lurid
headline, 'Men's rights activists are attacking women's scholarships', Engelhart
(2018) describes the complaint thus, 'a men's rights activist who has used federal
complaints to target women-only scholarships and programs is now trying to start a
national movement to end what he sees as discrimination against men'. But it is not
"using" a law to raise a complaint for the authorities to consider, but simply
expecting the law to be upheld, especially as there is a clear prima facie case.
Whilst there is no direct equivalent of Title IX in the UK, the 2010 Equality Act
makes a general provision for equality on grounds of sex. This has already caused
the university authorities at Oxford to open to male applicants a previously
female-only scholarship. It seems inevitable that other female-only scholarships,
and other universities, must follow suit or be open to legal challenge. As in the
USA, there is a vociferous backlash from feminists who do not want to see their
privileges removed, (Turner, 2019b).
This is happening as some universities in the UK are beginning to target recruiting
white males as this demographic is being recognised as a minority group in
universities. The report by Bodkin (2018) notes that, 'in 2016/17, only 27% of the
UK undergraduate intake were white males…. on certain courses such as
pharmacy, business and some science degrees, more than seven in 10 students is
from an ethnic minority'. Across both sexes and all wealth classes, (UCAS Analysis
& Research, 2017) gives the following participation rates at university entry in
2017 according to race, restricted to former state school pupils in the UK,
Chinese 63.0%
Asian 45.8%
Black 40.4%
"Any Other" 40.1%
"Mixed" 34.0%
White 29.3%
But note that those figures relate to both sexes, and there are substantially more
women than men in every racial group. For poor white males the figure is less than
10% (Figure 2.5).
2.10 Perceptions and Expectations
The underperformance of boys and young men at all stages of education, primary,
secondary and tertiary, is clear. However, there is little political will to address the
matter; the focus of concern lies elsewhere, as illustrated by the preceding
sections. This neglect is aided by minimising the visibility of male disadvantage. In
some cases, this is achieved by the diversionary tactic of referencing the gender
pay gap. At best this is a non sequitur. Another reaction is to focus solely on
"women in STEMM", and associated arguments related to role models and
stereotyping. Even in STEMM it is becoming harder to find female disadvantage as
there is none as regards students and, as regards staff, it is confined to the
professorial level (in the UK sense).
The proponents of stereotyping and role model arguments are often less willing to
apply them in the context of the disappearing male teacher and boys' educational
underperformance (Parson, 2016). Female primary school classroom teachers
outnumber their male counterparts eight to one. But female heads of primary
schools outnumber male heads of primary schools 'only' three to one. That the
latter fact is interpreted as evidence of discrimination against women is
bewildering. These are rather obvious examples of the empathy gap.
Harley and Sutton (2013) published a study on the role of stereotype threat in
boys' underachievement, see also (Collins, N, 2013). The study presented 238
pupils aged four to ten with a series of statements such as "this child is really
clever" and "this child always finishes their work" and asked them to link the
words to pictures of boys or girls. The study found that girls think that girls are
cleverer than boys. Girls at all ages said girls were cleverer. Boys aged between
four and seven were evenly divided as to which gender was cleverer. But by the
time boys reached seven or eight, they agreed with their female peers that girls
were more likely to be cleverer and more successful.
There is a widespread claim that girls lack self-confidence (OECD, 2015). There is
no evidence of it from this study. But this study does raise the question as to why
the experience of school seems so decisively to dent boys' self-confidence.
Researchers also found that the children believed adults shared the same opinion
as them, meaning that boys felt they were not expected by their parents and
teachers to do as well as girls and lost their motivation or confidence as a result.
In a separate experiment 140 of the children were divided into two groups, (Harley
and Sutton, 2013). The academics told the first group that boys do not perform as
well as girls. The second group were not told this. All the pupils were tested in
maths, reading and writing. The academics found the boys in the first group
performed significantly worse than boys in the second group, while girls'
performance was similar in both groups. This appears to confirm that low
expectations are a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The paper argues that teachers have lower expectations of boys than of girls and
this belief fulfils itself throughout primary and secondary school. Girls'
performance at school may be boosted by what they perceive to be their teachers'
belief that they will achieve better results and be more conscientious than boys.
Boys may underachieve because they pick up on teachers' assumptions that they
will obtain poorer results than girls and have less drive.
In 'Students' Perceptions of Teacher Biases', Ouazad and Page (2012) present
evidence of teacher gender bias. The study reports the results of an experiment
that involved about 1,200 grade 8 pupils (aged 13) across 29 schools in London,
Manchester, and Liverpool. Students were handed a sum of £4 which they could
either keep or allocate part of the sum to bet on their own performance at a test
where grading was partly discretionary. In a random half of the classrooms,
grading was done anonymously by an external examiner. In the other random half,
grading was done non-anonymously by the teacher. Thus, differences in students'
betting behaviour across the anonymous and non-anonymous classrooms identified
the effect of grading conditions on students' beliefs.
The study showed that pupils' perceptions were on average in line with teachers'
actual behaviour. The experiment involved students and teachers of different
ethnicity, gender, and socio-economic status. But gender was the only significant
factor in the results. Male students tended to bet less when assessed by a female
teacher than by an external examiner or by a male teacher. This was consistent
with female teachers' grading practices; female teachers gave lower grades to
male students. Female students bet more when assessed by a male teacher than
when assessed by an external examiner or a female teacher. The study provided no
evidence that students' beliefs depended on ethnicity or socio-economic status.
But the gender results showed that students' beliefs tend to increase the gender
gap in investment and effort. A male teacher increases the effort and investment
of a female student. A female teacher tends to lower the effort and investment of
male students. These observations suggest that more male teachers would be
beneficial to pupils of both sexes.
In 2012, a report commissioned by the All-Party Parliamentary Literacy Group,
the "Boys' Reading Commission" (National Literacy Trust, 2012) observed (page
13),
'The predominantly female make-up of the school and children's workforce could
mean that their knowledge of texts and reading materials could lead them to have
a bias towards materials which suited girls' interests. So even though there is no
evidence that the gender of the teacher impacts on the relative attainment of boys
and girls in a class, it could well be that the teacher's gender could influence the
extent to which they effectively promote books and reading materials that are
attractive to boys and girls. Interestingly, one survey respondent who understood
the need to promote reading materials that reflect the interests of boys at the
same time made clear her discomfort with these interests: "We try to work from
their interests no matter how banal, disgusting or undesirable"'.
That sentiment is very concerning. Children are remarkably sensitive to how adults
perceive them, and "disgusting" is a highly corrosive attitude. The feminist
novelist, Doris Lessing, became aware of the tendency by some teachers to
demonise masculinity in 2001 when she visited a primary school. She remarked
later, (Gibbons, 2001),
'Young boys were being weighed down with guilt about the crimes of their sex… I
was in a class of nine- and 10-year-olds, girls and boys, and this young woman was
telling these kids that the reason for wars was the innately violent nature of men.
You could see the little girls, fat with complacency and conceit while the little boys
sat there crumpled, apologising for their existence, thinking this was going to be
the pattern of their lives.'
Lessing said the teacher 'tried to catch my eye, thinking I would approve of this
rubbish'. She added: 'This kind of thing is happening in schools all over the place
and no one says a thing.' This is what happens when gynocentrism and misandry
run unchecked.
2.11 Worldwide
However badly boys and young men may be falling behind in education in the UK,
at least we can be sure that in underdeveloped countries it truly is girls who are the
educationally disadvantaged. We know this because all the great and the good have
told us so. We know it because Boris Johnson and Prince Harry and Meghan
Markle have told us so, (UK Government, 2018p). We know it because William
Hague and Malala have told us so, (Jackson, 2012). We know it because rock star,
Bono, has told us so, (Johnson, 2017). We know it because after Boko Haram
kidnapped the girls from Chibok in Nigeria in 2014, Michelle Obama told us so. In
May 2014, Barrack Obama yielded his weekly presidential address to his wife. She
expressed her outrage and distress at the Chibok girls' kidnappings, driving home a
message that Boko Haram is specifically attacking the education and emancipation
of girls. From this she widened her concern to the worldwide disadvantage suffered
by girls in education generally, (Obama White House, 2014).
But, in truth, Boko Haram were, and are, against western education for anyone,
not just girls, as they are against western values generally. Their approach to boys
in these schools had been rather more robust than kidnapping for some years prior
to the Chibok event. Shooting, beheading or being burnt alive proved an efficacious
cure for boys' tendencies towards seeking a western education. It might have been
nice for Michelle Obama to recognise these facts. But perhaps she had a point.
Kidnapping girls is news; killing boys is just business as usual. And there was little
point, after all, in attempting to recommence the education of the boys in the
picture shown in Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13: Nigerian Schoolboys Burnt Alive by Boko Haram
The lack of any mention of boys in the above news links sends the clear message
that it is girls in these underdeveloped countries who are uniquely disadvantaged
compared with boys. The message is clear, but the message is false. The reason for
the omission of any mention of boys is not because they are well educated, but
because they don't matter.
To those who are inclined to be sceptical about the thesis of male disposability,
please explain why Figure 2.13 - and dozens of similar incidents - did not merit a
mention, and not only by Michelle Obama but by almost everyone. The West
indulged in an orgy of virtue signalling over #BringBackOurGirls, but the mass
killing of boys did not create a ripple of concern.
What is the factual position regarding the education of boys and girls across the
world? Figure 2.14 shows United Nations literacy data for year 2015, (UNdata,
2015). The x-axis refers to different countries, plotting 159 of the world's 195
countries. The y-axis is the proportion of youths and young adults (ages 15 to 24)
who are literate. The countries are ordered in descending percentage of male
literacy. Hence the blue male line is a monotonically decreasing curve whilst the
female line zig-zags around it. The key feature is that the female zig-zag pretty
much follows the male curve. The correlation between male and female literacy
rates is 0.96.
Figure 2.14: Percentage Literacy by Country in Male Rank Order, 2015
At the lowest levels of literacy the mean of the female zig-zag is a slightly lower
than the male line. However, the difference between male and female literacy rates
is not the dominant feature of the data. The dominant feature is that countries
which educate their people to be literate do so for both sexes, whereas countries
which educate only a proportion of their men to be literate also educate a
comparable proportion of their women to be literate, the difference between the
sexes being of second order of magnitude. This does not align terribly well with the
picture of the matter being promulgated by politicians, royalty, celebrities, and the
media generally.
Figure 2.15 shows in a similar format the average number of years of education
received by the two sexes against country, (NationMaster, 2006). The data relates
to around 2006 and 176 countries of the world's 195 are plotted. The data are again
in rank order of male years of schooling, so the blue male line is a descending
staircase. The female data again zig-zags around the male line with the same
overall trend. The correlation between years of schooling of males and females is
0.93. Whilst there might be a tendency for a slightly smaller number of years of
schooling for girls at the lowest end of the data, this is again hardly the dominant
feature of the graph. The dominant feature is that countries which educate their
children only to primary school level do so for both sexes, and if they educate to age
16 or to age 18, they do so for both sexes. This, again, does not align terribly well
with the popular narrative.
Figure 2.15: Years of Education by Country in Male Rank Order, 2006
Figure 2.16 shows the ratio of the numbers of women to men enrolling in higher
education, that is in university and college education, (NationMaster, 2005). There
are more countries in which more women than men attend university than the
reverse. The top two countries, with in excess of three times more women than men
going to university are Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. In Malala's Pakistan
the ratio is 0.88, i.e., 0.88 women for every man going to university. In the UK the
gender ratio, as we saw previously, is 1.37, with 1.37 women going to university for
every man.
The issue in Pakistan, despite all the publicity and displays of Western concern over
Malala, is not primarily the relative educational disadvantage of girls and young
women, but the fact that both sexes are poorly educated in Pakistan. The average
years of schooling in Pakistan are only 7 years for boys and 6 years for girls. Both
sexes receive only primary level education on average, and only extremely small
absolute numbers of either sex attend university.
The great and the good implicitly promulgate a false perspective by sins of omission.
By never mentioning boys, they encourage the idea that, in underdeveloped
countries, boys are being educated but girls are not. It's a false picture. But it is
analogous to the same distorted picture of our own past in the UK. It's almost as if
there are virtue signalling Brownie points to be had in wringing one's hands about
girls' education, but none to be had for boys' education. It's almost as if there were
an empathy gap.
Figure 2.16: Ratio of Women to Men Enrolled in Tertiary Education by Country,
2005
2.12 Summary: The Education Empathy Gap
In this chapter we have seen that boys do less well at school than girls in the UK.
The gender gap in educational attainment is apparent from the earliest age and
increases as boys and girls move from primary to secondary to tertiary education.
The gender gap to the disadvantage of males gradually increases through their
school career, being up to 12% in primary school, up to 19% by GCSE, about
22%-29% by A Level, and 36% in terms of university entrance. There is evidence
from multiple sources that teacher bias contributes to the gender gap and that the
nature of the award system in the UK also contributes to the gender gap. School
teaching is strongly, and increasingly, dominated by women. But despite the
emphasis placed on role models and stereotyping in other contexts, there is a
reluctance to accept that these factors may be relevant to boys'
underperformance. The large and increasing gender gap is well known, but
Government policies display no political will to address it. Having Ministers for
Education who are feminists does not help.
At universities, subject curricula and award processes are being redefined
specifically to address any cases where men do better, reckless of the damage to
the academic integrity of the subject. Women have outnumbered men as
undergraduates in the UK for over a quarter of a century. Women dominate in 70%
of university subjects. Since 1900, a greater total number of degrees have been
awarded to women than to men. Within a few years, women will have been
awarded more degrees than men over the whole of UK history.
There is, of course, also a race and a class issue. But it is poor white people who
are bottom of the heap in terms of university entrance, with poor white males the
very bottom of all. A poor black woman is three times more likely to go to
university in the UK than a poor white male. Across all economic classes, in
2016/17, only 27% of the UK undergraduate intake were white males.
Athena SWAN, indirectly funded by Government, is deploying financial coercion
and moral blackmail to force universities to achieve higher proportions of women
in senior staff positions in STEMM. It is noteworthy that women now dominate as
undergraduates in STEMM. Women also dominate in junior staff positions in
STEMM, whilst in middle ranking staff positions in STEMM there is gender parity.
Athena SWAN is thus focussed on the most senior staff levels in STEMM, a small
proportion of the total. This is typical of feminist activism which most often
concentrates on the most senior positions, the objective being to place feminists in
positions of power. And yet there is evidence from the USA and from France that
academic hiring practices favour women over men in STEM fields.
There is enormous encouragement and support for women in STEM subjects or
considering entering the STEM field. In the USA the determination to get more
women in STEM has even given rise to classes in science and maths from which
boys are excluded, (Peterson, 2015). In the UK, the male dominated professional
institutes are heavily committed to promoting initiatives to encourage women into
STEM. This has been the case for decades. In contrast, in areas where men are
under-represented, such as teaching or nursing, there is no support for the minority
men from the female dominated unions. In professions where women dominate, the
focus remains just as emphatically on "women's equality" issues. This can only
discourage men from applying to a hostile environment.
Some of the initiatives to encourage women into STEM include female-only
scholarships or bursaries. These are now being legally challenged in the USA and
the UK as violations of equality legislation. The outcome of these legal challenges
remains to be seen.
In our society now, anti-male sentiment has become normalised (Nathanson and
Young, 2001). "Laddishness" is a pejorative, especially in universities, (Phipps and
Young, 2013), and teachers are trained in a culture in which masculinity is seen as a
character flaw, something to be overcome or suppressed (Martino, 2018). In 2000,
the philosopher Christina Hoff Sommers published a book drawing attention to the
destructive effect of these attitudes on boys' education in the USA, 'The War
Against Boys' (Hoff Sommers, 2000). Hoff Sommers challenged the divisive
narrative that boys are intrinsically pathological. The challenge was not well
received in some quarters.
The empathy gap can take a more subtle form. At the time of writing the Labour
Shadow Minister for Education, and former Shadow Minister for Women and
Equalities, is Angela Rayner. In January 2018 she was interviewed for an article in
the Guardian, 'White working-class boys should be more aspirational' (Walker,
2018). Rayner said a focus in the educational system on women and minority ethnic
groups had perhaps inadvertently had a negative impact on the attention paid to
white working-class boys. 'They have not been able to adapt', she said, 'Culturally,
we are not telling them that they need to learn and they need to aspire. They are
under the impression that they don't need to push themselves, in the way that
disadvantaged groups had to before.'
Rayner's diagnosis, that boys have not been able to adapt and need to try harder, is
another variant of "it's their own fault". There is a deep issue lurking in the
exhortation that "boys should be more aspirational". It lies in the word "should".
What does the word "should" imply? It implies something necessary in order to
achieve an objective or purpose. But that begs the question: towards what purpose
does Ms Rayner assume boys should be striving? Towards a success which they
have been taught is actually privilege and oppression of others? Why should they
wish to aspire to be oppressors? And Angela Rayner's exhortation is strangely
inconsistent with her complaint that universities are too male and pale, (Adams,
2019).
The age-old motivation of young males has always been to achieve sufficient
financial success to be able to attract a mate and ultimately to support a family.
There is nothing wrong with aspiring to this modest goal. It is presumptuous, and
dare I say rather patrician, for a senior MP to demand that working class lads
should wish to follow a "professional" route. It is rather fortunate that so many do
not "aspire" in this way or tradesmen might become even harder to find, and we all
depend a great deal more on them than we do upon lawyers or politicians or
journalists. Perhaps Ms Rayner should, like them, "aspire" to be a more useful
member of society, rather than yet another unnecessary politician.
It may seem like wild exaggeration to claim that, in education, we see male
disposability in operation. But recall that "disposability" is to be interpreted in
general as a lesser concern for males. The narrative of perennial female
disadvantage, the unshakable conviction that males cannot be disadvantaged,
except by their own nature, together with a strong women's lobby and the absence
of such a lobby for males, lead to a focus on women and girls even in education,
despite very clear statistical evidence that it is boys and young men who are
predominantly disadvantaged in education. The empathy gap is the overarching
psychological orientation which prevents any action being taken to redress male
educational disadvantage, spuriously legitimised by variants of "it's their own
fault". Not only do boys face a school system dominated by women, but Ministers
and Shadow Ministers for Education seem all too frequently to hold, or have held,
the "Women and Equalities" portfolio – yet another indication of what scant
concern exists for boys' education.
3. Physical Health and Longevity
It is said that your life flashes before your eyes just before you die…it's called
Life.
Terry Pratchett (1948 – 2018), The Last Continent
This chapter presents an overview of male longevity and the causes of men's early
or premature death. The gender gap in longevity, and in the major causes of
premature death, will be examined. It will be shown that the excess male over
female death rate is not just a feature of the old but is the aggregated result of the
greater death rate of males at all ages to 80.
I shall show that health and longevity are not determined solely by physical disease
but also by a range of psychosocial factors. These non-physical factors will also be
considered here, necessarily so for it will be found that disadvantages of
psychosocial origin are often the chief cause of gender disparities in death rates to
the disadvantage of males.
However, one must not lose sight of the fact that there are also biological
differences between the sexes. In sex-specific ailments this hardly needs
defending. However, even in diseases from which both sexes might be expected to
suffer equally, there are sex differences in both incidence and mortality – generally
to the disadvantage of males. In many cases it appears that males have impaired
immune response compared with females. Testosterone has been implicated in this
weakened immune response in males (Furman et al, 2014). The higher male than
female death rate in babies and very young children is evidence of a purely
physical component. Contrary to cultural assumptions, the male is more fragile
than the female as regards health (Kraemer, 2000). Biology also matters.
The demographic dependence of health and longevity will also be considered. The
extent of this demographic dependence will be seen to vary with gender, again to
the disadvantage of men.
When it comes to disadvantage, being dead is indisputably a case in point. And
when it comes to dying, male dominance remains unchallenged. And yet there are
many areas in which health policy adds to the disadvantage of males, as will be
shown.
3.1 Gender Disparity in Premature and Early Death
Longevity can be expressed in different ways. A common definition is "life
expectancy at birth", which refers to the expected life of a baby born now if death
rates at each age were assumed to remain constant. In England and Wales, based
on years 2012-14, male life expectancy at birth ranged from 74.7 years to 83.3
years, with an average of 79.8 years. Female life expectancy at birth ranged from
79.8 years to 86.7 years, with an average of 83.4 years - data from (Office for
National Statistics, 2015b). These ranges relate to local authority areas, so each is
an average over a large population within that area.
Men can expect a shorter life than women. The gender gap in life expectancy
ranges from 2.0 to 5.4 years depending upon local authority area.
Figure 3.1: Gender Gap in Life Expectancy at Birth Versus Male Life Expectancy
(2012-14 data from 346 local or unitary authorities in England and Wales)
Men's life expectancy is impacted more than women's by economic disadvantage. In
poorer regions for which the life expectancy is shorter, the gender gap in life
expectancy is greater (Figure 3.1). Conversely, where life expectancy is longer, the
gender gap in life expectancy is smaller. The longevity gender gap correlates quite
strongly with male life expectancy (correlation coefficient -0.5) but only very
weakly with female life expectancy (-0.1).
The review 'Inequalities matter: an investigation into the impact of deprivation on
demographic inequalities in adults' by Mayhew et al (2018) notes that (page 21), 'It
is particularly noticeable that men appear to be affected much more by extreme
deprivation than women. Not only do women have a higher life expectancy than
men but the range of difference between the most and least deprived percentiles is
less by a couple of years'. Thus, for men, there is an intersectional effect of gender
with socioeconomic disadvantage which increases the gender disparity in life
expectancy.
Figure 3.2: Percentage Gender Gap in Deaths by Age Range
However, life expectancy does not provide a very sensitive measure of health
disadvantage. What lies behind the gender gap in longevity is a huge percentage
gender gap in premature death rates. For England and Wales jointly in year 2016
this is shown in Figure 3.2. Mortality data for England and Wales in 2016 at each
age have been taken from (Office for National Statistics, 2017h) and mortality data
for Wales at each age have been taken from (Stats Wales, 2011).
Young men between the ages of 18 and 30 have more than double the death rate of
women of the same age (three times as great in their early twenties). Even mature
men, between, say, 40 and 60 years old, still have death rates 40% to 70% greater
than women of the same age. The number of male deaths exceeds the number of
female deaths up to age 83. Even male babies have a significantly higher mortality
than female babies.
Defining premature death as death before age 75, the number of premature deaths
of males in England and Wales in 2016 was 105,808 compared to 73,794 females –
an excess of male over female premature deaths of 43%. Figure 3.2 is an emphatic
indicator of male health disadvantage, though it generally goes unremarked in
favour of longevity measures.
3.2 The Leading Causes of Premature Death (<75)
Data for premature death (before age 75) in 2016 for England and Wales has been
taken from (British Heart Foundation, 2018) and (Office for National Statistics,
2017e). Death data from other specific causes have been obtained from: (i)
homicide data (Office for National Statistics, 2017j), (ii) alcohol related deaths
(Office for National Statistics, 2017k), (iii) drug related deaths (Office for
National Statistics, 2017m), and, (iv) suicide occurrences in England and Wales
(Office for National Statistics, 2017n). All data quoted in this chapter have been
derived from these sources unless otherwise stated. Perinatal deaths (prior to 28
days old) are excluded throughout.
Table 3.1 lists the numbers of premature deaths, by sex, together with the excess
of male deaths for each cause of death. Note that more men die in almost all
categories. The Table shows that in 2016 the top causes of premature death in
England and Wales were cancers, cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases and
digestive system diseases, in that order for both sexes, accounting in total for 74%
of premature deaths of men, and 76% of premature deaths of women.
Across all causes there is a 43% excess of premature deaths of men over that of
women in England and Wales. Cardiovascular diseases are by far the most
significant cause of excess male over female premature deaths, with cancers in an
easy second place. Digestive system diseases and suicide vie for third place.
However, if drugs and alcohol were combined into one category, they would take
third place. If suicide, drugs and alcohol were combined into one category they
would account for a total of 6,055 excess male deaths over female, and hence
would be the second most significant cause of excess male premature deaths.
However, cardiovascular diseases remain overwhelmingly the dominant cause of
excess male premature deaths.
A rather different picture emerges if the excess of male over female premature
deaths is calculated as a ratio. Against this statistic, the most significant causes of
excess male premature death are, in this order: transport accidents, suicide,
homicide, poisoning by noxious substances other than drugs or alcohol, drugs,
cardiovascular diseases, alcohol, undetermined causes, and the combined category
of falls, drowning and fire. All these causes result in male premature death rates
which are nearly double, or more than double, that of females. One of the most
noteworthy features of the excess male premature deaths, when expressed in this
way, is the prominence of the psychosocial causes: accidents, suicide, homicide,
alcohol and drugs, over the physical diseases.
Table 3.1: Gender Disparity in Premature Death (<75) in England and Wales
(2016) (listed in order of excess male deaths)
Cause of Death Males Females Excess Male Deaths#
Cardiovascular diseases 24,842 11,755 13,087 (2.10)
Cancers 36,833 31,801 5,032 (1.16)
Digestive system diseases 6,931 4,479 2,452 (1.55)
Suicide 3,501 1,080 2,421 (3.24)
Respiratory diseases 9,935 7,747 2,188 (1.28)
Alcohol 4,416 2,232 2,184 (1.98)
Drugs 2,572 1,172 1,400 (2.19)
Transport accidents 1,182 310 872 (3.81)
Falls, Drowning, Fire 1,033 535 498 (1.93)
Endocrine diseases 1,681 1,240 441 (1.36)
Diseases of the Nervous
System
3,528 3,117 411 (1.13)
Undetermined, including
Sudden Infant Death
776 396 380 (1.96)
TB, HIV, Sepsis, Hepatitis,
Meningitis
1,090 865 225 (1.26)
Homicide 371 156 215 (2.38)
Poisoning by noxious
substances other than drugs
or alcohol
316 141 175 (2.24)
Congenital & Chromosomal 614 502 112 (1.22)
Mental/behaviour disorders 1,391 1,279 112 (1.09)
Diseases of the blood or
blood forming organs
274 187 87 (1.47)
Diseases of the skin,
musculoskeletalsystem, or
genitourinary system
1,305 1,466 -161 (0.89)
specific diseases contained
in the above categories
Alzheimer's disease 444 563 -119 (0.79)
Diabetes 975 621 354 (1.57)
ALL CAUSES 105,808* 73,794* 32,014 (1.43)
*Exceeds the sum of table entries since not all causes are listed
#Figure in parentheses is the ratio of male to female deaths
However, one should not lose sight of the fact that, in terms of absolute numbers of
excess male premature deaths, cardiovascular diseases are way out in front, with
cancers an easy second. The prevalence of physical diseases in the gender death
gap suggests that biology may be important as well as psychosocial factors.
However, lifestyle issues will also impact on these physical diseases so the
separation of causal factors is not easy.
Violence (by others) is sometimes claimed to be a major cause of death. This is
untrue. Of the 21 causes of premature death listed in Table 3.1, homicide is 19th in
terms of numbers of men's deaths caused, and 20th for women.
3.2.1 Cardiovascular Diseases
Since cardiovascular diseases are easily the most significant cause of excess male
over female premature deaths they warrant more detailed attention.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the collective term for all diseases affecting the
heart and blood vessels. This subsumes a large range of diseases including:
coronary heart disease, myocardial infarction (heart attack), heart failure, and
cerebrovascular diseases (including strokes), and many others. Coronary heart
disease (CHD) is the collective term for diseases that occur when the walls of the
coronary arteries become narrowed, usually due to a gradual build-up of fatty
material called atheroma. Within the CVD categories, the biggest killers are CHD
and stroke.
Despite the justified ongoing concern about CVD related deaths, it is worth
pointing out that premature deaths by CVD have reduced dramatically over the
decades, for both sexes, making a major contribution to increasing longevity in all
the UK nations (see, for example, Figure 3.3 for Wales). Nevertheless, the ratio of
male to female premature deaths by CVD has remained stubbornly persistent.
Figure 3.4 illustrates how that ratio varies with age and with specific disease within
the CVD group. For most CVD diseases the ratio of male to female deaths reaches
a maximum in excess of two at about age 50. For CHD the peak male:female death
rate ratio is in excess of four.
3.2.2 Cancers
Table 3.2 gives the number of premature deaths from cancers in 2016 for England
and Wales. The number of premature male deaths from cancers exceeds the
number of premature female deaths from cancers by 16%. The leading cancer
causes of premature male mortality are lung cancer, colorectal cancer, oesophageal
cancer and prostate cancer in that order. In women the top four causes of
premature death by cancers are lung cancer, breast cancer, colorectal cancer and
ovarian cancer, in that order. Lung cancer is easily the top cancer killer for both
sexes, accounting for just under one-quarter of all cancer deaths for both sexes.
Figure 3.3: Premature Death Rate from Cardiovascular Diseases in Wales, 1969 -
2016
Figure 3.4: Ratio of Male to Female Deaths from Cardiovascular Diseases Versus
Age
Table 3.2 shows that all types of cancer result in more premature deaths of men
than of women, excluding only the female-specific cancers of breast, cervix, ovary
and uterus. The ratio of male to female cancer deaths, for all cancers except the
female-specific cancers, are displayed in histogram form in Figure 3.5. Colorectal
cancer is the second most important cancer for men, and the third most important
for women after breast cancer, as regards premature deaths. Colorectal cancer has
a national screening programme starting at age 60 for both sexes. It is the only
national cancer screening programme applicable to men.
Table 3.2: Premature Deaths from Cancers, 2016 (England and Wales)
Cancer England and Wales
Men Women
Ratio,
m:w
Lung, bronchus and trachea cancers 8,560 7,067 1.21
Colorectal Cancer 3,630 2,565 1.42
Oesophageal cancer 2,734 866 3.16
Prostate Cancer 2,588 - -
Pancreatic cancer 2,355 1,745 1.35
Brain cancer 1,614 1,090 1.48
Liver cancer 1,526 831 1.84
Oropharyngeal cancer 1,242 466 2.67
Lymphomas 1,232 168 7.33
Kidney cancer 1,209 550 2.20
Stomach cancer 1,136 525 2.16
Leukaemia 1,079 689 1.57
Skin cancers 951 552 1.72
Bladder cancer 938 438 2.14
Mesothelioma 832 188 4.43
Multiple myloma 628 460 1.37
"Benign" neoplasms 568 406 1.40
Cancer of the larynx 327 80 4.09
Testicular cancer 45 - -
Breast Cancer 42 5,340 -
Cervical cancer - 499 -
Cancer of the uterus - 1,034 -
Ovarian cancer - 2,041 -
All Cancers 36,833 31,801 1.16
Oesophageal cancer is the third most important premature killer of men by cancer,
and results in roughly three times as many premature deaths of men as women.
Prostate cancer and pancreatic cancer are almost as significant as oesophageal
cancer as regards premature deaths of men.
Figure 3.5: Ratio of Male to Female Premature Deaths from Specific Cancers
3.2.2.1 Lung Cancer
Data in this section are from 'lung cancer mortality statistics' (Cancer Research
UK, 2014c). Lung cancer is by far the biggest cancer killer, for both sexes. It is also
the cancer responsible for the largest number of premature deaths, in both sexes.
Lung cancer causes more premature deaths of men than of women (by about 21%).
A thorough review of lung cancer is beyond the scope of this book, but a few
remarks regarding the influence of gender are pertinent.
By far the most important cause of lung cancer is smoking. Estimates are that
between 80% and 90% of lung cancers are caused by smoking. At 2016, 17.7% of
men and 14.1% of women in the UK were smokers, but the prevalence of smoking
has been falling rapidly for both sexes. The difference in the prevalence of smoking
between men and women in the UK has been slight, about 3 or 4 percentage points,
for around 30 years (Office for National Statistics, 2017a), see also Figure 3.6.
However, people who have never smoked can also get lung cancer.
Two other significant causes of lung cancer are exposure to carcinogenic
substances, and natural radon. Implicated carcinogenic substances include diesel
fumes, certain solvents, arsenic, some metals, asbestos, wood dust, 'second-hand'
smoke, and a range of other chemicals. Exposure to these substances is often work
related, with people such as painters, builders, plumbers, garage mechanics, truck
drivers, and a whole range of manufacturing industries being potentially at risk. The
gendered nature of employment in these areas leads to men being more at risk from
these sources.
Figure 3.6: Smoking Prevalence and Lung Cancer Incidence Rates, Great Britain,
1948-2013, taken from (Cancer Research UK, 2014b)
Naturally occurring radon is another cause of lung cancer. Though radon is thought
to account for only about 4% of lung cancer deaths, in the UK this is over a
thousand deaths. Radon concentrations vary with local geology.
The incidence of lung cancer in men exceeds that in women, as does the mortality.
Survival rates in diagnosed men are poorer than those in women. It is beyond the
scope of this review to examine the causes of this gendered effect. However, the
male death rate by lung cancer has reduced markedly since the 1970s (Figure 3.7)
as a result of the reduced prevalence of smoking. In 1948 some 65% of men in the
UK smoked compared with 17.7% by 2016 (Office for National Statistics, 2017a),
see also Figure 3.6. Male smoking prevalence has been reducing for 70 years.
In contrast, the death rate of women by lung cancer has increased since the 1970s,
despite the prevalence of smoking amongst women having reduced from a peak of
44% in the mid-1960s to 14.1% by 2016. This is probably explained by the delayed
effect of smoking, with women today paying the price for a habit indulged decades
ago. What makes more obvious sense is that male and female mortality rates have
tended towards convergence as smoking prevalence has also converged. An excess
of male over female deaths due to lung cancer remains, probably due to a
combination of men's greater smoking prevalence and poorer male survival rates
but also due to the greater exposure of males to carcinogenic substances in the
workplace.
Figure 3.7: Lung Cancer Mortality Rates Versus Year, UK, 1971-2014, taken from
(Cancer Research UK, 2014c)
Figure 3.8: Lung Cancer Mortality Rates by Deprivation Quintile, England 2007-11
taken from (Cancer Research UK, 2014d)
There is a strong socioeconomic dependence in the incidence of lung cancer. This is
illustrated by Figure 3.8. The most deprived quintile is about 2.6 times more likely
to die from lung cancer than the least deprived quintile. The most deprived quintile
also has about a 3 times greater prevalence of smoking than the least deprived
quintile (National Survey for Wales, 2016/17), suggesting that the demographical
dependence simply reflects smoking prevalence, though occupational exposure to
carcinogens is likely to be demographic dependent also.
3.2.2.2 Prostate, Testicular and Breast Cancer
Prostate cancer is frequently paired with breast cancer for purposes of comparison,
because they are the most significant sex-specific cancers for men and women
respectively, and by a large margin. Prostate cancer has now exceeded breast
cancer as the larger killer. In England and Wales in 2016, 10,456 men died of
prostate cancer compared with 10,178 women who died of breast cancer (plus 72
men). However, a larger proportion of these male deaths are post-75 than the
female deaths. The number of premature male deaths from prostate cancer in 2016
was 2,588 compared with 5,340 premature deaths of women from breast cancer.
Hence, prostate cancer accounts for roughly half as many premature male deaths as
breast cancer does of women.
Nevertheless, even for deaths before age 75, prostate cancer is one of the leading
cancer killers of men (4th in Table 3.2). Prostate cancer causes more premature
deaths than ovarian cancer, and far more premature deaths than cervical cancer
and uterine cancer combined. Across all ages, prostate cancer kills 60% more men
than cervical cancer, uterine cancer and ovarian cancer combined kill women.
Men can get breast cancer. One of the most surprising facts in cancer death
statistics is that more men in England and Wales die of breast cancer than die of
testicular cancer, namely 72 and 50 respectively in 2016. In terms of premature
deaths these figures were 42 and 45 respectively. The incidence of testicular cancer
in the UK is about 2,400 cases per year, but the survival rate is about 98%. The
incidence of breast cancer in UK men is about 390 cases per year, but the survival
rate is very poor. However, these mortality numbers are relatively small.
There is no national screening programme for prostate cancer. This is not justified
in terms of its mortality. Prostate cancer causes 5 times as many premature deaths
as cervical cancer (and 14 times as many over all ages), yet there is a national
screening programme for cervical cancer. Prostate cancer kills more men under the
age of 75 than colorectal cancer kills women under 75, yet there is a national
screening programme for colorectal cancer in women (and men).
The usual reason which is cited for this omission is the lack of a suitable, reliable
diagnostic tool to form the basis of such a screening programme. The problem is
exacerbated by the relative inaccessibility of the prostate (e.g., compared with a
breast or testicle). A further exacerbation is that prostate cancer is often largely, or
totally, asymptomatic until it reaches an advanced stage.
In the absence of a national screening programme, a man must be pro-active in
seeking a diagnostic test for prostate cancer. This is usually a blood test, the socalled PSA (Prostate Specific Antigen) test. Men over 50 are entitled to a PSA test
on the NHS, although this entitlement is described in NHS guidance with the proviso
'after discussing the pros and cons with your doctor' (UK Government, 2016b). The
necessity to be pro-active, even in the absence of symptoms, is unfortunate. People
are not generally pro-active when nothing seems wrong.
In practice, it is the experience of many men that GPs or practice nurses will be
reticent about offering a PSA test (Prostate Cancer UK, 2016b). This reticence by
GPs is largely due to the very high rate of both false positives and false negatives
from the PSA test, though one suspects that practice costs also play a part.
Nevertheless, the PSA test is the usual initial tool which may trigger further
investigations. A digital-rectal examination can be a helpful additional check, a
negative result of which can restore peace of mind. However, this, too, is unreliable.
Emerging genetic testing may assist in assessing risk in the near future, (Spencer,
2019).
The usual follow-up to a suspicious PSA test or digital-rectal examination is a
biopsy. Currently about 100,000 men in the UK are given prostate biopsies annually,
and about 47,000 turn out to have prostate cancer (Cancer Research UK, 2015). It
is most likely the desire to avoid unnecessary biopsies, which are both costly and
uncomfortable for the patient, which motivates many doctors to discourage men
from having a PSA test in the first place. Currently the NHS in England is trialling
the use of an MRI technique as the follow-up to a suspicious PSA result as an
alternative to an immediate biopsy, (NHS England, 2018).
The technique in question is mpMRI (multi-parametric magnetic resonance
imaging). A study published in The Lancet has already provided evidence of its
efficacy, (Ahmed et al, 2017). They found that use of mpMRI could avoid the need
for biopsies in 27% of patients. If biopsies were required but were carried out using
an earlier mpMRI as a guide, up to 18% more cases of clinically significant cancer
might be detected. They concluded that mpMRI could also reduce over-diagnosis of
clinically insignificant prostate cancer as well as improving detection of clinically
significant cancer. The study has resulted in a recommended standard of mpMRI to
be deployed, referred to as the PROMIS (PROstate Mri Imaging Study) standard.
Many health boards in England have now adopted mpMRI as part of their
diagnostic pathway. Their experience with it has been very positive, (Prostate
Cancer UK, 2018a). However, take-up in the other three UK nations lags behind.
The following information was obtained via FOI, (Prostate Cancer UK, 2018b). As
of 2018, in Northern Ireland mpMRI to PROMIS standard is not available at all. In
Wales there are just two health boards which offer it on the NHS, namely the Cwm
Taff and Aneurin Bevin Health Boards. In Scotland there are a few health boards
that have adopted the technique, but most remain to be convinced of the benefits,
which can be financial, not just diagnostic.
Angela Culhane, chief executive of the charity Prostate Cancer UK, has said that
prostate cancer currently receives only half the funding and half the research that
is devoted to breast cancer in the UK, adding that developing better diagnostic tests
that could be used as part of a nationwide screening programme should be a
priority, (Culhane, 2018). The current position in the UK is that 37% of prostate
cancers are diagnosed only at an advanced stage (ORCHID, 2018). This compares
with only 8% in the USA where there is screening, (Chinegwundoh, 2018).
One of the unfortunate aspects of the prostate cancer diagnostic problem is that the
experts are openly in dispute about the merits of PSA testing. Some advise testing
early, to obtain a baseline reading, and then repeat testing to identify changes.
Others – and they are many – are sceptical about PSA testing at all. However,
those who speak against PSA testing appear to offer nothing in its place (other than
digital-rectal examination, which is no more reliable). This is disturbing. For men
who have the urinary symptoms (frequent need to urinate, especially at night, slow
to start urinating, weak stream) this can leave them with no means of putting their
mind at rest. But prostate cancer is commonly asymptomatic until it reaches an
advanced stage. The PSA nay-sayers would leave the asymptomatic man as a
hostage to fortune. The author knows many men in their 50s or 60s whose prostate
cancer was discovered following PSA testing (and subsequently successfully
treated). Without the test, would these men's longevity have been compromised?
Amongst the PSA nay-sayers was an Editorial in New Scientist (Don't screen out
the facts, 2018), which advised that, 'men should think twice about getting tested
for prostate cancer, unless they have symptoms'. But the question remains: after
thinking twice, what should the conclusion be? It gives one no comfort that this New
Scientist Leader repeats a notorious example of the empathy gap, namely that 'men
usually die with prostate cancer rather than of it'. This is male disposability as it
manifests in practice. Indeed, it is true that, if a man lives long enough, it can be
expected that he will eventually develop prostate cancer – and it might well be that
something else kills him. But the prevalence of prostate cancer at the time of death
has no bearing whatsoever on the death rate due to prostate cancer. The fact is that
10,456 men died of prostate cancer in England and Wales in 2016. It is completely
irrelevant that an even greater number of men might have had prostate cancer but
died of something else. It is hard to imagine the line taken by the PSA nay-sayers
being applied to, say, the mammogram test for breast cancer, despite this being no
more reliable than the PSA test (see below).
3.2.2.3 HPV Related Cancers
Human papilloma viruses (HPVs) are a group of more than 200 related viruses.
More than 40 HPV types can be spread through direct sexual contact, from the skin
and mucous membranes of infected people to the skin and mucous membranes of
their partners. They can be spread by vaginal, anal, and oral sex. There are also
HPVs which are not sexually transmitted and which cause non-genital warts.
Around 90% of sexually active people will be infected with HPV at some time,
though only around half with a high-risk variant (National Cancer Institute, 2015).
A range of HPVs are causally connected to various cancers. The most significant
cancers caused by HPV are cervical cancer and oropharyngeal cancers. One HPV
variant or another is responsible for virtually all cervical cancers. Hence, HPV
caused 499 premature deaths of women by cervical cancer in England and Wales in
2016 (Table 3.2).
The proportion of oropharyngeal cancers which are caused by HPVs is uncertain,
but substantial. Some sources put this at less than 50% (Cancer Research UK,
2016a). However, it is likely that this is based on old statistics prior to the incidence
of HPV-related oropharyngeal cancers increasing steeply from the mid-1980s. The
best estimate at present is that about 70% of oropharyngeal cancers are HPV
induced (Chaturvedi et al, 2011).
Consequently, based on 70% of the data in Table 3.2, HPVs probably caused about
870 premature deaths of men and 326 premature deaths of women from
oropharyngeal cancers in 2016 (England and Wales).
HPVs also cause about 95% of anal cancer (National Cancer Institute, 2015). There
were around 140 anal cancer deaths of males in 2014, and about 220 of women
(Cancer Research UK, 2014a). About half of these deaths occur after age 75, so the
number of premature deaths due to anal cancer is about 70 and 110 for men and
women respectively. There are other cancers associated with HPV, but they are
relatively rare. In total, then, about 940 men and 935 women suffered premature
deaths in 2016 due to HPV induced cancers in England and Wales.
Despite the number of premature deaths due to HPV cancers being virtually the
same for the two sexes, over ten years ago the NHS introduced a free vaccination
programme against HPV for girls, but with no such programme for boys. The NHS
programme to vaccinate girls against the most high-risk variants of HPV was rolled
out to Year 8 girls, i.e., from age 12, though it is available free up to age 18, (Public
Health England, 2014). By 2012 the uptake of the complete course by girls in Wales
was reported to be 87% (Public Health Wales Observatory, 2017). There was
initially no NHS vaccination programme against HPV for boys. The usual reason
cited (NHS, 2017) for this omission is that vaccinating girls 'helps to indirectly
protect boys from these types of HPV through what's known as herd immunity
because vaccinated girls won't pass HPV on to them'. The obvious flaw that this
does not protect men who have sex with other men was ultimately recognised. In
England, the government has recently confirmed that it will introduce a nationwide
HPV vaccination programme for men aged 45 or younger who have sex with other
men (UK Government, 2018f). This was made available at specialist sexual health
clinics from April 2018 (so such men will need to be pro-active).
As well as the HPV vaccination for girls, cervical cancer in women is also routinely
checked via a national screening programme (Public Health Wales Observatory,
2016). The so-called smear test is carried out every 3 or 5 years, depending upon
age. There is no HPV infection screening for boys or men, nor any screening
programme for oropharyngeal cancers which predominantly affect men. Thus,
women enjoy a double protection, and men initially had none.
The initial absence of an NHS vaccination programme for heterosexual boys was
highly controversial. The then-Secretary of State for Health and Social Care,
Jeremy Hunt, reiterated in March 2018, ten years after the vaccination became
routine for girls, that there was no intention to roll out the HPV vaccination for
boys, on grounds of cost effectiveness, (Adams, 2018). Whilst vaccination at a
private clinic might cost £300, it is believed that the cost to the NHS, due to
economies of scale, is more like £30. Meanwhile, Australia, Austria, Croatia, and
some provinces of Canada have state funded vaccination programmes for boys, with
several more countries likely to recommend vaccination of boys, including many
States of the USA.
The same argument based on "herd immunity" would apply equally if only boys but
not girls were vaccinated. But would such an approach be regarded as acceptable,
by anyone? Vigorous opposition from women's groups could be anticipated. It is
unlikely that anyone would dare to vaccinate boys but not girls when both were
equally at risk: such rationalisations as "herd immunity" would be immediately
dismissed (rightly) as outrageous sexism.
Quite apart from issues of equality and ethics, even a lay person can see that the
"herd immunity" argument was always seriously flawed. Many UK men will have
sex with women from abroad at some time (and once is enough). One need only
think of the large proportion of non-UK students at universities to be concerned. In
a letter to the Secretary of State in June 2016, 13 HPV experts observed that
'approximately 15% of 25- to 34-year-old males have had at least one sexual
partner from outside the UK in the past five years', (Carlin, 2016). They added, 'the
total burden of these diseases affects men and women about equally and we
therefore believe that there is a strong ethical argument for the equal protection of
both sexes'. They also noted that the costs of treating anogenital warts and
oropharyngeal cancers was such that there was a cost-benefit case to be made for
vaccinating boys. It would probably cost less than £20M per year to vaccinate all
UK boys at the same age as girls.
Dentists are often the first to spot the signs of oropharyngeal cancer and so are
particularly aware of its increasing incidence. British Dentists have been
campaigning for years to get boys vaccinated (Oral Health Foundation, 2017).
Senior doctors published their opinion on boys and the HPV vaccine in the British
Medical Journal in June 2016, including Elizabeth Carlin, president of the British
Association for Sexual Health and HIV, and Saman Warnakulasuriya, emeritus
professor of oral medicine and experimental pathology at King's College, London,
(Gulland, 2016). They urged the then-Health Secretary, Jeremy Hunt, to extend the
English national HPV vaccination programme to boys.
A campaign by the Men and Boys Coalition brought the EHRC into the fray, with an
implied threat of legal action based on unlawful discrimination on grounds of sex,
(Men and Boys Coalition, 2018). On 2 May 2018 the issue of vaccinating boys
against HPV was debated in the House of Commons (UK Parliament, 2018b). There
was impassioned support for vaccination of boys from Tory, Labour, Democratic
Unionist and Scottish Nationalist MPs. News reports were bullish about a change of
heart (Rose, 2018).
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health and Social Care, Steve
Brine, stated that he was awaiting advice from the NHS's Joint Committee on
Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI). The JCVI's interim advice in 2017 indicated
that to vaccinate boys would be 'highly unlikely to be cost-effective in the UK,
where uptake in adolescent girls is consistently high'. However, tellingly, the
Minister also referred to 'a number of threats of judicial review related to equality
and sex discrimination in relation to HPV vaccination'. Then on 24th July 2018
Steve Brine announced that boys aged 12 and 13 in England would be given the
HPV vaccine, (UK Government, 2018q). Wales, Scotland and the Republic of
Ireland made the same decision shortly after, though not Northern Ireland at the
time of writing.
Brine's announcement followed a recommendation from the JCVI which said that a
"gender-neutral" programme to protect against HPV would be cost-effective after
all, (Roger, 2018). Whether the threat of legal action played a part in this
turnaround I leave to the readers' judgment.
There is one outstanding issue. Virtually all women and girls under 25 in the UK are
now protected against HPV. But the new Government recommendations will only
vaccinate boys of age 12/13. Consequently the older cohort of boys and men will
remain unprotected. It is inevitable that this cohort will have elevated rates of the
associated cancers, particularly oropharyngeal cancer. This continues to be debated,
not least in Parliament, Sharon Hodgson, Shadow Minister for Public Health,
proposing a catch-up programme, (UK Parliament, 2019). Penny Mordaunt, then
Minister for Women and Equalities, stated in reply that, 'it is the view of Public
Health England that a catch-up vaccination programme for boys is not necessary, as
evidence suggests that they are already benefiting from the indirect protection
known as herd protection', thus sticking to the line which has already been
discredited. One suspects she placed the emphasis on the "Women" in her title
rather than on the "Equalities". The statistics will eventually reveal how many men
die prematurely as a result of this 10 year delay in HPV vaccination.
The disturbing aspect of the HPV vaccination saga is the amount of pressure, from
a range of authoritative bodies - and ultimately the spectre of legal action - which
was necessary to overturn a transparently sexist initial decision. Let those who are
convinced about male privilege and incredulous at the idea of male disposability
explain how vaccination for girls but not boys at equal risk was ever a policy
regarded with equanimity. Let them contemplate how improbable it would be for
anyone to have even contemplated vaccinating boys but not girls.
3.2.3 HIV-AIDS
Death from AIDS deserves a special mention because it affects men substantially
more than women. The death rate from AIDS has now reduced markedly from its
peak in 1994 when 1,537 men and 186 women died from AIDS in the UK. In 2017
there were 333 deaths of men from AIDS and 95 deaths of women. (These data
relate to all ages). To date in the UK there have been five times more deaths of
men than women from AIDS, (UK Government, 2018r).
3.3 The Leading Causes of Early Death (<45)
"Early" death may be defined as death before age 45. Data sources used here are
the same as in section 3.2. Table 3.3 lists 17 causes of death and gives for each
cause the numbers of male and female deaths before age 45, and their difference.
There is an excess of early male deaths over early female deaths for all causes
other than cancers. The probability of a man dying before age 45 is 78% greater
than for a woman. In contrast to premature deaths, the two most significant causes
of excess male early deaths are suicide and drugs, knocking cardiovascular
diseases into third place. Table 3.3 confirms the frequently made claim that suicide
is the biggest killer of men under 45.
Table 3.3 again confirms that the significance of inter-personal violence as a killer
is exaggerated in popular discourse. Of the 17 causes of early death listed,
homicide lies in 14th place in terms of the number of early deaths of men, and in
15th place for women.
As an example of how the significance of violence/homicide is exaggerated,
consider the statement made in the Welsh Government's 'Measuring the health
and well-being of a nation' (Public Health Wales, 2016b). It is stated under Item 43
that 'Suicide is one of the three leading causes of death in the most economically
productive age group (15-44 years); the other two being road traffic injuries and
inter-personal violence'. The statement is correct as regards suicide, but is
inaccurate as regards transport accidents, and wildly wrong as regards interpersonal violence.
Table 3.3: Gender Disparity in Early Death (<45) in England and Wales (2016)
Cause of Death Males Females Excess of Male Deaths#
Suicide 1,792 494 1,298 (3.63)
Drugs 1,300 376 924 (3.46)
Cardiovascular diseases 1,374 634 740 (2.17)
Transport accidents 710 164 546 (4.33)
Alcohol 685 368 317 (1.86)
Digestive system diseases 782 490 292 (1.60)
Falls, Drowning, Fire 251 64 187 (3.92)
Undetermined, including
Sudden Infant Death
300 154 146 (1.95)
Homicide 240 94 146 (2.55)
Diseases of the Nervous
System
450 329 121 (1.37)
Poisoning by noxious
substances other than drugs
or alcohol
140 41 99 (3.41)
Mental / behaviour
disorders
150 71 79 (2.11)
Endocrine diseases 293 230 63 (1.27)
Respiratory diseases 447 387 60 (1.16)
TB, HIV, Sepsis, Hepatitis,
Meningitis
179 140 39 (1.28)
Congenital & Chromosomal 252 229 23 (1.10)
Cancers 1,484 1,833 -349 (0.81)
ALL CAUSES 10,829 6,098 4,731 (1.78)
#Figure in parentheses is the ratio of male to female deaths
3.4 Occupational Health and Workplace Injuries and Deaths
3.4.1 Workplace Deaths in History
I confess, like many other people, I may have been inclined to complain from time
to time about "health and safety gone mad". But we have reason to be grateful
that modern standards of health and safety at work have improved beyond all
recognition compared to, say, Victorian times. The Victorians were prodigious
builders, but their many large civil works had a serious toll on men's lives. Building
the Forth road bridge (opened 1890) took 78 men's lives for example, (The
Scotsman, 2005).
And we are talking virtually exclusively of men's lives. During the industrial
revolution, prior to 1830, some 4,000 miles of canals were dug by hand in Britain by
men with picks and shovels (UK Parliament, 2018c). By 1914 men had also built
20,000 miles of railroad by hand, with some help from explosives, including many
cuttings, embankments, viaducts and tunnels, (Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2018).
There are plenty of examples of high death counts constructing specific tunnels,
viaducts or stretches of line. One such was the construction of the first Woodhead
railway tunnel. At just over 3 miles, Woodhead 1 was one of the world's longest
railway tunnels when it opened in 1845. At least 26 men died (other sources say 32)
of the 400 men employed in the excavation and lining of the tunnel. The death rate
among the men who built the tunnel (8%) was said to be higher than that of the
soldiers who fought at the battle of Waterloo (Burns, L., 2017).
However, it has been estimated that around 200 men died constructing the
Ribblehead viaduct, on which some 2,000 men were working at its height – which is
a higher death rate still (10%) (Yorkshire Dales Trail, 2011). It is unlikely that the
death rate was as high as these examples in all cases, but it is likely that of the
million or so men who contributed to building Britain's canal and railway systems,
the order of tens of thousands were killed on the job.
However, even that prodigious death toll is exceeded by coal mining. Between 1873
and 1953 some 85,000 men were killed in British coal mines, as many as 1800 in a
single year, (Mining Institute, 2016). It is remarkable by today's standards that a
single industry in a single country could cause over a thousand deaths per year, on
average, for decade after decade, and yet be considered acceptable. This is what
male disposability looks like.
Figure 3.9: Annual Number of Fatal Injuries to Employees in Great Britain 1900-
2016
Thankfully, the number of deaths at work has been falling steeply since the
beginning of the 20th century, a trend which has continued over the last few
decades, see Figure 3.9, (Health and Safety Executive, 2017f).
3.4.2 Workplace Deaths Now
Deaths at work are massively dominated by men. 97% of fatal injuries to workers
in Great Britain in 2016/17 were men: 133 out of 137, (Health and Safety
Executive, 2017m). In 2013/14 it was 98%: 122 out of 124, (Health and Safety
Executive, 2014). However, the number of deaths at work has reduced
substantially over the last 40 years. In the early 1980s there were typically around
500 deaths at work per year in Great Britain.
When judged by deaths per 100,000 employees, waste and recycling was clearly
the dominant area in terms of worker death rate in 2016/17. Transport and
manufacturing are the remaining significant sectors. Construction and agriculture
are the main sectors resulting in deaths at work, between them accounting for 73%
of such deaths. However, this is slightly misleading because of the large number of
men employed in these sectors.
3.4.3 Non-Fatal Injuries at Work
Workers self-reported 609,000 non-fatal injuries in Great Britain in 2016/17, of
which 62% were injuries to men and 38% to women (Health and Safety Executive,
2017d). The bulk of these will be minor injuries. A breakdown of the data by both
injury severity and gender is not readily available (though the far greater male
death rate at work suggests that severe injuries will also be skewed towards men).
3.4.4 Occupational Health Issues
Work-related ill health causes nearly five times more lost days of work than
injuries at work, 25.7 million days and 5.5 million days respectively in Great Britain
in 2016/17, (Health and Safety Executive, 2017g). The average number of working
days lost per full time equivalent worker in 2016/17 was 0.84 (men) and 1.18
(women) (Health and Safety Executive, 2017b). Note that this contrasts with
injuries at work, which are skewed towards men.
The number of new plus long-standing cases of work-related ill health in Great
Britain in 2016/17 was 1.3 million. Men and women each comprised 50% of these
cases, (Health and Safety Executive, 2017h). Stress, depression and anxiety
account for 46% of these cases, and musculoskeletal disorders a further 31%,
leaving only 23% for all other categories of ill health. Women account for the
majority of the mental health cases, whereas men account for the majority of the
physical health cases. The data given in the sections below refer to Great Britain.
3.4.4.1 Stress, Depression, Anxiety
526,000 workers suffered from work-related stress, depression or anxiety (new or
long-standing) in 2016/17. In the three year period 2014/15 to 2016/17 the average
incidence rate for work-related stress, depression or anxiety for males was 1,170
cases per 100,000 compared with 1,880 cases for females per 100,000. The three
occupations with the highest rate of stress, depression or anxiety were: human
health and social work, public administration and defence, and education, (Health
and Safety Executive, 2017k). This is broadly consistent with the higher rate of
mental disorders in women than in men in the general population (see chapter 17).
3.4.4.2 Musculoskeletal Disorders
507,000 workers suffered from work-related musculoskeletal disorders (new or
long-standing) in 2016/17. The prevalence rate for males was statistically
significantly higher than that for females, 1,730 and 1,560 cases per 100,000
workers respectively, averaged over the period 2014/15 to 2016/17. The four
occupations with the highest rate of musculoskeletal disorders were construction,
agriculture, forestry and fishing, transportation and storage, and human health and
social work, (Health and Safety Executive, 2017j).
3.4.4.3 Hearing
20,000 workers in the UK are estimated to have work-related hearing problems. In
the period 2007 to 2016 there were 1505 claims for work related deafness, of
which 1495 were from men and just 10 were from women, (Health and Safety
Executive, 2017c). Having myself spent some time in turbine halls with running
660MWe sets, I can understand why. These days, failing to wear ear protection is a
disciplinary offence in any caring industry.
3.4.4.4 Vibration White Finger and Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Carpal tunnel syndrome and so-called "white finger" are conditions caused by the
prolonged use of vibrating hand-held tools. These are conditions which
overwhelmingly affect men. Between 2007 and 2016 there were 10,990 new claims
for these conditions, of which 10,670 were from men and just 320 from women,
(Health and Safety Executive, 2017a).
3.4.4.5 Occupational Cancers
In 2015 there were about 8,000 cancer deaths, and 13,500 new cancer
registrations, attributed to occupational exposure. The carcinogens responsible
include asbestos, silica, diesel exhaust, mineral oils, and substances used by
painters. Shift workers and welders are also vulnerable to occupation induced
cancers, as are outdoor workers exposed to the sun. About half the occupational
cancer deaths are attributable to asbestos. The construction industry accounts for
nearly half the occupational cancer deaths, (Health and Safety Executive, 2017e).
In view of the work areas and the nature of the offending substances, the majority
of occupational cancers affect men. Of occupational cancer deaths, 79% were men
(6366), and 21% women (1657). Of new occupational cancer registrations, 74%
were men (10,074) and 26% women (3620), (Health and Safety Executive, 2010).
A major contributor to occupational cancer deaths is mesothelioma, which most
commonly affects the lungs. 80% of mesotheliomas are caused by asbestos. In 2016
it killed 1,947 men and 366 women in England and Wales, (Office for National
Statistics, 2017e). Figure 3.10 shows that the number of deaths from mesothelioma
has been rising steadily since 1973, despite far greater precautions now being
taken in respect of exposure to asbestos. This will be the legacy of past
carelessness because of the disease's long latency of many decades.
Despite the decline in the British coal industry, there are still 200 to 300 new cases
of coal dust induced pneumoconiosis annually, though the death rate is far smaller.
This is virtually exclusively confined to men (Heath and Safety Executive, 2018).
Figure 3.10: Annual mesothelioma deaths and cases in Great Britain, 1973 - 2016
4. Men's Access to Healthcare and Health
Spending by Sex
The only way to keep your health is to eat what you don't want, drink what you
don't like, and do what you'd druther not.
Mark Twain, (1835 – 1910), Following the Equator
In the matter of health, the familiar signature of the empathy gap, "it's men's own
fault", is manifest in claims that men do not look after themselves, that men do not
see their doctor when they should, and that men delay too long in seeking medical
help. In this chapter I review the evidence supporting or refuting these claims. I
allude briefly to the global position which also indicates a relative subordination of
men's health issues to those of women. I also review briefly the gender breakdown
of spending on healthcare and medical research using the USA as an exemplar. The
overall picture as regards the empathy gap in men's health is then summarised.
4.1 Men's Access to Healthcare
One of the explanations put forward to explain men's poorer longevity is that men
"just don't look after themselves". Men, it is said, do not visit their GP or other
health services when they should, and they delay consulting a doctor when they
have a medical problem, thereby disadvantaging themselves. Is this true? Or is this
just another instance of blaming men for their own disadvantage? Are poor health
outcomes for men a product of a macho male gender script in which help-seeking is
seen as weakness? Or is it a result of disadvantage imposed on men by society? Or
is it biology?
It is certainly the case that men in the UK visit their GP less often than women.
But this does not necessarily imply that men are gratuitously disadvantaging
themselves. Women visit their doctor in association with contraception, pregnancy,
neonatal and postnatal issues, as well as in the context of screening programmes.
None of these apply to men, or apply to a much lesser extent, so less frequent visits
by men to their GP is to be expected. In addition, it is known that people who work
full time find it more difficult to attend GP appointments. This will affect more men
than women, since more men work full time, see (White and Witty, 2009) and also
chapter 7. So, are the less frequent visits by men to their GP a disadvantage
imposed on them by their working patterns, rather than the fault of their selfdestructive 'hegemonic masculinity'? In this section some of the academic
publications are reviewed to shed light on the reasons for men accessing health
services less often than women.
In 2008, the Men's Health Forum and the University of Bristol were commissioned
by the Department of Health to examine the role of gender in accessing health
services in the UK, (Wilkins et al, 2008). We have seen that the gender gap in
premature death rate is dominated by cardiovascular diseases and cancers. This is
what Wilkins et al (page 21) had to say about accessing health services by men and
women in the context of cardiovascular problems – recalling that this is the top
cause of the gender gap in premature death,
'There are a number of studies which look at the gap between the onset of
symptoms related to heart attack/acute myocardial infarction (MI) and the
decision to seek treatment. However, the evidence is not clear cut in terms of
whether women or men are more likely to delay. In addition, although delays in
help-seeking have important clinical implications - increasing the risk of mortality
or subsequent morbidity - research does not tell us whether differences in delay
between women and men are long enough to have clinical implications.'
'One review of over 100 studies of treatment-seeking delay in patients with heart
attack and stroke reported that women had longer delays before seeking help
when experiencing symptoms of heart attack, but there were no differences
between women and men when experiencing symptoms of stroke. A 2004 metaanalysis of delays in treatment-seeking reported that larger-scale studies with
greater statistical reliability were most likely to report longer delays in seeking
treatment for women than men. In addition, one study suggested that, while men
and women were equally likely to delay, the time elapsed before seeking treatment
was longer for women than men, increasing their mortality risk.'
Similarly, in the context of cancers (the second most important cause of the gender
gap in premature death), the relevant extracts from Wilkins et al are as follows,
firstly on patient delays in seeking health care advice, (page 81),
'For 10 different groups of cancers combined, 13 studies showed greater delay in
men (10 of the studies were rated as strong methodologically, 2 moderate and 1
insufficient), 11 studies showed greater delay in women (8 strong and 3 moderate),
and 23 studies found that gender had no impact (11 strong and 12 moderate). There
was only one cancer where research was decisive, but this was because there was
only one study for that cancer, otherwise gender had no impact or the effect of
gender was inconclusive.'
And on practitioner delay, Wilkins et al tell us, (page 82),
'The review by Macdonald et al (2004) of research on delay uses the term
"practitioner delay" for the period between first consultation for symptoms and an
appropriate referral. Overall, for the 10 different groups of cancers, four studies
show greater delay when the patient was male (two strong methodologically and
two moderate), six studies show greater delay for female patients (six strong), and
four studies found that the gender of the patient had no impact (four strong). As
with patient delay, there are conclusive results for individual cancers only when
there has been a single study (on skin cancer, in which women had greater delay).'
In summary, (Wilkins et al, 2008) provide no support at all for the idea that men's
delay in accessing health services is responsible for their adverse outcomes in the
two key areas of cardiovascular diseases and cancers.
The study 'Do men consult less than women? An analysis of routinely collected UK
general practice data' analysed GP consultation data from just under two million
men and two million women, (Yingying Wang et al , 2013). The crude consultation
rate was 32% lower in men than women. Accounting for reproductive-related
consultations substantially diminished but did not eradicate the gender gap (Figure
4.1). However, consultation rates in men and women who had comparable
underlying morbidities (as assessed by receipt of medication) were similar; men in
receipt of antidepressant medication were only 8% less likely to consult than
women in receipt of antidepressant medication, and men in receipt of medication to
treat cardiovascular disease were just 5% less likely to consult than women
receiving similar medication. These small gender differences diminished further,
particularly for depression, after also taking account of reproductive consultations.
Wang et al were unable to control for the effect of full time working, due to
limitations in the recorded data. However, as can be seen from Figure 4.1, the sex
difference in consulting rates is confined to the working years and disappears
below 16 and rapidly disappears above 60. It seems likely that if full-time working
were accounted for, it might eradicate entirely any residual sex difference. Support
for this contention is obtained from other studies, discussed below.
A by-product of the analysis of Wang et al is the significance of socioeconomic
status. The gender gap in consultation rate becomes successively greater as one
moves down the deprivation quintiles. This is in line with the general trend that
socioeconomic disadvantage affects men even more than women. Women in the
most deprived quintile consult their GP approximately 10% more often than
women in the least deprived quintile. In contrast, men in the most deprived quintile
consult their GP about 4% less often than men in the least deprived quintile.
Ian Banks and Peter Baker (2013) recognise the significance of full time working
on men's accessing health care services, and the exacerbation of this problem for
men in relative deprivation. They note (page 40), 'there are some specific groups
of men who are likely to face additional barriers to accessing primary care. Lowincome men in employment tend to have less flexible working hours and may lose
pay if they take time off to attend an appointment….We now know that men will
use primary care services that meet their needs. By providing a male-specific
service that is also open in the evenings, the Camelon men's health centre in
Scotland succeeded in attracting significant numbers of men, particularly from its
target group: men in their 40s, living in deprived communities.'
Figure 4.1: GP Consultation Rate per 1000 Person-Year by Gender and Age (5
years age bands) in 2010. From (Yingying Wang et al , 2013). This graph does not
include the effects of full time working nor the dramatically reduced gender gap for
diagnosed morbidities (see text).
A report by the European Commission, 'Access to Healthcare and Long-Term
Care: Equal for Men and Women?' observes,
'An additional cultural barrier that is worth mentioning mainly affects men and
relates to the flexibility of services. An explanation given in the UK for men's lower
use of primary care services is that the opening hours are incompatible with the
long working hours that characterise the UK labour market. Men are unable or
uninclined to access primary care services because they are more likely than
women to work full-time and to work more than 45 hours per week.' (EGGSI
coordinating team, 2009), page 105.
Similarly, Alan White and Karl Witty (2009), in their discussion of men's under use
of health services, noted that, (i) 80% more men than women in the UK work full
time, (ii) three times as many women work part-time, (iii) 50% more women who
work full time have flexible working arrangements, and, (iv) three times as many
men as women work more than 45 hours per week. They conclude that, for men
'attending for health checks during the working day is at best problematic, at worst
impossible'. They go on to observe that the majority of community health promotion
activities, such as weight loss groups, also take place during the working day. The
relevance of working patterns in men's access to health services has also been
raised by the National Pharmacy Association (Doward, 2012).
There are studies which, at least superficially, appear to blame men's underutilisation of healthcare services on negative masculine behaviour traits. For
example, in a review of the literature, Paul Galdas et al (2005) conclude in their
Abstract that,
'the growing body of gender-specific studies highlights a trend of delayed help
seeking when they (men) become ill. A prominent theme among white middle-class
men implicates "traditional masculine behavior" as an explanation for delays in
seeking help among men who experience illness.'
But a curious aspect of this conclusion is that it is based on a dismissal of gendercomparative studies. In respect of gender-comparative studies the paper includes
this summary, (page 620),
'The review of key gender-comparative help seeking studies does not fully support
the hypothesis that men are less likely than women to seek help when they
experience ill health. Although many studies note the relative under use of health
services and symptom reporting by men in comparison with women, conversely,
many also find an increase in help seeking in men compared with women, or indeed,
no significant difference in help-seeking behaviour between genders. The evidence
suggests that occupational and socioeconomic status, among others, as more
important variables than gender alone.'
Galdas et al leave one in the peculiar position of being asked to believe that men's
and women's delay in seeking healthcare services are comparable, yet, at the same
time, men's delay is to be blamed upon "traditional masculine behaviour". It rather
begs the question: what causes women's similar delay, then? One cannot help but be
suspicious that the "gender-specific" studies Galdas et al cite may have suffered
from an over-willingness to make individual male behaviour culpable for a socially
imposed disadvantage, namely working patterns.
A similar conflict between ostensible conclusions and research content is to be
found in the American study by James Leone et al (2016). The Abstract states that
'results suggest gender norms and masculine ideals may play a primary role in how
men access preventative health care'. But what we actually find within the paper is,
(page 269),
'Using hegemonic masculinity theory we explored whether predictors of men not
accessing health care would be due to a threat to perceived masculinity
(macho/machismo), stigma, reactivity, and weakness/vulnerability. However, stigma
and weakness/vulnerability did not play a role in the prediction model. This was
somewhat of a surprise seeing that male gender norms and masculinity are closely
related such that endorsement of male gender role norms often prompts some men
to adopt a hypermasculine (i.e., hegemonic masculinity) ideal. We found less rigid
gender role norms in our participants.'
And,
'We also assessed our conceptual model as to whether the TNC (theory of
normative contentment) would align to men not accessing health care. Specifically,
we were interested in fatalism, denial, low awareness of risks, and low knowledge;
this was somewhat consistent. Fatalism and lack of knowledge did not achieve
statistical significance in our model.'
Leone et al do not discuss the role of working patterns in men's health care access.
A specific example where the role of work has been definitively established is
'Identifying Work as a Barrier to Men's Access to Chronic Illness (Arthritis) SelfManagement Programs' by Lisa Gibbs (2007). She concluded in a Headnote,
'A qualitative study was conducted involving in-depth interviews with 17 men with
arthritis. This paper discusses the role of work as one of the factors affecting men's
access to arthritis self-management services. Work was found to be a significant
conceptual, structural, and social barrier due to: its role in relation to men's
concepts of health and fitness; practical difficulties in accessing services during
business hours; and sociocultural influences resulting in prioritising of work
commitments over health concerns. The structural, conceptual, and sociocultural
work influences were more of a constraint for men in the middle stages of life when
work and family obligations were greatest.'
In summary, the literature suggests that there is a smaller gender gap in accessing
healthcare than is popularly believed, especially when the apparent gap is adjusted
to allow for women's greater access for contraceptive, pregnancy, childcare and
national screening purposes. The latter is a disadvantage imposed on men, not an
aspect of male behaviour. The residual gender gap in access to primary healthcare,
as displayed by Figure 4.1, is probably due in the main to men's working patterns,
and the resulting difficulties of access to healthcare and community health
programmes during the working day.
There is a willingness to attribute men's indisputable health disadvantages to men's
lesser use of healthcare services, and to attribute this to men's destructive
masculine characteristics. However, this hypothesis does not survive inspection. Not
only is men's reduced access to healthcare not as marked as is often supposed, but
the part of this reduced access which is not explained by valid sex differences in
need may be explicable by working patterns. Whilst it might be argued that men's
working patterns are an individual choice, it would be disingenuous not to concede a
societal – and practical/financial – obligation which acts in this respect.
Finally, there are clear instances of poorer service provision for men, for example in
respect of the dearth of national health screening programmes for men and the
withholding of the HPV vaccination programme from boys for over 10 years. What
has not been addressed here, but is badly needed, is a close examination of exactly
what services for specific medical conditions are made available, and at what stage,
under the NHS. In times of cost cutting, what services are pruned back? Is one sex
more impacted than the other by such reducing provision? In passing I note just
one: the availability of groin hernia (inguinal hernia) operations on the NHS.
In their lifetime, 27% of men will suffer from a groin hernia. Surgical treatment is
relatively straightforward and takes only about 45 minutes. But in July 2018 it was
revealed that over half of men seeking relief from their hernias are now being
refused the operation on the NHS, (Spencer and Hargreaves, 2018). More than half
the health boards in England refuse NHS funding for the 45-minute procedure
unless patients are in enough agony to 'impede working life'. The criterion for
surgery is now that the man is in too much pain to work. Those who doubt the
hypothesis of male utility, take note: a man's pain is not sufficient reason for action
unless his function may be compromised. The proportion of men being thus denied
relief has doubled in four years. Surgeons have described the rationing rules as 'an
absolute disgrace'.
There are signs here that male health disadvantage is more due to society-wide
acceptance of such disadvantage than it is to destructive masculine traits. Adopting
a stance that traditional male gender norms are responsible ("it's men's own fault")
may be a subconscious means of avoiding acknowledging the implied empathy gap.
4.2 Global Health of Men
Although the focus of this review is on the UK, it is instructive also to consider
briefly the international context, including under-developed countries. The 'Global
Health 50/50 Report 2018' notes that, worldwide,
'Over the past 25 years, men have consistently suffered higher rates of ill-health
(measured as Disability Adjusted Life Years, DALYs) than women…... in our
sample of 40 NGOs, 14 stated that they focus exclusively on the health needs of
women and girls….., no organisation in our NGO sample focuses exclusively on the
health of men and boys, despite longstanding evidence of higher disease burden and
lower life expectancy among men. This analysis of the focus of NGOs speaks to
the need for organisations to truly adopt a gendered approach to programmes and
strategies in realising the right to health for everyone.' (Hawkes et al, 2018), page
18.
This recognition of the dangers of conflating gender equality with women, and the
importance of being driven by evidential data, is welcome. It is fully consistent with
the World Health Organisations 'Gender Fact Sheet': 'Gender equality in health
means that women and men, across the life-course and in all their diversity, have
the same conditions and opportunities to realise their full rights and potential to be
healthy, contribute to health development and benefit from the results'.
The Global Health 50/50 report also notes that the health organisations from which
they obtained their data are still dominated, in terms of senior staff, by men:
'Global health is led by men: Sixty-nine percent (69%) of organisations are headed
by men; Eighty percent (80%) of board chairs are men' (page 14). This further
reinforces the danger, alluded to in chapter one, of conflating the fortunes at the
top end of the male distribution with the misfortune at the bottom end of that
distribution. There is a risk of holding the misguided belief that the preponderance
of men in senior positions advantages the common run of men. It does not. Men in
power do not favour other men over women. It is a lesson that many of our feminist
MPs still need to learn.
4.3 Healthcare and Health Research Spending
In this section I use data from the USA, because quality data on healthcare and
health research spending disaggregated by sex is less readily available for the UK.
One needs to distinguish between spending on medical research and spending
directly on the healthcare of individuals. Sex-specific data shows that both are
biased towards women.
4.3.1 USA Healthcare Spending by Sex
Cylus et al (2011) have examined USA healthcare data for 2004. Table 4.1 gives
their numerical results covering all ages and indicating that overall healthcare
spending on women was 34% greater than that on men (or 32% when calculated
per capita). Figure 4.2 gives their data in various age ranges. This shows that there
is no sex difference up to age 18, but thereafter spending is greater on women than
men. To quote,
'Per capita differences were most pronounced among the working-age population,
largely because of spending for maternity care. Except for children, total spending
for and by females was greater than that for and by males, for most services and
payers. The gender difference in total spending was most pronounced in the
elderly, as a result of the longer life expectancy of women.' (Cylus et al, 2011).
Table 4.1: Personal Healthcare Spending in the USA Disaggregated by Sex, 2004,
from (Cylus et al, 2011)
Service Women ($B) Men ($B) Women/Men
Hospital care 307.0 259.4 1.18
Physician and clinical
services
230.8 162.8 1.42
Nursing home care 76.7 38.5 1.99
Prescription drugs 109.6 79.2 1.38
All other services 163.7 122.1 1.34
All personal health care 887.9 662.0 1.34
Figure 4.2: Personal Healthcare Spending in the USA Disaggregated by Sex and
Age Range, 2004, from (Cylus et al, 2011)
A more recent analysis of USA healthcare spending is that of Dieleman et al (2016).
Their data for year 2013, disaggregated by sex and age, are displayed in Figure 4.3.
This Figure tells essentially the same story as that of Cylus et al (2011), except that,
by year 2013, the cost implications of ADHD had become apparent in the data.
They observe,
'Estimated spending differed the most between sexes at age 10 to 14 years, when
males have health care spending associated with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, and at age 20 to 44 years, when women have spending associated with
pregnancy and postpartum care, family planning, and maternal conditions. Together
these conditions were estimated to constitute 25.6% of all health care spending for
women from age 20 through 44 years in 2013. Excluding this spending, females
spent 24.6% more overall than males in 2013.'
It is rather alarming that the use of behaviour altering drugs on boys is now so
extensive that its cost is evident in overall healthcare statistics (see also chapter
17). It is also worth emphasising Dieleman et al's last point: healthcare spending on
women overall exceeds that on men by 24.6% even when spending on pregnancy,
postpartum care, family planning, and maternal conditions are excluded.
Figure 4.3: Personal Healthcare Spending in the USA Disaggregated by Sex and
Age Range, 2013, from (Dieleman et al, 2016).
4.3.2 USA Health Research Spending by Sex
Data on USA health research spending is taken from the Office of Research on
Women's Health 'Report of the Advisory Committee on Women's Health, Fiscal
Years 2015/16', (National Institutes of Health, 2017). Table 2 of this 452 page
report breaks down health research spending by disease, by sex, and for years
2015 and 2016. Table 4.2 reproduces the data for 2016, for the major headline
disease categories only. The data relate to the research budgets of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the National Institutes of
Health (NIH). Most research spending (80%) is not sex-specific. However, where it
is sex specific, more is spent on women. Across all diseases, female-specific health
research receives 2.32 times as much funding as male-specific research. There are
only two categories where men's health research funding exceeds women's,
namely substance abuse and environmentally induced diseases (and for these the
spend is close to parity). Most odd is the spend on cancers, for which the female
specific funding is 21.2 times the male-specific funding. Also surprising is the
category "immune disorders". This would presumably include AIDS, which affects
substantially more men than women, and yet the spend on women is 12.3 times that
on men.
Table 4.2: USA Health Research Budgets (HHS and NIH), 2016, by Sex
Disease Women $M Men $M Both $M Ratio W/M
Cancers 1,251 59 4,326 21.2
Cardiovascular/Pulmonary 520 388 3,220 1.34
Reproductive 352 21 629 16.8
Ageing 695 399 953 1.74
Endocrine/Gastrointestinal 362 227 675 1.60
Substance abuse 327 342 780 0.96
Behavioural 51 24 1,298 2.13
Mental Health 106 46 1,266 2.30
Infectious diseases 354 209 3,677 1.69
Immune disorders 148 12 423 12.3
Neurological/Muscular/Bone 88 40 1,951 2.20
Kidney/Urological 36 18 559 2.00
Ophthalmic/Oral 37 12 1,315 3.08
Environmentally diseases 13 14 228 0.93
Service, training,
miscellaneous
201 147 4,444 1.37
TOTAL $4.54B $1.96B $25.74B 2.32
4.4 The Empathy Gap in Men's Health
To summarise chapters 3 and 4, we have seen that men in England and Wales are
43% more likely to die before age 75 than women, and 78% more likely to die
before age 45. Men have a higher death rate from almost all causes. We have seen
that psychosocial factors are certainly significant in this shorter male longevity, but
that biological sex differences also play a part. The latter are evident in the fact
that the death rate for male babies and young boys exceeds that of females of the
same age by about 10% to 30%.
Suicide is the biggest killer of men under 45 (see chapter 18 for more on suicide).
Almost all fatal accidents at work are of men (97%). This is because of
occupational polarisation (see chapter 7) which results in the at-risk occupations
being overwhelmingly employers of men (construction, agriculture, waste,
recycling, transport and manufacturing). Non-fatal accidents at work are also
dominated by men.
The number of lost days of work per 100,000 employees due to occupational ill
health is greater for women than men, though both sexes report the same number
of incidents of ill health. Physical ill health due to occupation is more common in
men, whilst occupational stress, depression and anxiety is more common in women.
Fatal occupational health issues are dominated by men.
Both sexes suffer reduced longevity as a result of socioeconomic deprivation, but
this demographic effect is significantly more marked for men. The intersection of
deprivation and being male leads to the greatest health disadvantage.
Men suffer disadvantage in respect of cancers in several ways. Apart from the sexspecific cancers, more men die prematurely (<75) of every type of cancer. More
men than women die from occupational cancers, especially mesothelioma. Prostate
cancer now kills more men than breast cancer kills women, but there is no
screening programme for prostate cancer whilst there is a screening programme
for breast cancer. HPV infections are responsible for similar numbers of premature
cancer deaths in both sexes, but it took ten years of lobbying by health bodies and
others to persuade the Government to vaccinate boys as well as girls. Moreover,
women have an NHS screening programme for the main HPV-induced cancer,
cervical cancer, but there is no screening programme for oropharyngeal cancers
which predominantly affect men and are mostly caused by HPV. Lung cancer, the
biggest cancer killer, has a higher mortality in men. There is also a greater
occupational exposure element to men's acquisition of lung cancer than is the case
for women.
It is often claimed that men contribute to their own health disadvantage by their
reluctance to seek medical advice in a timely fashion. However, a review of the
evidence suggests this is less significant than is often supposed. Moreover, in as far
as this may be a factor, men's lower GP consultation rates are probably largely a
consequence of their difficulty in accessing health services due to working full
time. The presumption that men create their own disadvantage by failing to look
after themselves - perhaps due to hegemonic masculine norms - appears to be
another instance of maintaining the appearance of agency with individual men
themselves ("it's their own fault") rather than accepting any element of societal
disadvantage.
The impact of inflexible working hours on GP consultation rates, and hence
potentially on health outcomes, is more marked for socioeconomically
disadvantaged men. The reverse is the case for women.
One issue which is sometimes cited as a health disadvantage for women is that
trials of new drugs tend to be carried out on more men than women (Woodruff,
2010). Men and women are biologically different in a myriad of ways, and in
particular they metabolise drugs differently. Consequently, the sex bias in testing
may disadvantage women as regards the effectiveness of the drugs produced.
However, test subjects in drug trials are volunteers. There is some risk in being
such a volunteer. Sometimes a trial goes horribly wrong (Nelson, 2017). Where
there is risk, you can expect there to be more men volunteering than women. The
problem with under-representation of women in drug trials is that too few women
volunteer (Westervelt, 2015).
Perhaps the most stark example of the empathy gap in the context of health is
that, in December 2015, the Chief Medical Officer for England produced a report
"The Health of the 51%: Women" (Davies, 2015) but she has refused to produce
an equivalent for men (insideMAN, 2016). This is curious in view of the shorter life
expectancy of men, and the fact that this is due primarily to cardiovascular
diseases and cancers, causes which are firmly within the Chief Medical Officer's
remit.
Caroline Dinenage, then Minister of State in the Department of Health and Social
Care, has seen fit to refer to the NHS as the National He Service, (Ley, 2018). She
was speaking of the staff in the NHS. In similar vein, Health Secretary Matt
Hancock has more recently opined that, 'we must build an NHS that works for
women', (Blanchard, 2019). Perhaps these Ministers should concentrate more on
the service users of the NHS, rather than viewing the NHS simply as a vehicle for
female empowerment. But man-bashing is a popular sport amongst our political
class, and men's myriad health disadvantages do nothing to ameliorate it in the
context of the NHS.
In 2014, the then Health Secretary, Jeremy Hunt, called for 'more oestrogen to
dilute the testosterone in NHS boardrooms', claiming that women make better
leaders than men. He was of the view that there is a macho and bullying culture in
the NHS which would be cured by promoting more women to senior positions,
(Donnelly, 2014). No empirical evidence is necessary to support such assertions in
our culture now; we have been conditioned to believe such statements without
daring to demur. Even Ministers may now use the male hormone as a pejorative
and attract only praise, not criticism. In the same article, the Chief Medical
Officer, Sally Davies, complained that women who were already in senior positions
were not using their positions to promote more women sufficiently often.
These sentiments, expressed by the most senior Government officials in health
care, do not seem fully consistent with the ethos of equality. Whilst Dinenage and
Hancock and Hunt and Davies were referring to senior NHS staff, it's worth noting
that total NHS staff are 75% women (see chapter 7). Recall that Hunt was the
same Health Secretary who withheld the HPV vaccine from boys. And Davies is
the same Chief Medical Officer who saw fit to produce the report 'The Health of
the 51%: Women', with no equivalent for men. So their views should not be
assumed to have no impact on the health services they were charged with guiding.
An illustration of the operation of the gender empathy gap is provided by
comparing screening women for breast cancer with the PSA test for prostate
cancer. The reason always cited for not having a screening programme for prostate
cancer is that the PSA test is unreliable. But 25% of men with a PSA over 4 ng/mL
do turn out to have prostate cancer (National Cancer Institute, 2017), though this
may simply be the prevalence in the general population over a certain age (U.S.
Preventive Services, 2018). However, the use of screening in the USA has been
claimed to result in a far smaller percentage of late diagnoses of prostate cancer.
Contrast this with the breast cancer screening programme based on the
mammogram, for which there are persistent reports that it saves no lives, or very
few (Jaggar, 2018) (Health Impact News, 2018). In fact, there are claims it does
more harm than good due to over-diagnosis and detection of tumours which
precipitate traumatic treatments but which would never have grown to be life
threatening. Up to 80% of positive mammogram results are said to be instances of
such 'overdiagnoses'. Similar criticisms can, of course, be raised against PSA
testing. Screening for prostate cancer based on PSA testing results in
overdiagnosis in 20% to 50% of cases, (U.S. Preventive Services, 2018). It is not
my purpose to argue in favour of PSA based screening for prostate cancer. It may
well be that this would not be a net benefit to men, as argued by (Prostate Cancer
UK, 2016a). My point is only that one could reasonably argue that the existing
mammogram screening programme for breast cancer is no better motivated.
There was a top news story in May 2018 regarding nearly half a million UK women
in the age range 68 to 71 having missed their routine mammogram. The Health
Secretary and NHS chiefs were obliged to apologise publicly as stories circulated
that 130 to 270 women may have died as a result (Parry and Tolhurst, 2018). The
women in question will have had 5 or 6 previous mammograms since age 50, so they
had not been neglected entirely. On the same basis, how many men might have died
from not having a prostate cancer screening programme at all?
In view of the shortcomings of both the PSA and mammogram tests it is not clear
which sex is better served by the current arrangements: to have, or not to have, a
screening programme. But it seems that the different decisions for the two sexes
can be related to the ancient perceptions of gender: vulnerable women, hardy men.
In truth, both sexes are comparably vulnerable to cancer. The sentiment is
inapplicable, but psychology is not so easily bypassed. The sentiment of female
vulnerability is amplified by influential women's lobby groups and thus favours a
decision to take action, and to be seen to take action, in implementing screening. In
the case of men, in contrast, a decision based on cool logic and statistical evidence
has proved more acceptable, unhampered by empathy. Decisions unhampered by
empathy are sometimes the better ones. Despite my theme, empathy is not an
unalloyed good in every case.
But whoever comes off best, the lack of a prostate cancer screening programme is
not to be laid at the door of individual men as being "their own fault". And it would
be unreasonable to blame individual men for choosing to work in occupations which
have high death or disease rates. Women are not queuing up to work in these DAD
(dirty and dangerous) jobs, and yet they are often the jobs that most need doing if
society is to function. Nor is it men's own fault that testosterone is an immune
suppressant, or that men's mortality from many diseases exceeds women's. The
oft-repeated claim that men don't look after their health so well as women look
after theirs, whilst it might be true to some degree, seems to have been
exaggerated. It is a convenient rationalisation, though, behind which lurks the
empathy gap.
5. Male Genital Mutilation: History and Harm
Not the violent conflict between parts of the truth, but the quiet suppression of half
of it, is the formidable evil; there is always hope when people are forced to listen
to both sides; it is when they attend to only one that errors harden into prejudices,
and truth itself ceases to have the effect of truth, by being exaggerated into
falsehood.
John Stuart Mill (1806 – 1873), On Liberty
The non-therapeutic removal of male minors' foreskins is arguably the starkest
example of the empathy gap. There is immediately an issue of terminology. The
non-therapeutic excision of the foreskin is generally called "circumcision" or
"male circumcision" (MC) in popular discourse. However, the term "circumcision"
is a euphemism. It literally means merely "a circular cut", and so is not specific to
the penis. People opposed to the practice (sometimes called "intactivists") tend to
refer to non-therapeutic MC as "male genital mutilation" (MGM). Given the
dictionary definition of "mutilate" as 'to injure, disfigure, or make imperfect by
removing or irreparably damaging parts', (Dictionary.com, 2018), the designation
as MGM is reasonable. It is not necessary to make any analogy with female genital
mutilation for this terminology to be applicable. However, it would be lacking in
compassion to refer to a medically necessary circumcision as a mutilation.
Similarly, one could reasonably argue that if an adult man willingly undergoes a
non-therapeutic circumcision, referring to the resulting voluntary modification as a
mutilation would not be appropriate. Consequently, I shall use the term MGM as a
synonym for the non-therapeutic and non-consensual circumcision of males. For
male infants or boys too young to give meaningful consent, their non-therapeutic
circumcision is therefore MGM. Simply for variety I will use both the terms MGM
and the long-form "non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors" synonymously.
Almost all MC is MGM. Therapeutic circumcision is a very small fraction of all
circumcisions, and consensual but non-therapeutic MC of adult men quite rare
(other than in African rites involving adolescents).
In the West there is no ambivalence regarding non-therapeutic interference with
female genitalia. The practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) is prevalent in
some countries, especially in central Africa and the Middle East. However, the
practice is universally reviled in Western countries, and explicitly a criminal
offence in most. Countries with a high incidence of FGM also have a high incidence
of MGM, usually associated with religious beliefs, especially Islam. In contrast, in
Western and Anglophone countries, MGM can be prevalent despite FGM being
illegal and of comparatively low incidence. Indeed, in the West, the practice of
MGM arose within the white, "culturally Christian" demographic, whilst the
incidence of FGM within this demographic has always been essentially zero. The
Western practice of MGM, within the Christian-legacy demographic, arose without
any religious motivation, in contrast to the overtly religiously motivated Judaic and
Islamic practices. The question arises, therefore, whether there is a common
psychological motivation for MGM between these disparate cultures which
underlies the superficial motives. This is discussed in this chapter.
In this chapter the anatomy and function of the male foreskin are reviewed briefly.
This is important because there is near universal ignorance about the foreskin.
Staggeringly, even the mechanical function of the foreskin in normal sexual
intercourse is unappreciated by most members of the public. This leads to
embarrassingly ignorant descriptions of the foreskin as a "useless flap of skin".
The historical origins of MGM in various cultures are discussed. The various
procedures adopted for foreskin removal are described, together with the
practitioners who carry out the procedures, followed by a review of the prevalence
and incidence of MGM in Western and Anglophone countries.
From experience I know that many people first become concerned about
circumcision after viewing videos of the procedure being carried out, such as
(Duterte, 2018) or the rather less graphic depictions in the film 'American
Circumcision' (Marotta, 2018). If you do not fancy watching the genital cutting
itself, the photos of boys' faces during the procedure may be an alternative, as
shown by (Pleasance, 2017). Distressing to witness though these operations may
be, in my opinion this alone does not constitute a valid objection to the procedure.
Painful or distressing medical procedures are commonly accepted because of their
benefits thereafter. The emotional reaction to a video of a baby's genitals being cut
is understandable, but any case against MGM should not rest primarily upon that.
Instead the case for or against MGM must rest primarily upon three issues,
Whether there is long-term harm caused by MGM,
Whether MGM confers significant long-term medical benefit, as is claimed by
proponents, and,
The right of the individual to protection from non-consensual violation of their
bodily integrity.
The first of these key issues is addressed in this chapter, whilst the second and
third are addressed in the next chapter. Male circumcision is discussed with two
restrictions,
Only the circumcision of minors is of concern here. If adult men opt to have their
foreskin removed, that is entirely their own business. The issue is the removal of
foreskins from babies or boys too young to make meaningful, uncoerced, decisions
of their own.
Only Western and Anglophone countries will be discussed. This will include both
the "culturally Christian" demographic as well as other religious groups present
within these societies and associated with MGM (Islam and Judaism).
In particular, I shall not address here those MC practices associated with "coming
of age" rituals, common in sub-Saharan Africa. These involve physically mature
young men (though they may be minors by Western standards). The rituals
involved are invariably brutal. Their brutality is their point, the key requirement
being for the young man to show no pain. Anyone seeking an illustration of how a
society promotes the suppression of male emotions need look no further than this.
Many hundreds of these young men are permanently maimed annually in one
district of South Africa alone, the Eastern Cape. Photographic evidence of what
"maiming" means in this context can be found on the web site of Dingeman Rijken
(2013a). Since 1995, over 1133 young men in Eastern Cape have died from these
maimings (Rijken, 2013b). Nearly half a million young men have been hospitalised
in the Eastern Cape and Limpopo districts alone in the period 2008 to 2014 (South
African Health News Service, 2014). These indisputably destructive ritual
circumcisions are now attracting Western tourists, (Fisher, 2016). What better
illustration of the empathy gap do you want? It is inconceivable that female genital
mutilation could ever be a tourist attraction. Such a thing would be utterly hateful,
even to cultures which practice FGM.
Is it these young African men's own fault that such barbaric rites are expected of
them? In many cases it is not voluntary, they are cut by force. In some cases the
cutting-by-force in African countries occurs where traditional practices are being
pursued under the cover of health programs, in which the West is deeply
implicated, e.g., (Hudson, 2012), (Lagat, 2015). This has resulted in schoolboys
being subjected to MGM at school without their consent or the consent of their
parents. It has resulted in brutal circumcision mobs, where men are being obliged
to unzip in the street to prove they have been circumcised and face forced
circumcision where they stand if not.
No doubt some people will say that this is a phenomenon of the patriarchy, that
mass manifestation of hegemonic masculinity. But such people will have to explain
why it is that, in these cultures, it is just as often the women who insist that men
are cut – so as to render them "fit to be our husbands". James Rush (2014) reports
the following case,
'A dozen men are ambushed, stripped naked and forced to undergo circumcisions in
Kenya after their wives complained that they were not as good in bed as
circumcised men. One of the wives, Anne Njeri, who witnessed the incident, told
the radio station: "We are happy with the move to have such men cut because
uncircumcised men are dirty and do not perform well in bed and thus we are sure
their wives will now enjoy their marriages."'
The men were from tribes which did not usually practice circumcision but were
living amongst those who did. It is a matter of enforced "integration". MGM was
carried out by force, on the filthy ground, by a mob. This was despite the men's
best endeavours to hide and seek help, (BBC News, 2015). “This Is Africa" (2015)
documents another case, with a video. A 39-year-old man who had 11 children was
exposed as uncircumcised by his ex-wife, thus precipitating a mob who carried out
the cutting by force on the bare ground. This is MGM as a weapon of revenge,
instigated by a woman.
Shovelling all blame for such things onto "the patriarchy" will not wash. Societies
include women, and women have always exercised moral power in society. Women,
too, are active participants in cultures, especially in matters pertaining to sex.
However, I will say no more about circumcision practices outside the West or
Anglophone countries.
5.1 Anatomy, Histology and Function of the Foreskin
Proponents of MGM often refer to the foreskin as 'an unnecessary piece of skin'
or even 'a non-essential bacteria trap', (Kay, 2011), (Kay, 2016). My purpose here
is to expose this opinion to critical appraisal.
In terms of anatomy, histology and function, the foreskin is a complex organ in its
own right. Thanks to the prevalence of circumcision, many people will be
unfamiliar with what a foreskin even looks like. The upper picture of Figure 5.1
shows the foreskin in place over the glans (the head of the penis), with the penis in
the flaccid state. The lower picture of Figure 5.1 shows the erect penis with the
foreskin fully retracted, exposing the glans. Figure 5.2 shows the frenulum, the
connecting tissue between the foreskin and the glans. The frenulum forms an
inverted V shape (on erection). The tissue between the frenulum and the bottom of
the glans (the "corona") is known as the "frenulum delta". The frenulum, the
frenulum delta and the glans are all normally covered by the foreskin and hence
invisible in the flaccid penis.
Figure 5.1: The Foreskin, Covering the Penis when Flaccid (upper picture) and
Retracted when Erect (lower picture). Credit: 123GLGL - Own work, CC BY-SA
3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=18107314
Figure 5.2: The frenulum
In my 66 years of life, I have never yet met a man who has a foreskin who
regarded it as a "useless bit of skin". This is a view I have only ever heard
expressed by people without a foreskin. Reasonably, one would expect the opinion
of those who do have a foreskin to carry greater weight regarding its desirability
than those who have never had a foreskin in their adult life. I have also never
heard a man with a foreskin complain that it presented any hygiene difficulties.
The penis, complete with foreskin, is extremely easy to wash: easier than a vagina
or one's finger nails, for example. The myth common amongst the circumcised, that
the intact foreskin is forever clogged with smegma, is just that – a myth.
There is a staggering degree of public ignorance about the function of the foreskin
in heterosexual "penis in vagina" sexual intercourse. Those who incline to the
"useless bit of skin" opinion are clearly unaware of it. The rolling action of the
foreskin over the glans is a clever piece of natural engineering which reduces the
relative sliding between the penis and the vaginal wall, thus reducing the need for
lubrication. It forms a rolling bearing. For those who do not have a foreskin, you
will probably need a video to convey what this means, see for example (Penis
Project, 2016) or (Complete Man, 2018).
The same rolling action of the foreskin over the glans is deployed in masturbation
by those males who have a foreskin. Masturbation by circumcised men is generally
facilitated by lubrication. Thus, whilst lack of a foreskin does not prevent
masturbation, it does frustrate its most convenient accomplishment.
Except during sexual arousal, when the penis becomes erect and extended, the
glans is normally covered by the foreskin. The foreskin therefore acts as a
protective covering for the glans which prevents the mucosal tissue of the glans
from drying out. Without a foreskin, the glans is permanently dry. Over time, the
glans of a circumcised penis becomes keratinized. One might expect this exposure
and keratinization to lead to a loss of sensitivity in the glans of the circumcised
penis. The evidence for and against this expectation is reviewed in section 5.5.1.
The detailed histological investigations by Taylor and Lockwood (1996) and by
Cold and Taylor (1999) revealed, perhaps for the first time, the complexity of the
foreskin and its density of nerves. These authors identified the 'ridged bands'
emanating from the frenulum into the frenulum delta. They determined that this
tissue contained more Meissner's corpuscles than the glans, these Meissner's
corpuscles being nerve endings which are especially sensitive to light touch. In
contrast they opined that the glans has quite low fine-touch discrimination. They
concluded that 'the innervation difference between the protopathic sensitivity of
the glans penis and the corpuscular receptor-rich ridged band of the prepuce is part
of the normal complement of penile erogenous tissue' and that 'the prepuce is a
specialized, specific erogenous tissue'. Since MC oblates this tissue, they
recommended that 'surgical excision should be restricted to lesions that are
unresponsive to medical therapy'. These authors were also the first to identify the
significance of the dartos muscle, which is almost entirely contained within the
prepuce and is therefore lost on circumcision. This renders the penis 'less able to
make positional adjustments during erection' and may account for dispositional
differences in a penis subject to MC.
More recently this perception of the sensitivity of the foreskin and its frenular
structures has been argued by McGrath (2000) and McGrath (2011). In McGrath's
view, the frenulum is a junction for a nerve system which radiates out into the
foreskin via the 'ridged bands'. The part of the foreskin immediately adjacent to
the ridged bands and the frenulum vein forms the frenulum delta which is claimed
by McGrath to be the most sensitive area of the penis. Note that the frenulum, the
ridged bands and the frenulum delta would be invisible, on the underside of the
foreskin, when the foreskin is in place covering the glans.
Older textbooks and papers refer to the source of penile sensation as being solely
the glans and often justify the existence of the prepuce by stating that it merely
protects the 'sensitive' glans. The work alluded to above suggests these statements
are contrary to the neuro-anatomical and physiological facts, and that the prepuce
is actually the primary sensory platform of the penis. McGrath claims that the
human penis has a different nerve structure from other primates, and different also
from female clitoral nerve structure. He claims that 'the foreskin is undoubtedly
the main sensory unit of the penis' and has the 'highest concentration of sensory
nerve endings anywhere on the body'. Clearly, if this perception is correct, the
removal of the foreskin is a major loss to a man.
5.1.1 Foreskin Development: Retraction
A further example of the profound ignorance which surrounds the foreskin
concerns its natural development in young boys. At birth the mucosa of the glans
and the inside of the prepuce are fused together. Retraction of the foreskin is
therefore prevented – and is not desirable. Staggeringly, until very recently, even
doctors were unaware of the natural development of the foreskin, especially as
regards retractability. In its natural development, the foreskin gradually becomes
looser and more easily rolled back over a number of years. My own foreskin did
not retract fully, to the extent illustrated in Figure 5.1, until I was 10 years old, and
that is within the normal range. Figures 5.3 and 5.4 plot data from (Oster, 1968)
and (Hiroyuki Kayaba et al, 1996). To quote the latter, 'the incidence of a
completely retractable prepuce gradually increased from 0 percent at age 6
months to 62.9 percent by 11 to 15 years'.
Medical ignorance of the normal development of the foreskin has led to
widespread spurious diagnoses of phimosis, i.e., an interpretation that lack of full
retractability in boys is pathological. Failure of the foreskin to fully retract in boys
prior to physical maturity is rarely a condition requiring medical intervention,
unless there are other complicating factors.
Figure 5.3: Incidence of Preputial Adhesions in Various Age Groups. Data from
(Oster, 1968) replotted by (Cold and Taylor, 1999)
5.2 The History of MGM
Circumcision of males is required, or held to be desirable, within the major
Abrahamic-Semitic religions, Judaism and Islam. Both worldwide and in Western
countries, Muslims are far more numerous than Jews. Islam's holiest book, the
Qur'an (Koran), does not mention circumcision. However, much of the teachings
and practices of Mohammed are in the hadith (sayings or teachings) and this text is
amongst those regarded by Muslims as sources of their religious lore. One of these
hadith suggests that both male and female circumcision was recognized by the
Prophet. Circumcision was said to be the Prophet's way (sunnat) for men and
ennobling (makrumah) for women, (al-Akiti, 1996). However, whilst most Muslims
continue to be circumcised, there are some Muslims who question the practice,
(Quranic Path, 2018).
Figure 5.4: Retractability of the Prepuce in Various Age Groups. After (Hiroyuki
Kayaba et al, 1996). Tight preputial ring is indicated in blue; retraction of the
prepuce to at least the glans corona is indicated in red.
The book 'Marked in Your Flesh' by Leonard Glick (2005) provides a history of
circumcision in the Judaic culture, in which MC is carried out in a ceremony called
Brit Milah. Glick himself is against circumcision. As in Islam, there is also an anticircumcision movement in Judaism which seeks to replace Brit Milah with Brit
Shalom, which involves the ceremony without the genital cutting (Oryszczuk,
2018). The religious origin of the practice for Jews is Abraham's covenant with
Jehovah, (Genesis 17, 10-14),
'This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after
thee: every male among you shall be circumcised. And ye shall be circumcised in
the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of a covenant betwixt me and
you. And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every male
throughout your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of
any foreigner that is not of thy seed. He that is born in thy house, and he that is
bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in
your flesh for an everlasting covenant. And the uncircumcised male who is not
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he
hath broken my covenant.'
This is clear, but people who are not inclined to believe that Abraham literally
heard Jehovah's voice may look for what lies behind this mythologized account.
Religious sacrifices were a common aspect of Old Testament cultures. The
circumcision 'covenant' might be interpreted as such a sacrifice, specifically a type
of child sacrifice which avoids the killing of the child. Abraham is, after all, the man
who very nearly sacrificed his own son. Circumcision appears as a far preferable
substitute. The relationship between circumcision and sacrifice is dealt with in
some detail in (Glick, 2005)
People wishing to look beyond religious accounts to sociological reasons for the
rise of circumcision in some cultures will be interested in the opinion of Moses
Maimonides, the Jewish intellectual and physician, who expressed the following
view as early as the twelfth century,
'With regard to circumcision, one of the reasons for it is, in my opinion, the wish to
bring about a decrease in sexual intercourse and a weakening of the organ in question,
so that this activity be diminished and the organ be in as quiet a state as possible. It has
been thought that circumcision perfects what is defective congenitally…How can
natural things be defective so that they need to be perfected from the outside, all the
more because we know how useful the foreskin is to that member? In fact this
commandment has not been prescribed with a view to perfecting what is defective
congenitally, but to perfecting what is defective morally. The bodily pain caused to that
member is the real purpose of circumcision. None of the activities necessary for the
preservation of the individual is harmed thereby, nor is procreation rendered
impossible, but violent concupiscence and lust that goes beyond what is needed are
diminished. The fact that circumcision weakens the faculty of sexual excitement and
sometimes perhaps diminishes the pleasure is indubitable. For if at birth this member
has been made to bleed and has had its covering taken away from it, it must indubitably
be weakened. In my opinion, this is the strongest of the reasons for circumcision. Jewish
men, sexually subdued and readily controlled by their wives, don't stray into mischief.
The power of his member has been diminished so that he has no strength to lie with
many lewd women.' (Maimonides, translation 1963)
Maimonides is clear: the purpose of MC is to diminish male sexual function. But
who benefits from a reduction in male sexuality? Moses Maimonides opines that it
is a form of control which society exercises on men to encourage stable family units
and discourage promiscuity. This explanation, in terms of diminished male sexual
function, unites the Judaic and Western-medical traditions, to which I now turn.
The term "Western-medical tradition" will be used to describe the practice of
MGM in Western countries, especially Anglophone countries, and amongst the
majority, white, "culturally Christian", demographic. This is a relatively new
cultural phenomenon, having arisen only in the 19th century.
Whilst Christianity is an Abrahamic religion, priority over the Old Testament is
most often given to the New Testament, the testament of Christ and his disciples.
St. Paul in (Galatians 5, 2-6) advises thus,
'Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to
do the whole law (i.e., the Judaic law). Christ is become of no effect unto you,
whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace. For we
through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. For in Jesus Christ
neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh
by love.'
This passage is to be interpreted as Paul warning that circumcision, as an outward
sign of Judaism, carries the risk that the individual who opts for circumcision will
revert to Judaism. In these early days of Christianity, Paul is attempting to
delineate clearly between the old (Jewish) religion, and the new Christian religion.
This passage makes clear that Paul regards circumcision as being a spiritual
irrelevance, but a potential practical threat in terms of encouraging apostacy. In
ruling that circumcision is not a requirement of Christianity, Paul is consistent with
the Council of Jerusalem of a few years earlier (circa 50 AD). Circumcision has
never been a requirement of any of the major branches of Christianity. For this
reason I opt for the designation "Western-medical tradition" rather than
"Christian tradition", which would be very misleading.
So, if the origin of the "Western-medical tradition" of circumcision does not lie in
religion, what did cause it? The motive was overtly to diminish sexual function. We
have already noted the role of MC in frustrating masturbation (though it does not
prevent the determined). We shall see below that reduction of sensitivity is a
defining characteristic of the circumcised penis. In 18th century Britain,
circumcision was regarded as a rather embarrassing curiosity associated especially
with Jews. We are informed by Robert Darby (2005) that 'between the mid 18th
century and the late 19th century, the foreskin was transformed from an
adornment which brought pleasure to its owner and his partners…to a useless bit
of flesh and an enemy of the state'. Darby lays out clearly the origin of the
Western medical tradition of MC in the obsession to stamp out masturbation and to
impose what was seen as moral purity upon boys. A quote conveys the prevailing
"wisdom"
,
'It (self abuse) lays the foundation for consumption, paralysis and heart disease. It
weakens the memory, makes a boy careless, negligent and listless. It even makes
many lose their minds; others, when grown, commit suicide…. Don't think it does
no harm to your boy because he does not suffer now, for the effects of this vice
come on so slowly that the victim is often very near death before you realize that
he has done himself harm. It is worthy of note that many eminent physicians now
advocate the custom of circumcision.' (Melendy, 1915)
It is not only in recent times that extraordinary claims have been made with no
empirical basis whatsoever. John Harvey Kellogg (1888) informs us,
'A remedy (for masturbation) which is almost always successful in small boys is
circumcision…..The operation should be performed by a surgeon without
administering an anaesthetic, as the brief pain attending the operation will have a
salutary effect upon the mind, especially if it be connected with the idea of
punishment, as it may well be in some cases.'
Many people opine that MGM and FGM are not to be compared because only
FGM was carried out specifically for the purpose of diminishing female sexuality
(by the patriarchy, of course). Such an opinion is founded, as they so often are,
simply on ignorance of history. Diminishing of male sexual function, whether it be
masturbation or intercourse, has always been the underlying purpose of MC. But it
was not only masturbation which 19th century authors claimed could be cured by
circumcision. There is hardly a disease known to man that has not at some time
been claimed to be cured by MC, see for example, (Medicalization of Circumcision
Timeline, 2014). The modern incarnation of such claims will be critiqued in chapter
6.
5.3 MGM Procedures, Practitioners and Risk
In the West, when MGM is motivated by religion or culture, it is carried out prior
to physical maturity. The Western-medical tradition usually carries out MC on the
new-born infant. Similarly, the Judaic tradition circumcises at the eighth day after
birth. The ceremony, known as Brit Milah, involves circumcision carried out by a
specialist Rabbi, known as a Mohel. In Islam, circumcision is carried out on older
boys, typically between 6 and 10 years old, though it can be younger in some cases.
In the West, Muslim circumcisions may use the same surgical procedures as the
Western-medical tradition, i.e., procedures carried out by doctors or qualified
nurses, the main difference being the age of the child.
However, both Muslims and Jews may also opt, even in the West, for circumcisions
carried out by persons without conventional medical training. Remarkably, anyone
can set themselves up as a circumciser in the UK. Not only is the practice of
circumcision tolerated, but it is not regulated either. Indeed, the lack of regulation
is probably related to the fact that the procedure is actually illegal (see section 6.4)
and any serious consideration of regulation would flounder on this simple fact. The
refusal to acknowledge that MGM is assault therefore involves a double whammy
of disadvantage in which boys are also unprotected from brutally incompetent
practitioners.
Unregulated circumcisers advertise their trade openly (Fogg, 2012). Even when the
result is the baby's death, punishments are remarkably lenient, or non-existent. In
2010 the ironically named Goodluck Caubergs bled to death at 27 days old after
suffering the ministrations of a nurse, Grace Adeyele. She carried out the
procedure using ordinary scissors, forceps and olive oil, and without anaesthetic.
Adeyele was subsequently convicted of homicide in 2013 but received only a
suspended sentence, (Britton, 2013). She had previously carried out over 1000
circumcisions. In 2012, when one month old Angelo Ofori-Mintah died from
massive blood loss two days after being circumcised at home by a Mohel, the Rabbi
faced no charges. A verdict of accidental death was returned, (Brent & Kilburn
Times, 2012). Had the Rabbi cut off any body part other than the baby's foreskin,
with the same result, it is certain that he would have been found guilty of homicide.
Taiwo Shittu was not quite so lucky as the Rabbi. But this bogus nurse got only 30
weeks in prison after the baby she circumcised in her home nearly bled to death
(Rucki, 2014). The idea of male disposability is, you will no doubt recall, a theory
entertained only by men's rights nutjobs.
Even surgical procedures carried out by qualified medical staff in hospitals make
uncomfortable viewing. In 2018 I attended a screening of the film 'American
Circumcision', (Marotta, 2018), in which almost all the women, and many of the
men, looked at their shoes during the footage of the procedure. I re-emphasise the
point made previously that the procedure itself, however distressing, does not
necessarily provide a valid motive for intactivism. However, the fact that the
procedure involves significant trauma requires that any claims of subsequent
benefit must be very clear indeed, and the benefit must be more than marginal.
There are a number of variants on the surgical procedure, depending upon the
device used to clamp the foreskin or guide the cut. The following sources link to
online videos. If I believed in trigger warnings I would issue one now – I don't, you
should know.
Two of the videos linked in the 2019 paperback edition of this book have been
removed by YouTube, namely (Kumar, 2010) and (Windisch, 2010). As usual with
YouTube it is unclear why, though I suspect the baby's screaming might have
something to do with it. However, here are some videos which are still available as
I write, though who knows for how long. The first uses the Plastibell method. The
video is very poor, but it has sound, (Indies18, 2008). The next also uses the
Plastibell method, (Arshad Shaikh, 2017). It has a much clearer video, though the
audio has been replaced by a music soundtrack. I leave you to consider why this
might be.
The next uses the Gomco clamp and is done by a nurse, her first circumcision, and
she seems pleased with her performance, (Megan, 2014). The video has no sound,
one wonders why not. Plenty of blood, though. Another Gomco clamp demo, again
with audio replaced by a music soundtrack, (Oraby, 2015). All techniques require
firmly restraining all four limbs of the baby, though in many videos this is obscured
by shrouds over the infant. The restraints are clear in this video.
And finally this one, (Duterte, 2018), uses a Mogen clamp and has audio, indicating
what you missed in those without.
For older boys, or adult men, an alternative to surgery for foreskin removal is an
ERCD (Elastic Radial Compression Device). These devices cause necrosis of the
foreskin over a period of time by starving it of blood flow due to radial compression
applied by an elastic ring. (World Health Organisation, 2012). These are the
devices of choice for the mass circumcision programme in Africa (see chapter 6).
5.3.1 Risks of the Procedure
A review by Bollinger (2010) estimated that 117 circumcision-related deaths of
infant boys occur in the USA annually. The study was based on claims that the
extent of circumcision related deaths is not normally appreciated, as the formal
cause of death is generally recorded as something else, e.g., surgical mishap,
infection, haemorrhage, cardiac arrest, stroke, reaction to anaesthesia, or even
parental neglect. Since there are over a million circumcisions annually in the USA,
this is a fatality rate of roughly 0.01%. This puts the risk of death in perspective.
However, if the procedure confers little or no benefit, and is actually harmful in
other ways, then any deaths at all are unacceptable. But Bollinger's estimate has
come in for severe criticism, (Circumcision News, 2010). Brian Earp et al (2018c)
analysed a vast database of inpatient records over a ten year period in the USA
and identified that just over 20 baby boys per million died following inpatient
circumcision and before leaving the hospital. They caution that this should not be
misinterpreted as the death rate due to circumcision,
'In the present analysis, we identified 1 early death for every 49,166 newborn
inpatient circumcisions, or 10.2 early deaths per 500,000 newborn inpatient
circumcisions. We stress that this figure refers to deaths that occurred subsequent
to the circumcision but prior to discharge within the same hospital admission; it
should not be taken to refer to the frequency of deaths caused by newborn
circumcision, as the present data cannot directly support such an inference.'
When circumcision was more fashionable in the UK, (Gairdner, 1949) reviewed
case histories of 90,000 circumcisions for boys under five years old from 1942 to
1947 in England and Wales, identifying 95 deaths attributable to circumcision, a
fatality rate of about 0.1%, ten times worse than Bollinger's implied rate in the
USA. This might be attributable to lower prevailing standards at that earlier date.
However, complications short of death are far more common. The NHS tells us that
the risk of circumcision carried out under proper medical conditions is as follows,
(National Health Service, 2016),
'There's between a 1 in 10 and a 1 in 50 chance that you'll experience bleeding or
infection. Other possible complications of circumcision can include permanent
reduction in sensation in the head of the penis, particularly during sex.'
Note that the NHS in the UK has no financial interest in promoting MC, which may
be why the NHS assessment of circumcision complications is more forthright than
in cultures in which the practice is more widespread. In just one Birmingham
hospital in one year, 105 boy babies were treated for complications arising from
circumcision, about one per month being life threatening, (Poole, G, 2014a). Up to
three baby boys per month are admitted to the Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital because of bleeding after home-based circumcisions, (BBC News, 2012).
As well as the immediate risks of the procedure, MC can cause a large range of
mutilations which are life-long. (CIRP, 2013) lists 292 references relating to
complications of circumcision, to which I cannot hope to do justice here. They
cover ablation of the penis, adhesions, amputations of the penis, anaesthesia
problems, apnoea, bleeding, balanitis, botched circumcisions, concealed penis,
cancer, circulatory complications, clamp complications, denudation of the penile
shaft, emesis, infection, impotence, keloid formation, meatitis/stenosis, skin
bridges, urethral fistula, urinary retention, urinary tract infection, and various
other things.
5.4 Prevalence and Incidence of MGM
The "prevalence" of MC is the proportion of the male population who have been
circumcised. "Incidence" refers to the proportion of a cohort being circumcised per
year.
The official policy of the NHS since 1949 has been that they do not offer nontherapeutic circumcision for religious, cultural, social or personal reasons, because
such circumcision is not a medical necessity. This 1949 decision led to a decline in
the number of individuals undergoing circumcision in the United Kingdom. A
number of NHS hospitals did re-start offering a free circumcision service locally to
parents, especially during the 1980s, however this afterwards became rarer. Some
Health Trusts take a view that offering non-therapeutic circumcision on the NHS is
desirable to prevent the use of 'back street' circumcisers. The Baby Centre (2013)
informs us,
'Not many NHS trusts fund circumcision for non-medical reasons, because the risks
outweigh the potential health benefits. However, sometimes religious or cultural
male circumcision is offered on the NHS, as it is safer than the circumcision being
carried out elsewhere. In Scotland, it's recognised that circumcision in a safe,
sterile environment, by a skilled surgeon, is better than the risks associated with
unsafe, unregulated ritual practices.'
For example, prior to 2013, when MC was carried out free of charge by the NHS in
Sheffield, about 200 non-therapeutic circumcisions were carried out for religious
reasons there (BBC News, 2013). The incidence of MGM in the UK was about
35% in the 1930s, reducing to about 20% in the 1940s, and reducing further to
around 6% by 1975, see sources cited by (CIRP, 2006). In the UK, Westernmedical circumcision was almost exclusively confined to the upper and uppermiddle classes. The prevalence of MC in the UK in 1970 has been reported to have
been 24% (Public Health Agency of Canada, 2007), decreasing to around 15.8% in
2015 (Dave et al, 2003).
The 2011 census revealed that, in England and Wales, there were 162,000 male
children of Muslim families not exceeding 4 years of age, and 9,000 male children
of the same age designated as Jewish, (Office for National Statistics, 2011).
Assuming all Muslim and Jewish boys are circumcised, and ignoring any other
circumcisions, this suggests about 34,000 circumcisions per year. The number of
Muslims in the UK has increased further, by about 15%, between 2011 and 2018,
but the estimate of 34,000 circumcisions per year in the UK will be accurate if the
percentage of Muslim and Jewish baby boys being circumcised is actually 85% and
the number of circumcisions amongst the rest of the population is negligible. This
suggests a current incidence of at least 8%.
Figure 5.5: Prevalence of MC in Australia, from (Circinfo, 2013)
Neonatal circumcision was routine in Australia until the 1970s. Based on 7,060 men
aged 16-59 responding to a survey in Australia in 2001/2, 59% were circumcised.
Restricting to the Australian-born the prevalence was even greater, 69%. In young
men aged 16-19 the prevalence was lower, but still substantial, at 32%, (Richters et
al, 2006). Figure 5.5 shows the rapidly falling prevalence of MC in Australia,
though it remains high in absolute terms.
Within the USA, the incidence of neonatal MGM carried out in hospitals
immediately after birth is plotted against year in Figure 5.6. This excludes
circumcisions not carried out in hospitals and also MC carried out at a later date.
The incidence has fallen from 64.5% in 1979 to 58.3% in 2010, (Owings and
Williams, 2010). In the west of the USA the incidence in 2010 was 40% whereas in
the midwest it was 70%. Between 1930 and 1965 the US incidence increased from
31% to a peak of 85% (Circumcision Reference Library, 2012). In the period 2005
to 2010, the prevalence of MC amongst American males aged 14 to 59 was 80.5%,
and 90.8 % for non-Hispanic white males.
Figure 5.6: Incidence of MGM in the USA, from (Owings and Williams, 2010).
In 1970 the prevalence of MC in Canada was 48% (Canadian Medical Association,
1996). In 2007 the incidence of neonatal MC in Canada was 32% (Public Health
Agency of Canada, 2007). 44% of mothers stated their decision to circumcise was
based on health or hygiene, 36% was to be like their father, and 17% was religious.
The very high prevalence of MC in the USA (about 80%) compares with just 2.7%
of the US population being Jewish or Muslim. In Canada, only about 4% of the
population is Jewish or Muslim, and in Australia 2.2%. These figures contrast with
MC prevalence in the recent past of around 30%. Hence the overwhelming
majority of circumcised men in these Anglophone countries are not circumcised for
religious reasons. This used to be true also in the UK, in the 20th century. But now,
the relative rarity of Western-medical circumcisions in the UK, together with the
steep increase in the UK Muslim population, means that the current incidence of
MC in the UK is overwhelmingly Muslim. Worldwide, Islam also accounts for the
overwhelming majority of circumcisions.
5.5 The Harmful Effects of MGM
In this section I address the potential long-term harm of MGM. The risk of the
procedure itself has been dealt with in section 5.3.
5.5.1 Studies of Sensitivity
According to McGrath (2011), circumcision removes around 50 cm² of skin. All the
ridged banding is lost. The frenulum may or may not be ablated but is usually
adversely affected. More than half the sensory nerve endings of the penis are lost.
The expectation that neonatal foreskin removal will result in sensitivity loss in the
glans has been reported to be measurable by some authors. For example, the
conclusion of Sorrells et al (2007) was,
'The glans of the circumcised penis is less sensitive to fine touch than the glans of
the uncircumcised penis. The transitional region from the external to the internal
prepuce is the most sensitive region of the uncircumcised penis and more sensitive
than the most sensitive region of the circumcised penis. Circumcision ablates the
most sensitive parts of the penis.'
The "transition region" to which Sorrells et al refer is the frenulum delta, and can
be seen on Figure 5.1 (lower) as the more pink region lying between the glans
corona and the exterior of the foreskin. However, the conclusion of Sorrells et al is
by no means uncontentious. For example, Kimberley Payne et al (2007) measured
penile sensitivity in sexually aroused men, on both the shaft and the glans of the
penis. They concluded that their results 'do not support the hypothesized penile
sensory differences associated with circumcision'. A similar negative result from
Clifford Bleustein et al (2005) was that, in a study of neonatally circumcised men,
'circumcision status does not significantly alter the quantitative somatosensory
testing results at the glans penis'.
Consequently, the effect of neonatal foreskin removal on the subsequent
sensitivity of the glans remains contentious. One of the problems in this area is that
there is no unique measure of "sensitivity". The apparent sensitivity depends upon
what sort of stimulus is deployed. Nor is there any guarantee that any given
method of measuring sensitivity will correlate with sexual performance. Most
importantly, though, the studies of Payne et al and Bleustein et al did not address
foreskin sensitivity, which is actually the key issue.
In that respect, the paper by Jennifer Bossio, Caroline Pukall and Stephen Steele
(2016) is of greater potential significance because it included sensitivity tests on
the foreskin. The results and conclusions from the paper are,
'Results: Penile sensitivity did not differ across circumcision status for any stimulus
type or penile site. The foreskin of intact men was more sensitive to tactile
stimulation than the other penile sites, but this finding did not extend to any other
stimuli (where foreskin sensitivity was comparable to the other sites tested).'
'Conclusions: Findings suggest that minimal long-term implications for penile
sensitivity exist as a result of the surgical excision of the foreskin during neonatal
circumcision. Additionally, this study challenges past research suggesting that the
foreskin is the most sensitive part of the adult penis. Future research should
consider the direct link between penile sensitivity and the perception of
pleasure/sensation. Results are relevant to policy makers, parents of male children
and the general public.'
This paper garnered some public attention and provides the most significant recent
counter-narrative to intactivists, (Craig A. , 2016) (Bakalar, 2016). One of the
authors, Caroline Pukall, a professor of psychology, was quoted in the latter article
thus, 'Neonatal circumcision doesn't make the penis less sensitive. We can
conclude that there are no significant differences in sensitivity between the
circumcised and uncircumcised groups'.
However, there is rather a mismatch between the results and the conclusions of
Bossio et al. Their results indicate that the foreskin is no less sensitive than other
parts of the penis. In fact, their results indicate that the foreskin is more sensitive,
but let that pass for now. Assume, for sake of argument, that the foreskin had the
same sensitivity as the glans. The foreskin is large – typically around 50 cm² in the
adult male. Its removal is therefore an indisputable loss of sensory tissue. Bossio et
al make no allowance for the extent, or quantity, of sensory tissue. They implicitly
assume that if any tissue remains which has unchanged sensitivity, then
'circumcision doesn't make the penis less sensitive'. On that basis one could claim
that one's hand would be no less sensitive if three fingers became completely numb
(or, equivalently, were removed). It is spurious to claim that 'there are no
significant differences in sensitivity between the circumcised and uncircumcised
groups' when the former has had a large proportion of tissue removed and this
tissue was, even according to Bossio et al, at least equally sensitive as the
remaining tissue.
There are further difficulties with the paper of Bossio et al, as identified by Earp
(2016). The statistics are low, just 30 circumcised and 32 intact men contributed to
the study. More importantly, the maximum age of men taking part was 37. This is a
serious criticism because anecdotal evidence is that serious loss of sensitivity in
men subject to neonatal or boyhood MGM becomes far greater in middle age.
(Consider how useful would be a study of the link between smoking and lung
cancer if confined to people no older than 37). Moreover, participants with a past
or present sexual dysfunction were screened out. To quote Earp (2016), 'it is
simply not possible to draw meaningful conclusions about the effects of infant
circumcision on sexual dysfunction in adulthood by first excluding men with sexual
dysfunction from the study sample'. It's hard to disagree. Other methodological
difficulties with Bossio et al include testing the foreskin sensitivity only on its outer
surface, where it is likely to be less sensitive. The underside of the foreskin, the
'ridged band' region, the frenulum, and the frenulum delta, were not tested, but
these are the areas identified by McGrath and others as the most sensitive areas
of the foreskin. Also, Bossio et al appear to have tested the penis in the flaccid
condition, which may not be indicative of typical sexual experience.
But most peculiarly, Bossio et al's own findings do show that the foreskin is more
sensitive than all other areas of the penis to tactile stimulation and to warmth –
despite all the above shortcomings. This is illustrated by Figure 5.7, taken from
Figure 2 of (Bossio et al, 2016) as replotted by (Earp, 2016). These histograms plot
detection thresholds to punctuate stimuli and thermal stimuli (smaller values
indicate greater sensitivity). The foreskin is the most sensitive of the penile
regions tested to both types of stimulus. Bossio et al also gave results for pain
thresholds. The foreskin was the most sensitive to heat-induced pain, whilst for
punctuate pain the foreskin was comparable to other regions of the penis.
However, the detection threshold is the better measure of sensitivity (pain, after
all, is unpleasant).
Figure 5.7: Penile Sensitivity Results of (Bossio et al, 2016) as replotted by (Earp,
2016). Note that the lower the detection threshold, as plotted below, the more
sensitive the region in question. Hence, these histograms indicate the greater
sensitivity of the foreskin.
5.5.2 Studies of Men's Sexual Experience after Circumcision
5.5.2.1 After Neonatal MGM
The direct tests of penile sensitivity discussed in section 5.5.1 may not necessarily
be a good indicator of sexual function and satisfaction in practice. This section
addresses the results of comparative studies of circumcised and intact men's sexual
function and experiences. The Abstract from Bensley and Boyle (2001) reads,
'Circumcised and genitally intact men, as well as female and gay partners having
sexual experience with both circumcised and intact men, were surveyed in order to
investigate the long-term effects of infant circumcision. Both circumcised men and
the sexual partners of circumcised men reported a number of adverse physical,
sexual, and psychological sequelae. Logistic regression analysis revealed that
circumcised men could be reliably classified as having penile scarring, need for use
of lubrication when undertaking sexual activity, reluctance to use condoms,
progressive decline in sexual sensitivity, as well as unhappiness with and reluctance
to think about their circumcision status. Female and gay sexual partners reported
that their circumcised partners were more likely to experience reduced sexual
sensation as compared with their intact partners, as well as dissatisfaction with
their orgasms and a wide range of negative emotions associated with being
circumcised. Evidently, there are many adverse physical, sexual and psychological
effects from infant circumcision, which need to be acknowledged in any discussions
pertaining to informed consent in relation to circumcision surgery.'
Not only circumcised men but also their female partners report less sexual
satisfaction. For example, Frisch et al (2011) observed that (omitting the detailed
statistics),
'Circumcised men reported more partners and were more likely to report frequent
orgasm difficulties after adjustment for potential confounding factors, and women
with circumcised spouses more often reported incomplete sexual needs fulfilment
and frequent sexual function difficulties overall, notably orgasm difficulties and
dyspareunia (painful intercourse). Findings were stable in several robustness
analyses, including one restricted to non-Jews and non-Moslems.'
Since the perception of sexual capacity is necessarily psychological, it is relevant
also to enquire into how men subject to MC regard their status vis- a-vis intact
men. The Abstract from Earp, Sardi and Jellison (2018) tells us,
'Critics of non-therapeutic male and female childhood genital cutting claim that
such cutting is harmful. It is therefore puzzling that 'circumcised' women and men
do not typically regard themselves as having been harmed by the cutting,
notwithstanding the loss of sensitive, prima facie valuable tissue. For female
genital cutting (FGC), a commonly proposed solution to this puzzle is that women
who had part(s) of their vulvae removed before sexual debut 'do not know what
they are missing' and may 'justify' their genitally-altered state by adopting false
beliefs about the benefits of FGC, while simultaneously stigmatising unmodified
genitalia as unattractive or unclean. Might a similar phenomenon apply to
neonatally circumcised men? In this survey of 999 US American men, greater
endorsement of false beliefs concerning circumcision and penile anatomy predicted
greater satisfaction with being circumcised, while among genitally intact men, the
opposite trend occurred: greater endorsement of false beliefs predicted less
satisfaction with being genitally intact. These findings provide tentative support for
the hypothesis that the lack-of-harm reported by many circumcised men, like the
lack-of-harm reported by their female counterparts in societies that practice FGC,
may be related to holding inaccurate beliefs concerning unaltered genitalia and the
consequences of childhood genital modification.'
Consistent with this, my personal experience has been that circumcised men
generally believe that having a foreskin is unhygienic; that the foreskin is dirty and
difficult to clean, though this is untrue. In criticising the pro-circumcision paper by
Tobian and Gray (2011), Boyle and Hill (2012) make some very hard-hitting
observations,
'Most doctors favouring MC are circumcised themselves. Circumcision status
'plays a huge role in whether doctors are in support of circumcisions or not'.
Circumcised doctors often defend circumcision by producing flawed papers that
minimise or dismiss the harm and exaggerate alleged benefits. Tobian and Gray are
products of circumcising cultures. Their article exudes Freudian defences of denial
and rationalisation. The authors seem blinded by their own circumcision‐generated
emotional needs. The readers of such articles must be aware of the culture‐of‐
origin and circumcision status of the authors, in order to properly evaluate
assertions about MC. Invariably, when biased opinions promoting MC are published
by doctors trying to justify their own psychosexual wounding, uncircumcised
doctors (who mostly see no need for amputating anatomically normal healthy
erogenous tissue) are quick to refute such overstated claims. We fully expect that
this distortion of the medical literature will continue until non‐therapeutic male
circumcision is prohibited by law and most circumcised male doctors have passed
from the scene.'
There is now a large number of publicly available video recordings providing men's
personal testimonies regarding their experience of the long-term harm of MGM. I
give just a few here, all of them doctors or professors. Gregory Boyle was the
professor of psychology at Bond University in Australia from 1993 to 2013. He
gives a passionate account of the harm he has suffered from MGM, (Gregory
Boyle, 2014), though the video has been made private in the last two years. John
Warren (2011), a UK doctor and the founder of NORM-UK, talks here about his
intactivism and how he realised in middle age that his diminishing sensitivity was
due to circumcision, after which he uncovered the whole unfortunate story. George
Denniston (2017) of Doctors Opposing Circumcision reminds us that there is no
national medical society in the world that recommends routine infant circumcision.
He describes MGM as an atrocity. I leave the reader to contemplate why there is a
warning on this video. Ken McGrath (2011) describes his work on the histology of
the foreskin and the neurological evidence for its high sensitivity. Morten Frisch, a
doctor and professor of sexual health epidemiology at Statens Serum Institut in
Copenhagen and at Aalborg University in Denmark, discusses his 2011 study on
sexual function difficulties in circumcised men and their female partners, (Frisch,
2012). In particular, he tells us of his difficulty getting the work published in the
face of hostile referees.
5.5.2.2 Before and After Adult Circumcision
The overwhelming majority of circumcisions are carried out prior to physical
maturity, and hence prior to sexual experience. In principle, one might expect the
best evidence for the effects of MC on sexual function to come from the minority
of cases where the procedure is carried out on men with prior sexual experience,
thus providing a "before & after" comparison. There are such studies, but
unfortunately they are mostly seriously marred by one factor: men who elect to be
circumcised as adults almost always do so because they have a medical problem
which circumcision is intended to ameliorate. This is a rather serious skew in such
evidence because an improvement in function is obviously far more probable in
cases where there was a prior medical condition (as contrasted with the case for
the overwhelming majority of MGM).
Cases in point are Fink, Carson and DeVellis (2002) and Patel, Palmer and Sheriff
(2005). In the first of these, 123 men were identified who were circumcised when
aged 18 or older. However, 93% of these men were circumcised to correct medical
problems, only 7% were described as "elective". 44% of the men responded to the
survey, with a mean age of 46 (42 at circumcision). The survey results showed,
'Adult circumcision appears to result in worsened erectile function, decreased
penile sensitivity, no change in sexual activity and improved satisfaction. Of the
men 50% reported benefits and 38% reported harm. Overall, 62% of men were
satisfied with having been circumcised.'
Given that 97% of these men had the surgery to correct problems, an overall
perception of benefit of only 50% – with 38% reporting harm – is not impressive.
The findings of Fink, Carson and DeVellis (2002) certainly do not indicate any
benefit of MC for men without medical conditions, and actually indicate harm
(worsened erectile function and decreased penile sensitivity).
Patel et al (2005) identified 'one hundred and fifty men between the ages of 18 and
60 years as being circumcised for benign disease between 1999 and 2002'. 59% of
these responded to a questionnaire, which led to the following conclusion: 'Penile
sensitivity had variable outcomes after circumcision. The poor outcome of
circumcision considered by overall satisfaction rates (61%) suggests that when we
circumcise men, these outcome data should be discussed during the informed
consent process'. A shortcoming of both these studies is that the surveys were
carried out only a few years after circumcision, whereas sensitivity loss is known to
accumulate over time.
Not all studies report diminished sexual function due to MC. The study of Temucin
Senkul et al (2004) concerned men circumcised when adult, but not predominantly
for medical reasons. Of the 42 men in the study, 39 desired circumcision for
religious reasons. Their median age was 22.3 years. Their sexual performance
before and after MC was evaluated using the Brief Male Sexual Function
Inventory. Senkul et al concluded that 'adult circumcision does not adversely affect
sexual function' but that 'the mean ejaculatory latency time was significantly
longer after circumcision'. The term "ejaculatory latency time" refers to the time
for a man to reach orgasm from first vaginal penetration. Whilst a longer
ejaculatory latency time can be regarded as beneficial (perhaps especially for the
female partner) it can also be regarded as symptomatic of reduced sensitivity.
Longer times to climax in circumcised men have also been reported by other
investigators, e.g., (Frisch, 2012). More seriously, the "after" survey was
conducted shortly after recovery from MC, and the men in question were very
young. Indications from other studies and surveys are that sexual function becomes
more seriously degraded later in life, especially in middle age and after.
In summary, before/after studies of the effect of MC on sexual function are
inconclusive and marred by serious skews or limitations in the samples surveyed.
5.5.3 Survey Evidence: Men's Subjective Experience of Circumcision
The majority of circumcised men do not report being unhappy with their condition.
However, one should bear in mind that the overwhelming majority of circumcised
men have known no other condition as a sexually mature adult. Nevertheless,
American and Australian Surveys cited by Tim Hammond and Adrienne Carmack
(2017) suggest between 20% and 50% of circumcised men are dissatisfied with
their condition.
The PhD thesis of Bossio (2015) reports an online study of 657 men (367 neonatally
circumcised, 290 intact). She reports that, 'intact men almost unanimously rated
that they were highly satisfied with the amount of foreskin they have'. Hence,
whilst a substantial proportion of circumcised men are dissatisfied with their
condition, intact men are virtually never dissatisfied. This simple observation is
telling but generally passes unnoticed in debates on MGM. Bossio (2015) indicates
that circumcision dissatisfaction can be a serious issue: 'the largest proportion of
circumcised men reported feeling extremely dissatisfied with being circumcised,
while the largest proportion of intact men reported feeling extremely satisfied with
being intact. The more foreskin a participant reported having, the greater their
self-reported satisfaction with their circumcision status.'
The Global Survey of Circumcision Harm has been reported in (Hammond and
Carmack, 2017) and a video presentation of the results given in (Hammond, 2015).
It is important to note the goal of this survey was not to seek a representative
sample of all circumcised men, but to qualitatively explore experiences of only
those who already consider themselves harmed by involuntary non-therapeutic
circumcision. Moreover, the focus was not on botched procedures, but on surgeries
that respondents believed were ordinary. Most respondents (60%) reported
becoming aware of their circumcision harm before age 19, including 25% reaching
this awareness before age 13.
The physical damage or deformities reported were as follows (noting that the
percentages refer to respondents to a survey focused on harm, not to a
representative sample of circumcised men).
Partial/total loss of the frenulum 72%
Prominent circumcision scar(s) 63%
Little/no shaft skin mobility when erect; tight cut 56%
Drastic skin tone variance on either side of scar 46%
Distal shaft hair (causes friction during sex) 45%
Twist/bend in penis when flaccid or erect 25%
Meatal stenosis 24%
Skin tag(s) 20%
Skin bridge(s) 10%
Partial/total loss of penile body/shaft 10%
Gouges/surgical deformities of the glans 8%
The most frequent physical problems which resulted were,
Insensitive glans 67%
Dry, keratinized glans, needs lubricants before sex 75%
Excess stimulation needed to achieve orgasm 59%
The resulting psychological or emotional problems reported included,
Anger 71%
Frustration 72%
Betrayed by mother/father/doctor for lack of protection 55% / 50% / 58%
Dissatisfied with my condition 77%
Feel mutilated 61%
Violated / raped 55%
My human rights were violated 73%
Feel inferior to intact men 66%
Causes distrust of medical profession 65%
The detailed results of the Global Survey of Circumcision Harm as they stood in
2012 recorded hundreds of subjective comments by respondents, of which a few
are given below, (Hammond, 2012),
Frequent ripping of what is left of my frenulum;
Wooden stick feeling during sex;
Loss of feeling in glans (this many times in various words)
Scar is too tight to accommodate a full erection comfortably;
Glans is sensitive but in a sandpaper sort of way, not pleasurable;
Complete sexual dysfunction with no feeling whatever;
No pleasure and feeling of envy towards intact boys;
Cut into urethra causing fluid filled cysts;
Penis bent on erection, will not straighten;
Pain when erect;
If I wear a condom I feel absolutely nothing;
Pubic hair growing at scar / discomfort to partner prohibits sex
This survey provides many men's personal testimonies. There is a book consisting
of nothing but men's personal testimonies about their circumcision status and how
it has affected their lives 'Unspeakable Mutilations: Circumcised Men Speak Out'
,
(Watson, 2014). Further sources may be found in (Circumcision Resource Centre,
2018).
The preceding discussion has concentrated upon physical forms of harm, or
psychological problems stemming directly from the physical harm. However, there
is some evidence that the trauma of the circumcision procedure itself may cause
lasting psychological damage. For example, Bollinger and van Howe have
presented evidence that circumcised men exhibit elevated alexithymia (the
reduced ability to identify, describe or recognise one's own emotions) compared to
intact men, (Bollinger and van Howe, 2011).
A summary of this chapter is included at the end of the next chapter where we
shall turn our attention to the veracity, or otherwise, of the claimed benefits of
circumcision and its legal status in various countries, including the UK.
6. MGM: Claimed Benefits and Legality
The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of
a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good,
either physical or moral, is not sufficient warrant.
John Stuart Mill (1806 – 1873), On Liberty
In chapter 5 I reviewed the anatomy of the foreskin, the history of practices to
remove it, and the harm that can accrue as a result of male circumcision (MC). In
this chapter I look at the other side of the argument: the claims that nontherapeutic circumcision of male minors, or male genital mutilation (MGM), is
medically beneficial. The issue of legality in the UK and elsewhere is also briefly
considered. Whilst harms and benefits are relevant to this, there is also a matter of
principle: the right of children to have their bodily integrity protected. Finally, both
chapters 5 and 6 are summarised.
The claim of medical benefit is the key issue in the defence of MGM. It is
therefore necessary to provide a review and critique of the evidence. It is
unavoidable that some medical detail will be necessary. However, the literature on
the subject is huge. A thorough literature review is impractical in this book, and
excessive medical detail is inappropriate. To give focus to the discussion, therefore,
I shall concentrate upon critiquing a recent review of medical evidence by leading
proponents of MGM, Brian Morris et al (2017). Some observations are made about
this paper before proceeding to the review of medical evidence.
6.1 Background to the 2017 review of Morris et al
Brian Morris is a prolific author of journal articles presenting the case for medical
benefits of MGM, (Morris, 2018). Morris is a founding member of the Circumcision
Foundation of Australia which changed its name to the Circumcision Academy of
Australia in 2014. The paper (Morris et al, 2017) includes eight co-authors. The
conflict-of-interest statement in the paper states, 'Authors are members of the
Circumcision Academy of Australia', and that the organisation's purpose includes
the provision of 'contact details of doctors who perform the procedure'. It is
reasonable to conclude that this indicates a favourable bias towards MGM. In a
letter to the editor of the Canadian Journal of Urology, Joan Robinson, Ann
Jefferies and Thierry Lacaze (2017) noted that the two Canadian co-authors of
(Morris et al, 2017) operate circumcision clinics, which represents an obvious
conflict of interest.
Morris et al (2017) represented the policy statement of the American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) in a light more favourable to circumcision than strictly justified,
referring to the AAP's 'formulation and release of a new affirmative early infant
MC policy statement in 2012'. The actual view of the AAP is discussed in section
6.3 and includes the statement, 'health benefits are not great enough to
recommend routine circumcision for all male newborns'. Morris et al's claim that
'Australia is the only non-United States country in which an evidence-based policy
statement has been produced' is rather odd given the statements made by
authoritative medical establishments in New Zealand, Canada, Finland, the
Netherlands and Great Britain, to name just a few, as summarised in section 6.3.
Morris and other co-authors have previously been taken to task by an
authoritative medical body for misrepresenting their position in published work.
The paper by Morris et al (2016), 'Canadian Paediatrics Society (CPS) position
statement on new-born circumcision: a risk-benefit analysis revisited' so upset the
CPS that three members of the CPS wrote a detailed rebuttal in a letter to the
editor of the Canadian Journal of Urology, (Robinson, Jefferies and Lacaze, 2017).
Noting that neonatal circumcision is an operation with lifelong consequences
performed without patient consent, and further noting deaths from surgical
circumcisions in Canada as elsewhere, the CPS authors conclude that the existing
evidence fails to provide a case for the CPS to recommend routine circumcision.
They also note that 'no country outside of Africa has adopted a national policy
promoting routine circumcision'.
Morris et al (2017) garnered media attention, e.g., the Australian news report in
(Wiedersehn, 2017) which re-iterated the claim in the journal paper that
'uncircumcised males face an 80 percent risk of developing a foreskin-related
condition requiring medical attention'. The claim is extraordinary. Living in a
culture in which the large majority of men are intact, I might have expected to be
aware of instances of such medical problems in men of my acquaintance. I can
think of none. Whilst men may be reticent about talking of such matters, a
prevalence as high as 80% seems startlingly inconsistent with personal experience.
6.2 Critique of the claims of Morris et al, 2017.
The claims of (Morris et al, 2017) are critiqued below as a convenient device to
examine the claims typically made for the medical benefits of MGM. I address the
different diseases for which benefit is claimed in turn.
6.2.1 Urinary Tract Infections
Morris et al (2017) claim as follows,
'Of any year of life, urinary tract infection (UTI) in males is most common in the
first year, affecting 1%-2% of uncircumcised boys compared to 0.1%-0.2% of boys
who are circumcised. Risk reduction continues, however, beyond infancy. The most
recent meta-analysis (in 2013) noted that over lifetime 1 in 12 circumcised males
experience a UTI compared with 1 in 3 uncircumcised males.' (Morris et al, 2017)
The effect of MGM on prevalence alone is insufficient to justify its use as a
preventative (even assuming the claim were valid). Whether or not the condition is
serious, and the availability of treatments less invasive than circumcision, are also
important. According to the NHS the prevalence of UTIs in children in the UK is as
follows, (NHS, 2016),
Boys have a higher incidence of UTI up to the age of 6 months, after which it is
more common in girls;
Girls have a higher incidence of recurrent UTI;
3% of girls and 1% of boys will have an upper UTI by the age of 7;
1 in 10 girls and 1 in 30 boys will have a UTI by the age of 16.
Prevalence at later ages is indicated by German data taken from (Guido
Schmiemann et al, 2010) and reproduced as Figure 6.1. The prevalence of UTIs in
young men is extremely low. Its prevalence in young women is far higher. Note that
UK and German data refer to societies in which the incidence of MC is modest or
low (16% or less). If one hypothesises that the foreskin is causally related to UTIs
in men, why is this not apparent in young men? Figure 6.1 indicates a far lower
prevalence of UTIs in adult men than claimed by Morris et al. Increased
prevalence of UTIs in older people is often related to catheterisation.
UTIs are generally successfully treated with antibiotics. In the case of females,
where the incidence of UTIs is far greater after early infancy, no other treatment
is being sought. Even if one takes at face value Morris et al's claimed benefits of
MGM on UTI incidence, the number of circumcisions needed to prevent one UTI is
at least 73, and perhaps over 100 (Robinson, Jefferies and Lacaze, 2017). Since
treatments with antibiotics are generally successful, this means 73 surgical
operations would be required to avoid one course of antibiotics.
Figure 6.1: Prevalence of UTIs per 1000 from (Guido Schmiemann et al, 2010)
However, Morris et al's claims on the effect of MGM in reducing UTI incidence
are not secure. To quote (Robinson, Jefferies and Lacaze, 2017), 'The literature in
this area is difficult to interpret because urines obtained via a midstream or
catheter specimen from an uncircumcised male are commonly contaminated by
organisms under the foreskin. Evidence for this is that 9% of uncircumcised and
0.5% of circumcised asymptomatic males had bacteriuria later verified by
suprapubic urine collection to be falsely positive.' Here, "suprapubic urine
collection" refers to urine extracted from the bladder directly by inserting a needle
through the abdominal wall. By this means, contamination of the urine as it passes
out of the urethra is avoided. This observation implies that specimens collected in
the usual manner will seriously over-estimate the incidence of infection in intact
males.
Moreover, a close examination of the data sources reveals that there is a dearth of
data for adult men, (Collins, W, 2017f). Robinson et al therefore conclude that,
'there is only very low quality evidence that circumcision prevents UTIs beyond
infancy'. More importantly, it makes no sense to carry out 73 surgical operations to
avoid one course of antibiotics, especially as antibiotics are regarded as adequate
to treat females, who are the overwhelming majority of sufferers from UTIs. UTI
prevention does not provide a motivation for MGM.
6.2.2 Phimosis
Phimosis is the term given to an inability to fully retract the foreskin (the lower
picture of Figure 5.1 shows full retraction). Morris et al claim that phimosis 'affects
approximately 10% of uncircumcised adolescent and adult males'. In contrast, the
University of California Department of Urology (2018) advises that the 'current
incidence of phimosis is about 1% in 7th grade boys' whilst Robert van Howe
(2006) states that 'the incidence of true phimosis is less than 2%'. In India, Shahid
(2005) distinguishes between physiologic and pathologic phimosis. He notes that
'2% of normal males continue to have non-retractability throughout life even
though they are otherwise normal' and that 'the incidence of pathological phimosis
is 0.4 per 1000 boys per year or 0.6% of boys are affected by their 15th birthday.'
Phimosis is a common reason for medically-advised circumcision, but this appears
to have been due to widespread ignorance in the medical community regarding the
natural development of the foreskin. As explained in section 5.1.1, full retraction is
commonly not possible before physical maturity, or even a few years thereafter
(see Figures 5.3 and 5.4). Whilst removal of a foreskin is clearly a cure for
phimosis, in boys and young men a tight foreskin is not necessarily phimosis, i.e., it
is not necessarily a pathological condition. Prior to physical maturity it is most
likely to be a condition which will rectify itself. If persistent post-puberty, steroid
creams can be effective. Physically mature young men who still cannot fully retract
their foreskin might be best advised in the first instance to masturbate more often,
perhaps modifying their technique, (Beaugé, 2005).
Even when the phimosis appears genuine, and doctors refer the patient for
circumcision, (Kumar, Deb and Das, 2009) record that, out of 100 such referrals,
only 12 were actually genuine phimosis for which circumcision was ultimately
indicated. This aligns well with other sources which indicate that circumcision can
be avoided, even when phimosis is genuine, in about 87% of cases, (Circinfo.org,
2014). In summary, in severe and genuine phimosis, circumcision may ultimately be
indicated, but not before other treatments are tried as these are likely to be
successful. Circumcision is genuinely indicated at an incidence of only about 0.1%.
Phimosis prevention does not provide a motivation for routine MGM.
6.2.3 Balanitis / Candidiasis
Balanitis is redness, swelling, soreness or rash around the glans (the head of the
penis) or the foreskin. The cause of balanitis is generally poor hygiene. The
incidence of balanitis is almost an irrelevance since effective treatment
generally requires merely better hygiene. Cleaning the uncircumcised penis
presents no problems. Soap and water, chaps – and if that doesn't work, then just
warm water (the soap may be the problem). For persistent cases, antibacterial, or
antifungal, or possibly steroidal, creams will be effective almost always. If reinfection occurs repeatedly after successful treatments, it is likely to be either
thrush (candida) or streptococcal bacteria. In both cases the most probable source
of infection is the man's female partner: the vagina tends to harbour these
infectious agents (Men's Health Forum, 2014). Incidence rates of balanitis are
high, perhaps 3% - 11% (Medscape, 2017), though sources are very variable.
Morris et al's claim in regard to the incidence of balanitis amongst intact men and
boys is reasonable, but the effectiveness of MGM in reducing it is less clear. Some
studies suggest that circumcised men actually suffer greater rates of balanitis, (van
Howe, 1997). In the case of balanitis, though, the incidence of the condition is
relatively unimportant since it is so easily treated. The use of surgery to treat such
a minor condition which is so easily treated by improved hygiene is clearly
disproportionate.
6.2.4 Human Papilloma Virus (HPV)
Of all Morris et al's claims, that relating to HPV is most baffling. The HPV threat
to males is principally oropharyngeal cancer from HPV infection acquired through
oral sex. Obviously this cannot be influenced by the status of the man's penis.
Nevertheless, Morris et al claim that MGM reduces the risk of HPV infection by
40% to 65%. This is not credible. Now the decision has been taken to offer the
HPV vaccine to boys on the NHS, the rate of HPV infection in men and the
incidence of oropharyngeal cancers can be anticipated to reduce in the UK. HPV
does not motivate MGM.
6.2.5 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
Perhaps the most important health claim for MC is that it reduces the likelihood of
becoming infected with HIV, especially as regards health policies in Africa. Morris
et al claim a 60% reduction in female-to-male heterosexual HIV infection
probability consequent upon being circumcised. I examine the provenance and
reliability of this claim in this section. However, the claim runs counter to
elementary observations. For example, compare the prevalence of HIV in the UK
and the USA. The UK annual data tables for HIV, (UK Government, 2017d), give
the following data for total cases by the end of 2016,
Persons seen for HIV care in the UK: 91,987
Total UK HIV diagnoses minus deaths, 150,726 – 23,374 = 127,352
Dividing these figures by the UK population gives a prevalence of 0.14% to 0.19%.
In contrast, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2018) state, 'At the
end of 2015, an estimated 1.1 million persons aged 13 and older were living with
HIV infection in the United States, including an estimated 162,500 (15%) persons
whose infections had not been diagnosed'. Dividing by the USA population at that
time gives a prevalence of 0.34%.
Hence the prevalence of HIV in the USA is about double that in the UK, whereas
the prevalence of MC in the USA is around 80% compared with about 15% in the
UK. This runs contrary to expectation if MC was protective and also the only
factor involved. In reality, of course, there are other factors involved – race, for
example. The prevalence of HIV is greater amongst blacks than whites, and the
USA has a higher proportion of blacks than the UK.
However, even within the USA there is no correlation between circumcision and
the prevalence of HIV, and this remains the case if only black men or black men
who have sex with other men are included, (Fox, 2007).
An even more emphatic example is provided by those African countries with very
high prevalence of MC. The following countries have a circumcision prevalence
greater than 80%: Gabon, Djibouti, Eritrea, Kenya, Somalia, Benin, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Ivory
Coast, Mali, Niger Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo. The average
prevalence of MC in these 19 countries is 90%, but the average prevalence of HIV
is very high by Western standards, namely 2.1% in 2017 (down from 2.4% ten
years earlier). Admittedly the HIV prevalence in these 19 countries is modest by
African standards. Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South
Africa, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe all have horribly high HIV prevalence
between 10% and 26%. Nevertheless, an HIV prevalence some 11 times higher
than in the UK in 19 African countries with an average MC prevalence of 90%
hardly invites an hypothesis of protection by MC.
On the other hand, those African countries with extremely high HIV prevalence do
have lower prevalence of MC. All these observations are confused by other
variables, of course. In the case of MC prevalence in Africa, the obviously
correlated variable is religion (Islam versus Christianity especially), with all the
cultural differences that implies, e.g., alcohol consumption, women's free
association, etc. Then there are countries like Rwanda, which has an MC
prevalence of only 10% but also (for Africa) a low HIV prevalence of 2.7%,
comparable with African countries with around 90% MC prevalence. One can
reasonably question the likelihood of mass circumcision programmes being
beneficial in Rwanda. [African data for HIV has been taken from (World Health
Organisation, 2018b), and for MC from (Williams et al, 2006)].
The three African randomised controlled trials (RCTs) on which Morris et al's
claims depend are the same studies upon which the World Health Organisation
(WHO) based their recommendation for circumcision as an effective HIV
preventative in 2007. On the strength of these studies, the WHO and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) have rolled out a programme
to circumcise over 20 million African men. As of 2017, a total of 14.5 million
African men had been circumcised under this programme, across 14 sub-Saharan
African nations, and the rate of circumcising has been increasing (World Health
Organisation, 2017). The claim is that this programme will avert over half a million
new HIV infections by 2030. It has been funded in part by the Gates Foundation.
Irrespective of how efficacious MC might be as an HIV preventative, I have some
unease that this WHO/UNAIDS programme represents a new form of medicalised
neo-colonialism. Daniel J Ncayiyana, editor of the South African Medical Journal,
has observed that, 'it is curious and even worrisome that the campaign to
circumcise African men seems to be driven by donor funding and researchers from
the North', (Ncayiyana, 2011). He was being diplomatic. He meant, I think, 'white
men telling black men what to do with their bodies'. He has a point.
Consequently I now concentrate on these three African RCT studies, thus
addressing both Morris et al and the basis of the WHO/UNAIDS mass
circumcisions of African men at the same time. The studies in question are (Auvert
et al, 2005), (Bailey et al, 2007) and (Gray et al, 2007). These three studies
concluded that circumcision reduces female-to-male HIV transmission rates by
60%, 53% and 51% respectively. There is no claim that the rate of transmission of
HIV to women will be affected.
Two issues arise: firstly, how reliable are these studies as indicators of long-term
HIV reduction in circumcised men? Secondly, is a 50% to 60% reduction in HIV
infection a sufficient benefit against the requirement to circumcise several tens of
millions of men?
Before critiquing the underlying studies, it is worth noting that latex condoms, used
consistently and correctly, are 87%-95% effective in preventing HIV transmission,
(Pinkerton and Abramson, 1997), (Davis and Weller, 1999). Hence, the
effectiveness of consistent condom usage in preventing HIV transmission is
comparable to its effectiveness at preventing conception. Studies that do not
isolate consistent condom usage suggest that intermittent usage is 60% - 70%
effective against HIV transmission. A concern might be that the reduced sensitivity
of the circumcised penis might discourage condom usage, and thus ultimately have
an adverse effect on HIV transmission rates.
The three RCT studies have come in for substantial criticism on methodological
grounds. The key criticisms are summarised below and expanded upon in, for
example, (Boyle and Hill, 2011) and (Earp, 2012), in particular the note dated
4/3/14 in the latter referring to various counter-arguments.
The studies were stopped early, based on early positive findings (termination bias);
No account was taken of the fact that circumcised men would be sexually inactive
for a couple of months while their wounds healed – so inevitably they had less sex
than the control group;
Participants in the circumcised group received two year's free healthcare and safe
sex counselling;
Significant numbers of men who became infected reported never having sexual
activity or reported having always used condoms, suggesting non-sexual routes to
infection which have not been allowed for when interpreting the data;
Parallel studies showed an increase in HIV transmission, but these have been sidelined;
The claim that the observed reduced HIV transmission would apply for life is
unproved, none of the tests extending for longer than 2 years;
Anomalous results which cast doubt on the veracity of subjects' self-reporting,
(Ncayiyana, 2011);
That the studies considered female-to-male HIV transmission only, not male-tofemale or male-to-male.
A follow-up study to the Ugandan trials of Gray et al was carried out, in which MC
was offered to the uncircumcised control group from the earlier trial, (Gray et al,
2012). Surveillance was then maintained for 4.79 years. The conclusion was, 'Posttrial HIV incidence was 0.54/100 py in circumcised and 1.71/100 py in
uncircumcised control arm men (adjusted effectiveness 67%). There were no
significant differences in sociodemographic characteristics and sexual behaviours
between controls accepting MC and those remaining uncircumcised.' A rather
obvious problem with this study is that the men who were circumcised were selfselected. The danger, then, is that men accepting circumcision might be those who
are more inclined to safe sex practices, e.g., condom use, which would badly skew
the findings. Gray et al did attempt to control for this via statistical tests, but it is
not clear if this is sufficient to eradicate the bias in the data.
There is a substantial literature commenting adversely on the three RCT trials,
some quite excoriating. Some of these have been summarised in the Appendix of
(Collins W. , 2017g). It may never become clear if the mass circumcisions being
carried out on African men have had the desired beneficial effect because the
prevalence of HIV is already falling across Africa as a whole.
Reports from Malawi indicate that 'circumcision does not help in the reduction of
HIV but exacerbates it', (Malawi24, 2015). They write, 'HIV infection rate in
Malawi has doubled in recent years despite a range of interventions put in place to
tackle the spread of the virus that have included relentless campaigning on
condomisation and circumcision'.
In summary, despite the massive WHO/UNAIDS programme to mass circumcise
African men as an AIDS preventative, the evidence that this will prove efficacious
is fragile and a weight of counter-evidence exists. Moreover, as an AIDS
preventative in Western countries, as claimed by Morris et al, there is no evidence
to support it at all but there is evidence to the contrary.
6.2.6 Other Diseases
Morris et al claim benefits of MGM for a whole range of sexually transmitted
infections (STIs). It is inappropriate to reproduce the details here. An accessible
review can be found in (Collins W. , 2017g), and a thorough analysis in 'Sexually
Transmitted Infections and Male Circumcision: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis', by (van Howe, 2013). The Abstract from that paper serves to summarise
the position for STIs,
'The claim that circumcision reduces the risk of sexually transmitted infections has
been repeated so frequently that many believe it is true. A systematic review and
meta-analyses were performed on studies of genital discharge syndrome versus
genital ulcerative disease, nonspecific urethritis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, genital
ulcerative disease, chancroid, syphilis, herpes simplex virus, human papilloma virus,
and contracting a sexually transmitted infection of any type. Chlamydia,
gonorrhea, genital herpes, and human papillomavirus are not significantly impacted
by circumcision. Syphilis showed mixed results with studies of prevalence
suggesting intact men were at greater risk and studies of incidence suggesting the
opposite. Intact men appear to be of greater risk for genital ulcerative disease
while at lower risk for genital discharge syndrome, nonspecific urethritis, genital
warts, and the overall risk of any sexually transmitted infection. In studies of
general populations, there is no clear or consistent positive impact of circumcision
on the risk of individual sexually transmitted infections. Consequently, the
prevention of sexually transmitted infections cannot rationally be interpreted as a
benefit of circumcision, and any policy of circumcision for the general population to
prevent sexually transmitted infections is not supported by the evidence in the
medical literature.'
Morris et al claim benefits of MGM for two final diseases: penile cancer and
prostate cancer. The main source on which Morris et al's claims rest as regards
penile cancer is the meta-analysis of (Larke et al, 2011). The wording of these
authors' conclusions does indeed suggest a beneficial effect of childhood
circumcision. However, examination of the paper's Figures 2 and 3 is unconvincing
since results from 11 of the 14 studies plotted in these Figures are consistent with
there being no effect (i.e., the 95% confidence interval encompasses an odds ratio
of one). See (Collins W. , 2017g) for further discussion.
Finally, Morris et al claim a benefit of MGM in respect of prostate cancer, their
quoted source being (Pabalan et al, 2015). However, the studies compiled by
Pabalan et al, when combined, show no statistically significant effect. When
outliers are removed the results are as shown in Figure 6.2, i.e., negligible effect. A
far more reliable, and far more pleasurable, means of protecting the health of your
prostate is to have regular sex – alone if necessary.
The position on claimed health benefits of MGM has been summarised by Morten
Frisch et al (2013). They conclude that whilst there is a possible protection against
urinary tract infections in infant boys, which can easily be treated with antibiotics
without tissue loss, 'the other claimed health benefits, including protection against
HIV/AIDS, genital herpes, genital warts, and penile cancer, are questionable,
weak, and likely to have little public health relevance in a Western context, and
they do not represent compelling reasons for surgery before boys are old enough to
decide for themselves.'
Figure 6.2: Effect of MC on Prostate Cancer, data after removal of outliers. From
(Pabalan et al, 2015). Odds ratio of 1 means no effect.
6.3 The Opinion of Medical Bodies Worldwide
No authoritative medical body in any country in the world has recommended
routine circumcision of males outside of Africa. The most positive statements on
infant MGM have been made by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and
the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC). The AAP caused some controversy
when they released a revised statement on MGM in 2012, having previously been
unambiguously negative. Extracts from the 2012 AAP statement are,
'Evaluation of current evidence indicates that the health benefits of newborn male
circumcision outweigh the risks.'
'Although health benefits are not great enough to recommend routine circumcision
for all male newborns, the benefits of circumcision are sufficient to justify access
to this procedure for families choosing it and to warrant third-party payment for
circumcision of male newborns. It is important that clinicians routinely inform
parents of the health benefits and risks of male newborn circumcision in an
unbiased and accurate manner.'
'Parents ultimately should decide whether circumcision is in the best interests of
their male child…..The medical benefits alone may not outweigh these other
considerations for individual families.' (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2012)
The cynic may focus on the above approval of 'third-party payment', noting that
the membership of the AAP comprises those who would financially benefit. The
careful wording of the advice throws the actual decision regarding risk versus
benefit upon the parents.
The AAP's stance that circumcision carries a net benefit over its risks has been
echoed by the CDC who reiterate the claims of medical benefit in respect of UTIs,
STIs, balanitis, penile (and 'possibly' prostate) cancer and HIV, (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2014). However, these two American medical
bodies appear to be out of step with the rest of the world, and one should recall
that the USA is a circumcising culture.
In 1996 the Canadian Paediatric Society stated their view that, 'the overall
evidence of the benefits and harms of circumcision is so evenly balanced that it
does not support recommending circumcision as a routine procedure for newborns'.
This advice was reviewed in 2015, their updated position being,
'Recent evidence suggesting the potential benefit of circumcision in preventing
urinary tract infection and some sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, has
prompted the Canadian Paediatric Society to review the current medical literature
in this regard. While there may be a benefit for some boys in high-risk populations
and circumstances where the procedure could be considered for disease reduction
or treatment, the Canadian Paediatric Society does not recommend the routine
circumcision of every newborn male.'
The Central Union for Child Welfare, Finland, gave the following opinion in 2003,
'Circumcision of boys that violates the personal integrity of the boys is not
acceptable unless it is done for medical reasons to treat an illness. The basis for the
measures of a society must be an unconditional respect for the bodily integrity of
an under-aged person. Circumcision intervenes in the sexual integrity of a male
child causing a permanent change in organs and has consequences pertaining to
both health and quality of life. The circumcision of girls is rightly considered as
inhuman mutilation of the genitals and is punished abuse. Also boys must be
guaranteed a similar protection by law. According to the opinion of the Central
Union for Child Welfare in Finland nobody has the right, on behalf of the child, to
consent to the operation, violating the bodily integrity of the child, if it is not done
to treat an illness.'
In one legal case in Finland, the circumcision of a four-year-old boy was ruled
illegal. The court noted that 'not even a long religious tradition justifies protecting
the bodily inviolability of boys to a lesser degree than that of girls', (Sanomat,
2006). A commentary on the web site of the Finnish Central Union for Child
Welfare by a special adviser expressed the following view. 'There is no rational
doubt about the harmfulness and suffering of circumcision. It is a question of daring
to finally make a decisive political action to outlaw it unequivocally in a
criminalising law' (Sariola, 2012), translated from the Finnish.
The Royal Dutch Medical Society (2010) issued the following position statement
(extracts only),
'There is no convincing evidence that circumcision is useful or necessary in terms
of prevention or hygiene. Partly in the light of the complications which can arise
during or after circumcision, circumcision is not justifiable except on
medical/therapeutic grounds…..Non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors is
contrary to the rule that minors may only be exposed to medical treatments if
illness or abnormalities are present, or if it can be convincingly demonstrated that
the medical intervention is in the interest of the child, as in the case of
vaccinations. Non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors conflicts with the child's
right to autonomy and physical integrity….. There are good reasons for a legal
prohibition of non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors, as exists for female
genital mutilation.'
This strong statement ended, 'However, the KNMG (i.e., the Royal Dutch Medical
Society) fears that a legal prohibition would result in the intervention being
performed by non-medically qualified individuals in circumstances in which the
quality of the intervention could not be sufficiently guaranteed. This could lead to
more serious complications than is currently the case.' The British Medical
Association (2006) published advice which is still linked on their web page as
updated on 26 February 2018. They write,
'In the past, circumcision of boys has been considered to be either medically or
socially beneficial or, at least, neutral. The general perception has been that no
significant harm was caused to the child and therefore with appropriate consent it
could be carried out. The medical benefits previously claimed, however, have not
been convincingly proven, and it is now widely accepted, including by the BMA,
that this surgical procedure has medical and psychological risks. It is essential that
doctors perform male circumcision only where this is demonstrably in the best
interests of the child.'
The BMA then duck the issue by adding, 'the responsibility to demonstrate that
non-therapeutic circumcision is in a particular child's best interests falls to his
parents'. This is an abdication of responsibility. The key issues in making this
decision relate to claimed medical benefits and the potential risk or harm of MGM.
If the BMA are not confident to advise on these matters, then parents clearly
cannot do so in any meaningful way.
The Royal Australasian College of Physicians (2010) published a review in which
they concluded,
'After reviewing the currently available evidence, the RACP believes that the
frequency of diseases modifiable by circumcision, the level of protection offered by
circumcision and the complication rates of circumcision, do not warrant routine
infant circumcision in Australia and New Zealand.'
This policy position was reiterated by an RACP spokesperson in 2017,
(Wiedersehn, 2017). The London Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) have issued
guidance on male circumcision, thus recognising that MGM is potentially a child
safeguarding issue. The guidance quotes the British Association of Paediatric
Surgeons advice that 'there is rarely a clinical indication for circumcision'. Extracts
from LSCB guidance are,
'Doctors / health professionals should ensure that any parents seeking circumcision
for their son in the belief that it confers health benefits are fully informed that
there is a lack of professional consensus as to current evidence demonstrating any
benefits. The risks / benefits to the child must be fully explained to the parents and
to the young man himself, if Fraser competent. The medical harms or benefits have
not been unequivocally proven except to the extent that there are clear risks of
harm if the procedure is done inexpertly. The legal position on male circumcision is
untested and therefore remains unclear.' (London Safeguarding Children Board,
2017a).
A more comprehensive collection of statements on non-therapeutic MC has been
collected by (CIRP, 2016).
6.4 Legal Issues
6.4.1 The Illegality of MGM in the UK
The UK public can be forgiven for believing that non-therapeutic circumcision of
male minors, subject to parental consent, is legal in the UK. After all, such
circumcisions are carried out openly. Circumcision clinics advertise their services
and the NHS is involved in the practice on some occasions. But this conflates
legality with tolerance. MGM is tolerated, in part, because of its association with
religions, and because there is a reluctance to face down the accusations of
antisemitism. (The term "antisemitism" incorporates both anti-Jewish and also
anti-Arabic opinions, most Arabs being Muslim). Toleration is reinforced by claims
of medical benefit, and the general belief that MGM does no harm. Circumcision
then becomes conflated with other medical procedures which confer indubitable
benefits. Where there are genuine medical reasons for surgery, it is accepted that
parents can consent on behalf of the child.
However, parents have an obligation to protect their children, not a right to
consent to procedures which do not provide indisputable benefit. For example, in
the UK, parents cannot consent to having a child tattooed. The legality of infant or
childhood MGM therefore hinges upon the claimed benefits, and lack of harm, i.e.,
the net benefit. Even if this test were passed, there is also the separate issue of
principle: the child's right to bodily integrity. In the foregoing sections I have
argued that the claimed medical benefits are spurious or very minor at best, whilst
the long-term damage can often be substantial, albeit not in every case. The most
favourable summary is that a clear demonstration of net benefit has not been
demonstrated. A more accurate summary is probably that MGM is likely to be a
net harm.
Under these conditions, non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors, too young to
give meaningful consent themselves, is illegal under the assault laws. To be legal
there would need to be legislation making MGM specifically exempt from the
assault laws. There has been no such legal over-ride in the UK. In a submission to
the Law Commission for England and Wales, Christopher Price (1996) concluded
the following,
'Non-therapeutic circumcision is painful, risky and disabling; as such it is unlawful
and offends against domestic and international laws: it gives rise to criminal and
civil liability. It raises issues of individual human rights, moral issues, issues of
discrimination, physical and psychological damage: it is an abuse (sexual, physical
and emotional) of the child.'
'Although existing laws are sufficient to sustain a prosecution and a civil claim
arising from circumcision, for the avoidance of any doubt (for the same reasons
that the Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act 1985 was passed) and to avoid
discrimination as between the sexes and/or between groups of male children, male
non-therapeutic circumcision should be accorded the same legislative prohibition as
female circumcision.'
'Circumcision done as a non-therapeutic procedure to an unconsenting child is
abhorrent, destructive and a legal, ethical and moral affront which has no place in
any society which wishes to call itself civilised.'
My argument that MGM is illegal is, of course, the opinion of a lay-person. A more
legally cautious exposition of the situation has been given by barrister James
Chegwidden in a presentation to the group Men Do Complain, as can be seen in the
video here, (Duncker, 2017). Chegwidden makes reference to a ruling by Sir James
Munby, then President of the Family Division, in a case known as "In the matter of
B and G (Children)", (Royal Courts of Justice, 2015). In it Munby repeats an
observation made originally by the Applicant's counsel, Mr Hayes, who quotes
Baroness Hale, who was then a Justice within the Supreme Court and later its
President (now retired), as follows,
'Baroness Hale of Richmond said in Re B (Care Proceedings: Appeal) [2013]
UKSC 33, [2013] 2 FLR 1075, para 185, that any form of FGM, including FGM
WHO Type IV, amounts to "significant harm". To use Lady Hale's language, no
form of FGM can, Mr Hayes says, be characterised as trivial or unimportant,
having regard not merely to its purely physical characteristics but also to its
associated trauma and potential emotional or psychological consequences.'
Nothing could have been further from Baroness Hale's mind in making the above
remarks than bolstering a case against MGM. But that may be their import. It has
to be conceded (and Munby does concede) that MGM is far more invasive than
Type IV FGM, which is the slightest nick or puncture of the clitoral hood. Munby
writes (para 69),
'Given the comparison between what is involved in male circumcision and FGM
WHO Type IV, to dispute that the more invasive procedure involves the significant
harm involved in the less invasive procedure would seem almost irrational. In my
judgment, if FGM Type IV amounts to significant harm, as in my judgment it does,
then the same must be so of male circumcision.'
One might think that this is virtually a slam-dunk for ruling MGM illegal.
Unfortunately Munby manages to rule in favour of the status quo, despite his own
compelling logic – see (Royal Courts of Justice, 2015) or (Duncker, 2017). His
"argument" is revealing as he bases his ruling on existing societal norms and
prejudices, and rules the harm of genital cutting, that he himself has identified, as
being of lesser significance – but only for males. He writes (paras 72, 73),
'Whereas it can never be reasonable parenting to inflict any form of FGM on a
child, the position is quite different with male circumcision. Society and the law,
including family law, are prepared to tolerate nontherapeutic male circumcision
performed for religious or even for purely cultural or conventional reasons, while
no longer being willing to tolerate FGM in any of its forms. There are, after all, at
least two important distinctions between the two. FGM has no basis in any religion;
male circumcision is often performed for religious reasons. FGM has no medical
justification and confers no health benefits; male circumcision is seen by some
(although opinions are divided) as providing hygienic or prophylactic benefits. Be
that as it may, "reasonable" parenting is treated as permitting male circumcision.
I conclude therefore that although both involve significant harm, there is a very
clear distinction in family law between FGM and male circumcision.'
Munby has here capitulated to the status quo. He has concluded that "reasonable"
parenting can include the inflicting of harm, but only if the child is male. This is
male disposability. It is so firmly psychologically embedded that it resists attack by
logic and law.
As regards the "two important distinctions" to which Munby appeals, we have seen
that the medical benefit claim is spurious – and that this is underwritten by a wide
range of authoritative medical bodies worldwide. But the religious distinction is
also spurious, as emphasised by (Earp, 2018a).
Whilst female cutting is not mentioned in the Qur'an, neither is male cutting, both
are mentioned only in the hadith. (Judaism has the stronger case here, as the Old
Testament refers only to male cutting). In any case, there is more to religious
tradition than is necessarily to be found in their holy scriptures. So Munby's
argument fails even on its own merits. In truth, he was rationalising a conclusion he
felt socially constrained to reach.
6.4.2 Attempts to Make MGM Illegal in Other Countries
There have been attempts in a number of European countries to make nontherapeutic circumcision of male minors explicitly illegal.
6.4.2.1 Germany
The Germans got close to banning non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors in
2012, but then backed off. In 2012 a Higher Regional Court in Cologne decided
that religious circumcision of boys constituted bodily harm, (Spiegel Online, 2013).
This sparked intense opposition, especially from Jewish groups, the outcome of
which was a Bill to clarify that non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors was, in
fact, legal. This was passed in the Bundestag in December 2012, (Scholz, 2012).
Subsequently, in 2013, the Higher Regional Court of Hamm, a city in western
Germany, prohibited a mother from having her 6-year-old son circumcised and
ruled that parents and doctors are obliged to inform the child 'in a manner
appropriate to his age and development' about the procedure and be mindful of his
wishes. In my opinion, this is passing the buck. Every time a court resorts to "the
voice of the child" they are abdicating their responsibility. The procedure remains
legal in Germany, but either parents or doctors might (in principle) fall foul of
consent requirements.
6.4.2.2 Sweden
There was a motion to ban non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors in Sweden
in 2013. The claim by its proposers was that,
'boys should have the same right to avoid both complications of reduced sensitivity
in the genitals, painful erections, increased risk of kidney damage and
psychological distress by permanent removal, and the tremendous violation of
privacy that circumcision actually means.'(Canadian Jewish News, 2013)
The initiative failed, as such initiatives have failed elsewhere. The article repeats a
falsity about the motivation of intactivists: 'ritual circumcision of underage boys
increasingly has come under attack in Scandinavia, both by left-wing secularists as
well as right-wingers who fear the influence of immigration from Muslim
countries'. The motivation of intactivists is not political, and certainly not an attack
on any religion. The motivation is that MGM is a non-consensual violation of bodily
integrity, coupled with potential harm and lack of commensurate benefit. The
motivation is compassionate, and that many parties see only political, or
antisemitic, motivations is indicative of their own incredulity that compassion might
be the motive. It is indicative of their empathy gap.
6.4.2.3 Iceland
In 2018 there was a renewed flurry of activity. Silja Dögg Gunnarsdóttir of the
Icelandic Progressive Party proposed a Bill based on the argument that 'if we have
laws banning circumcision for girls, then we should do so for boys'. The Bill came in
for the usual vigorous opposition from religious groups, (Sherwood, 2018), and was
projected to fail, (Demurtas, 2018), despite strong support from the Icelandic
medical community, (Harretz, 2018). In the event, the Bill was not heard. The
status quo – the empathy gap – wins again, despite all sound arguments to the
contrary.
6.4.2.4 Denmark
The issue of explicitly banning non-therapeutic circumcision of male minors arose
again later in 2018, this time in Denmark following a people's petition which
reached the requirement of 50,000 votes to trigger parliamentary debate, (Mattha
Busby agency, 2018). Once again, though, politicians lacked the courage to enact a
ban, though intactivist campaigners in Denmark remain hopeful.
6.4.2.5 The USA
A recent legal issue arose in the USA, not in the context of attempting to ban nontherapeutic male circumcision, but in the context of a case brought to prosecute on
FMG charges. Antony Lempert (2018) has observed that the repeated failure of
attempts, worldwide, to criminalise MGM is increasingly throwing a spotlight on
the inconsistencies in the legal treatment of males and females. This is bringing
forcibly to the attention of the public and politicians alike the failure to abide by
the precepts of equality legislation. The unintended consequence of failing to
protect male minors might be that the existing statutes to protect females from
FGM are judged unlawful. This has now happened in the USA. (Earp, 2018a) has
summarised the situation, emphasising that awareness of the legal inconsistency is
only getting more insistent. He gives illustrations of how some pro-FGM groups
are using this inconsistency as an argument for making some of the less invasive
forms of FGM legal. He also points out the problem of intersex children. At what
point does a small penis become a large clitoris? Hence at what point is surgical
modification of such genitalia legal and when will it attract many years in prison?
In a separate video, Brian Earp (2018b) has explained a ruling made in a US
District Court in Michigan in November 2018. The judge's ruling in that court was
that the US federal law, Title 18 Code 116, which purports to make FGM illegal
throughout the USA, is unconstitutional. As Earp notes, the Michigan judge's ruling
does not mean that FGM has suddenly become legal in the USA. In fact, the
statutes prohibiting sexual assault, common assault or child abuse made FGM
illegal prior to the explicit Code 116 – just as was also true in the UK. The
Michigan judge's ruling was based on his view that the US Government had
exceeded their powers in enacting a federal level law, and that such legislation
should properly rest at the State level. On these grounds he considered he had the
legal power to strike it down as regards local (State) application. However, his
reason for wishing to do so was precisely that the statute is explicitly
discriminatory based on sex, i.e., that it fails to provide the same protection to both
sexes. It was due to this – the glaring inconsistency that is not going to remain
hidden any longer – that he declared the federal statute unconstitutional. This is a
remarkable state of affairs.
6.4.2.6 Religious Objections
In summary, no country has passed a law making non-therapeutic circumcision of
male minors explicitly illegal. Though many countries have assault laws, or other
laws, under which the practice could be legally challenged, the de facto position at
present is tolerance of the practice. As far as I am aware, only two countries
(Norway and Sweden) have even stipulated that the procedure must deploy
anaesthesia.
The deference given to the opposition from Jewish groups contrasts with the
simple observation that the number of men who have been circumcised in one
country alone (the USA) is about 17 times larger than the total number of male
Jews worldwide.
Interestingly, Israel only regards male circumcision to be a religious act, and as
such can legally be carried out by a person without formal medical training, up to
the age of six months. After this age, circumcision in Israel must be carried out as a
surgical procedure by surgically qualified persons, (UNAIDS, 2010). It is not clear
whether this imposes a restriction on non-therapeutic circumcisions beyond the six
month age limit. This does not affect Jews, as the Jewish custom is to circumcise at
8 days old. However, the Moslem practice is to circumcise boys well past the infant
stage. Jews are very active in opposing moves to outlaw non-therapeutic male
circumcision in other countries, claiming it would be antisemitic. It would be
hypocritical if they had, in practice, imposed such restrictions in Israel, though this
is not entirely clear.
In order to avoid the religious objection, some people have argued there should be
a specifically religious exemption from a law that would otherwise ban nontherapeutic circumcision of male minors. There are several serious objections to
such a proposal. One is that it opens the door to making FGM legal if groups argue
that their religion calls for it. (And despite the oft-repeated fact that the Qur'an
does not require female cutting, there are other Moslem texts which do mention it
and a case for FGM being a religious practice could be made by determined
proponents). A second objection is that it opens the door to other religious
exemptions, with very unfortunate consequences. There have been a number of
cases in the UK of severe child abuse, sometimes leading to death, as a result of
traditional African practices. While we would dismiss these as "witchcraft", a case
could be made for one person's witchcraft being another person's religion. Making
exemptions from laws for certain classes of people, however such classes be
defined, would be terribly retrograde. All groups should be content to live within
the law of the land. A third reason that a religious exemption to the illegality of
non-therapeutic circumcision of minors should be avoided is simply that it is
discriminatory. Making it illegal to cut a nice Christian boy, but saying it is
perfectly fine to cut those Jewish or Moslem boys – how could that be acceptable?
6.5 The Male Genital Mutilation Empathy Gap
The wildly different perceptions of FGM and MGM by many members of the
public, and by the criminal justice system, is a particularly stark example of the
empathy gap. We have seen that Lord Justice Munby was obliged to conclude that
if FGM always constitutes harm, as Lady Justice Hale asserted before him, then
MGM must also be considered a harm. The medical evidence concurs. It is
remarkable, then, that a non-consensual violation of the bodily integrity of a child,
which has been judicially ruled to constitute a harm, nevertheless is still to be
treated as legal. This position is arrived at by rationalisations which do not bear
scrutiny and which are actually for the purpose of protecting the status quo rather
than the child.
In no cultural tradition was medical benefit the original motivation for circumcision.
In the "Western-medical" tradition, the original motivation was indisputably to
diminish male sexual function, especially as regards discouraging masturbation.
Claims of medical benefit arose later as a post-hoc rationalisation. But the claims
of medical benefit are dubious, and marginal at best, whilst the harm done by
MGM can be substantial for a significant proportion of circumcised men. The net
effect cannot be asserted to be a benefit with any confidence, and is, on average,
likely to be a disbenefit. The trauma of the procedure further tips the scales in the
negative direction. However, the invasion of the bodily integrity of the child is the
decisive factor.
The illegality of MGM has yet to be tested in the UK by bringing a case to court.
However, the CPS are unlikely to allow this to happen. Even cases where there has
been a failure to obtain parental consent, a clear breach of law, tend not to be
prosecuted. It is an unfortunate characteristic of human societies that the public
can be inveigled into accepting anything, so long as everyone else goes along with
it – even cutting body parts off babies.
It is not only religious groups who will oppose moves to outlaw MGM. Women's
groups have in the past actively opposed such moves. For example, following the
initial ruling in Germany in 2012 to make MGM illegal, we read,
'Women's rights groups and social policy makers also condemned the decision, but
for the reason that it would have the effect of putting male and female
circumcision on the same footing, when they were "in no way comparable", said
Katrin Altpeter, social minister in the state of Baden-Württemberg. Female
circumcision, she said, was a far more drastic act. It is already outlawed in
Germany.' (Connolly, 2012)
But it is not really the relative severity of MGM versus FGM which lies behind this
view. Anyone who has campaigned, or spoken out publicly, in opposition to MGM
will probably have met with an angry retort from some people. They react with
passionate hostility towards you. If one were to campaign in favour of cutting body
parts off babies, I can readily understand why people would react with passionate
hostility. But why should people react with such venom to campaigning against
doing so? This reaction is revealing. To disagree is one thing, but it is the anger
which is illuminating. The retort is likely to be, "FGM is far worse". But it will not
placate your interlocutor to stress that you are equally opposed to FGM. I have
never come across any intactivist who is not equally opposed to FGM. "Equally",
you see, is not sufficient. My interpretation of the psychology at work here is that
the anger comes from a deep prejudice that the spotlight of concern should never
be shone upon males. Males are not the proper recipients of concern. Females must
retain their monopoly on victimhood and its attendant benefits. This is feminist
intensified gynocentrism and its correlate, male disposability: the empathy gap.
This is unfortunate because the peculiar characteristic of compassion is that it is
not diminished by being bestowed more widely: the quality of mercy is not strained.
7. Work, Pay, Tax, Spending and Pensions
State providing as a matter of routine soon creates a victim culture in which all but
the richest people feel that far from owing the community anything, they deserve
more from it. This deprives the mass of citizens of the elementary self-respect
which they need to have in order for a moral economy to operate.
Geoff Dench (1940 - 2018), Transforming Men
The fundamental public duty of any able-bodied citizen is to minimise calls on
community resources both by being self-reliant where he or she can, and through
helping out family members too, in order to limit the use made of state help.
Communities would soon get overdrawn without families.
Geoff Dench (1940 - 2018), Transforming Men
In this long chapter I examine UK employment, pay, working hours, tax, pensions
and spending and how these vary with sex. This includes data on unemployment
and economic inactivity for men and women. The polarization of employment by
gender is considered, and examples given of occupations dominated by women,
including the significance of the public sector in this respect. I then consider one of
the most contentious subjects in the context of gender: the pay gap, including how
it varies with age and with full time or part time working. ONS data for the gender
pay gap are compared with data from individual company submissions under the
2017 legislation which has made gender pay gap reporting obligatory in the UK.
The latter data is examined to determine the proportion of companies which pay
women significantly more than men, as well as vice-versa. Based on ONS data I
also consider examples of occupations for which the pay gap is in favour of women,
to balance the usual narrative.
I then examine total paid working hours by sex, and the greater prevalence of part
time working amongst women. This provides a complementary picture to pay: men
earn more and also work more paid hours. Evidence from British Social Attitudes
Surveys is reviewed to discern whether there is general public contentment, or
discontent, as regards the prevailing gendered working patterns. Next, I consider
who spends the household money, irrespective of who may earn it. There is a long
section on pensions, concentrating upon the UK, and drawing out inequality issues.
Finally, I discuss the contribution to unpaid housework by the two sexes, including
caring responsibilities.
The picture which emerges from this broad sweep of issues related to work and
financial matters is far from being the one which is usually presented.
7.1 UK Unemployment Data
The "unemployed" are defined as those without a job but who have been actively
seeking work in the last four weeks and are able to start work in the next two
weeks. The "labour force" consists of those people in the nominal working age
range (16 to 64) who are employed, plus those who are unemployed in the above
sense. People who are of nominal working age who are not within the labour force
are said to be "economically inactive". This includes full time students and all
people who do not wish to be in paid work, e.g., full time home-makers, those who
are retired prior to age 65, or simply people who do not wish to work.
The unemployment rate is the number of unemployed as a percentage of the labour
force. Note that the unemployment rate is not usually defined as a percentage of
the whole population or even the whole population of working age. The economic
inactivity rate is the number of economically inactive people as a percentage of the
working age population. The labour force participation rate is the number of
people in the labour force as a percentage of the working age population. The
economic inactivity rate and the labour force participation rate are thus
complementary measures; they add to 100%.
Figure 7.1 shows the unemployment rate in the UK from 1971 to the end of 2017,
(Office for National Statistics, 2018k). In April 2018, the UK unemployment rate
(4.2%) was at a 42-year low and was essentially equal for men and women.
However, historically, the unemployment rate for men has been higher than that
for women since 1981. The peaks in the unemployment rate evident in Figure 7.1
demonstrate how recessions affect men's employment more than women's (e.g.,
those in the early 1980s, early 1990s and post-2008). At the end of 2017 there were
782,000 unemployed men and 689,000 unemployed women. However, it is
important to recall that the 'unemployment rate' only measures those actively
seeking and able to work. It does not measure those who have dropped out of being
recognised as economically active.
Young people who leave education at age 16 have very high rates of
unemployment. In 2018 the unemployment rate for 16- to 17-year-olds in the UK
was about 30%, a decrease from about 40% a few years earlier. This is the
demographic within which much future disadvantage will be focused. Young people
who are not in education, employment or training ("NEETs") are of particular
interest. Figure 7.2 shows the number of NEETs in England in the age range 16 to
24 as a percentage of people of the same age and sex versus year, (Office for
National Statistics, 2018g). There used to be more female NEETs, but in recent
years the prevalence of NEETs has converged for the two sexes.
Figure 7.1: UK Unemployment Rate by Sex versus Year (Percent)
Figure 7.2: NEETs in England by Sex versus Year
7.2 UK Economic Inactivity
People between 16 and 64 who do not feature as either employed or unemployed
are the economically inactive. One of the most significant features of the huge
social changes over the last half-century is the increasing participation of women in
the labour force. Figure 7.3 shows how the percentage of women who are
economically inactive has reduced from 45% in 1971 to an all-time low of 26% by
2017, (Office for National Statistics, 2018j). What is less widely appreciated is the
huge increase in men's economic inactivity. In 1971 only 5% of men were
economically inactive, i.e., 95% of working age men were participating in the
labour force. Now some 17% of working age men are economically inactive.
Figure 7.3: UK Economic Inactivity Rates by Sex (Percent)
The obvious feature of Figure 7.3 which tends to be elided in popular discourse is
that the increasing economic participation of women has been largely mirrored by a
decreasing economic participation of men. Overall, economic inactivity has reduced
only marginally, from 25% (1971) to 21% (2017). The main reason for this is more
women in the workplace (fewer women as full time home-keepers). But this is
offset by substantial increases in the number of full time students and also increases
in the number of long term sick. The dominant reason for men being economically
inactive is being in full time education, closely followed by long term sickness. The
dominant reason for women being economically inactive is being a full time homekeeper followed by being in full time education and long term sickness.
Over the period 1971 to 2017 the working age male population of the UK increased
from 16.5 million to 20.5 million. Hence, in 1971 there were 0.8 million economically
inactive men in the UK, but by 2017 this had increased to 3.4 million. There are
more than four times more economically inactive men of working age than there
used to be in 1971.
The bulk of the sex disparity in the economically inactive is due to the difference in
full time home-keeping. In the last 25 years, the number of men in a full time homekeeping role has increased substantially from about 100,000 to about a quarter of a
million, see Figure 7.4. Over the same period the number of economically inactive
women in that role has reduced from just under 3 million to just under 2 million.
Figure 7.4: Numbers of UK Home-keepers by Sex versus Year (note the different
scales for the two sexes)
There are still more women than men under 65 who are retired, but these numbers
are converging due to the raising of the retirement age for women.
At the end of 2017, 25% of men and 22% of women who were economically
inactive did, in fact, want a job (850,000 men and 1.16 million women respectively).
These figures are larger than the numbers classed as unemployed, illustrating how
the unemployment figures under-state the number of people who want a job. The
sum of the unemployed and the economically inactive who wished to work at
December 2017 was 1.63 million men and 1.85 million women.
Finally, there is a sizeable number of the economically inactive classed either as
"discouraged workers" or simply as "other" (440,000 men and 538,000 women).
We might expect to find particular disadvantage in these categories.
7.3 Gendered Occupations
Employment tends to be polarised by sex. This is often referred to as
"occupational segregation". However, the term "segregation" is loaded, redolent
as it is of racially segregated societies and hence a separation enforced by
hegemony. But it is personal preference which drives most employment areas to
deviate substantially and consistently from a random distribution of the sexes.
The number of employees in the UK by occupation category may be obtained from
the Government dataset dated April-June 2017, (Office for National Statistics,
2017f). 331 listed employment areas included data sufficient to deduce a ratio of
male to female employees. 142 of these (43%) employed more women than men;
189 (57%) employed more men than women. Just 73 occupations (22%) had
employee numbers within plus or minus 30% of equality. 151 (46%) had an excess
of male employees over female employees exceeding 30%. 107 (32%) had an
excess of female employees over male employees exceeding 30%. This is
employment polarisation. We hear a great deal about employment segregation –
but generally only in respect of a small subset of jobs, namely certain desirable
professions in which men dominate but feminist women covet.
A thorough review of employment by gender across all occupations is beyond the
scope of this book. However, since the subject at hand is male inequality, it is
appropriate to consider briefly some of the sectors and occupations in which men
are underrepresented. A sample of the 142 occupations which employ more women
is provided in Table 7.1 together with the percentage by which women outnumber
men, (Office for National Statistics, 2017f). The list is not exhaustive, merely some
illustrations. They are overwhelmingly dominated by jobs that involve working
with people or animals. In contrast, the occupations in which men are most
emphatically dominant are the skilled trades, which primarily involve the
manipulation of inanimate matter.
Table 7.1: Examples of occupations in which women outnumber men (UK).
Standard Occupational Classification % Excess of Women
Dental nurses (49,138)*
Childcare and Related Personal Services 1352
Nursing and Midwifery Professionals 541
Senior care workers 503
Social workers 391
Houseparents and residential wardens 378
Therapy Professionals 376
Care workers and home carers 372
Child and early years officers 350
Special needs education teaching professionals 343
Finance officers 332
Nursing auxiliaries and assistants 323
Health associate professionals 312
Pharmaceutical technicians 300
Education advisers and school inspectors 201
Office Managers and Supervisors 185
Pharmacists 164
Careers advisers and vocational guidance specialists 162
Youth and community workers 161
Counsellors 158
Health Associate Professionals 153
Other Financial administrative occupations 152
Travel agents 150
Socialservices managers and directors 141
Local government administrative occupations 139
Other welfare and housing associate professionals 130
Physiotherapists 128
Senior professionals of educational establishments 115
Housing officers 111
Medical radiographers 106
Public relations professionals 102
Conference and exhibition managers and organisers 97
Legal associate professionals 97
Public services associate professionals 89
Credit controllers 80
Veterinarians 71
Authors, writers and translators 58
Human resources and industrial relations officers 56
Buyers and procurement officers 49
Health services and public health managers and directors 37
Marketing associate professionals 37
Medical and dental technicians, Ophthalmic opticians 34
*no male dental nurses listed, this is the actual number of female dental nurses
Even those professions in which men are most dominant tend to be associated with
the inanimate rather than the animate, e.g., engineering and IT. This is hardly news
but bears repeating, as does the fact that this division into people versus things is
reflected also in subject choice at university (see chapter 2).
7.3.1 The Public Sector
In 2017/18 total public spending was £802 billion (UK Government, 2018b). This
£802 billion public spending compares with the UK's total GDP which is about £2
trillion (Trading Economics, 2018). In December 2018, some 5.37 million people
were employed in the public sector, and 27.34 million in the private sector, (Office
for National Statistics, 2018h). Hence, the public sector accounts for roughly 40%
of GDP, but only 16.5% of employment.
Across all areas, women are 46% of those employed, men 54% (this includes parttime workers). But in the public sector, women comprise about two-thirds of
employees, twice as many as men. In contrast, women account for only about 42%
of private sector employees (NCVO UK Civil Society Almanac, 2017). Staff in the
voluntary sector, totalling 853,000 people in 2016, are about 65% women (NCVO
UK Civil Society Almanac, 2017).
Health and education together account for significantly more than half of public
employees, and both these areas are strongly dominated by women. About 1.1
million people are employed in schools in England alone, (UK Government, 2018s).
Across the whole of the UK education sector there are 1.51 million public
employees, (Office for National Statistics, 2015g). The sex ratio of school
employees is as follows, (Higher Education Statistics Authority, 2016),
Of all teaching staff, across all schools, 24.2% are men and 75.8% are women;
Auxiliary staff across all schools are 20.4% men and 79.6% women;
Across all schools and all staff, 22.1% are men and 77.9% are women.
At March 2018 the NHS employed 1.64 million people, UK wide (Office for
National Statistics, 2018h). This comprises 1.33 million in England and about
161,000, 84,000 and 66,000 in Scotland, Wales and N.Ireland respectively (NHS
Choices, 2016). Of these, roughly half are clinically qualified (doctors, nurses,
midwives, dental staff, health service staff, radiologists, paramedics, etc). Overall,
NHS employees are roughly 75% women (90% of nurses/midwives, 80% of nonprofessional staff, and about half of the rest (The King's Fund, 2018).
Hence, education and healthcare account for about 3.15 million of the 5.35 million
public sector workers (59%). Of this 3.15 million, about 2.4 million (76%) are
women. Of the remaining 2.2 million public sector employees, excluding health and
education, more than half (53%) are women.
7.3.2 Armed Forces
Between 9% and 14% of UK armed service personnel are women. Women account
for a larger percentage of officers than other ranks across all three main services,
Table 7.2, (House of Commons Library, 2017). The proportion of deaths accounted
for by women in recent military campaigns was substantially smaller than their
proportion in the forces. In the campaign that followed the invasion of Iraq on 20
March 2003 and came to an end in April 2009, the UK war deaths were 173 men
and 6 women (3% women), (BBC News, 2016). In the 14 years starting in October
2001, the number of UK war deaths in Afghanistan were 453 men and 3 women
(0.7% women), (BBC News, 2015).
Table 7.2: Percentage of UK Armed Service Personnel who are Women
Service Officers Other Ranks
Army 11.8% 8.6%
Navy 9.3% 8.9%
RAF 16.9% 13.2%
Figure 7.5: The Number of UK Apprentices by Sex and Year
7.3.3 Apprenticeships
With one exception (which looks anomalous) more young women than young men
start, and complete, apprenticeships, see Figure 7.5, (Department for Education,
2019). Nevertheless, Unionlearn, the learning and skills organisation of the TUC,
together with the National Apprenticeship Service and the Skills Funding Agency,
have published research which gives the opposite impression. They write in their
report,
'recommendations are made for how the range of stakeholders in the
Apprenticeship system can take action to increase interest in Apprenticeships and
reduce barriers to access generally, as well as specifically act to promote the
greater inclusion of young women and ethnic minority groups.' (Becci Newton and
Joy Williams, 2013)
It is easy to see why well-meaning people will get entirely the wrong impression
when such misleading material is so common. There is a mindset so intent on seeing
female disadvantage everywhere that evidence to the contrary becomes invisible
to them.
7.3.4 The Gender Equality "Paradox"
A perennial theme amongst feminists is the underrepresentation of women in
STEM subjects at university and in STEM employment. The so-called "paradox"
is that data from many countries shows that the more "gender-equal" the society,
the greater is the degree of occupational gender segregation. For example, the
greater the gender equality, the smaller the proportion of women in STEM
occupations. Stoet and Geary (2018) have presented a particularly thorough
analysis and their main results are shown in Figure 7.6. The y-axis in these graphs
is a measure of how gender-equal is the country in question. Both graphs plot
points representing a range of countries. Graph (b) shows that the more genderequal the society, the smaller the proportion of women in STEM (correlation
-0.47). Conversely, the countries with the largest proportion of women in STEM
are countries which are not noted for their equitable treatment of women.
The so-called "paradox" is only paradoxical if one insists on maintaining that there
are no innate differences between the sexes. Actually, the "paradox" is evidence
that there are innate sex differences. If one is happy to acknowledge innate sex
differences, then there is no paradox. The differences in question need not be
differences in ability. They may be differences in preference, and probably are.
One of the things which exercises women's advocates is that women's
underrepresentation in STEM appears incommensurate with their ability in science
at school level.
Figure 7.6: A Measure of a Country's Gender Equality (GGGI) versus, (a) Gender
Gap in Intraindividual Science Performance, and, (b) Percentage of Women in
STEM Graduates, from (Stoet and Geary, 2018)
Figure 7.6: A Measure of a Country's Gender Equality (GGGI) versus, (a) Gender
Gap in Intraindividual Science Performance, and, (b) Percentage of Women in
STEM Graduates, from (Stoet and Geary, 2018)
Graph (a) in Figure 7.6 is particularly interesting in this regard. It uses an x-axis
defined by the gender gap in an intraindividual science performance measure. This
measure depends, not just upon performance in science, but also on performance in
maths and reading. The intraindividual science score for a given individual is the
difference between that individual's performance in science and his (or her)
average performance across science, maths and reading. Thus, an intraindividual
science score may be boosted by being poor at reading, say. A girl may have a
science score equal to that of a boy, but girls who are good at science tend also to
be good at the other subjects, and perhaps even better at reading. A boy who is
good at science, however, is often poor at reading. The gender gap in their
intraindividual science performance measures may therefore be large, not because
the boy is better at science but because he is poor at reading (though the measure
would also register a boy's particularly strong science performance, of course).
Graph (a) shows that the more gender equal the country, the greater is the gender
gap in the average intraindividual science performance measure (correlation 0.42).
From this perspective the dominance of men in STEM may be as much to do with
women who are verbally gifted compared to men as it is to do with men who are
scientifically strong. Even women who are scientifically capable may opt for nonscientific subjects because they are just as capable in those alternative subjects,
and perhaps prefer them.
I have long maintained that boys opt for maths, physics and IT at A Level partly to
get away from the dreaded word, lack of facility with which has plagued them
throughout their school career up to that point. Graph (a) may be a manifestation
of that, in part.
The bottom line is that UK women dominate in every subject apart from TEM and
architecture (recalling that women dominate in the pure sciences in the UK).
People who agonise over "women in STEM" never seem concerned that, other
things being unchanged, more "women in STEM" would mean that women's
overall dominance at university would increase above its current 37%. The lesson
of Graph (a) may be – and this is the true paradox – that achieving a greater
proportion of women in STEM may be best accomplished by improving boys'
reading and writing.
If the innate sex differences which lie behind Figure 7.6 relate to preference, then
this might be expected to manifest also in non-academic measures. Giolla and
Kajonius (2018) have shown that sex differences in personality are larger in more
gender equal countries, Figure 7.7 (correlation 0.69). Sex difference in personality
was defined by measuring the "big five" personality traits (neuroticism,
extraversion, openness, agreeableness and conscientiousness) and defining a
"distance" measure, essentially as the Euclidean distance between the two points
in this 5-dimensional space. The Scandinavian countries are most gender-equal and
also have the largest sex difference in personality. Does a more equal culture cause
the personalities of the two sexes to diverge? Or does a more equal culture merely
provide the opportunity for innate personality differences to be manifest?
Figure 7.7: Gender Equality Index versus Sex Difference in Personality, from
(Giolla and Kajonius, 2018)
Giolla and Kajonius (2018) also show how each of the big five personality traits
vary with the countries' gender equality, disaggregated by sex. Where increased
gender equality has a beneficial effect, the benefit is greater for women than for
men (improved openness and agreeableness). Greater gender equality leads to
decreased conscientiousness in both sexes, but the effect is more marked for men.
Greater gender equality leads to greater introversion in men, but not in women. In
short, greater gender equality is beneficial for women (except as regards diminished
conscientiousness). But the same cannot be said for men, the benefits being more
muted and there being as many disbenefits. This may be because the standard
measure of "gender equality" is actually a measure of "women's equality", not a
measure of equality at all. If more (of this type of) gender equality results in
divergence of personality between the sexes, is this related to increasing inter-sex
conflict? (I note in passing that measuring only the "big five" personality traits
probably underestimates sex differences, which might be greater in the associated
sub-traits).
7.3.5 Diversity?
There is now a very strong initiative across most large corporations, driven by
Government, to achieve "balance" or "diversity", generally defined as a
workforce whose demographic composition mimics that of the population as a
whole – but only in a limited sense. The demographic characteristics which are
subject to this equalisation initiative vary but generally include sex, ethnicity,
disability status and sexuality. (At what point did it become acceptable to make
revealing one's sexuality obligatory?).
For example, the BBC has declared their targets, both on and off screen, to be
50% women, 15% BAME, 8% with disabilities, and 8% LBGT, (BBC, 2016). There
is no requirement to employ straight white men in the same proportion as in the
general public. The over-constrained nature of these quotas means that it is
inevitable, if the quotas are met, that the number of straight white men employed
will be substantially less than in the general public. Do not imagine this is an
oversight. It is a deliberate plan to de-power white men. One hopes they will find a
good number of talented disabled, black lesbians otherwise the quotas will leave
just 19% for heterosexual white men. This drive to "equalise" across the
demographic spectrum (apart from heterosexual white men) is, in some cases,
being insisted upon at all levels in the organisation. This is to prevent those nasty
old white patriarchs filling up their quota of women and ethnic minorities with
cleaners and junior clerks, of course.
This is not a joke. It is overt discrimination and it is going to happen. Disabled
BAME women really will be able to name their price, even if they have absolutely
nothing to offer the company, especially if they are also willing to identify as
lesbian or bisexual. Such people will be gold dust in order to meet the quotas whilst
allowing straight white men in senior positions to hang onto their jobs. There will
be a disabled BAME lesbian on every Board of any company with quotas – or, at
least, every Board that can find one.
Anecdotally, it is already beginning to be noticed by the unwanted heterosexual
white men that they are being passed over for promotions on the sole grounds of
being the white, male and straight. One does not need to be a genius to foretell the
inevitable resentment that will follow. Unfair, enforced diversity is divisity. The
disgruntled men will be told that this is what loss of their male privilege feels like.
No, it's what prejudice feels like. But companies will still be reliant on the
dedication of these same men – more so than before as senior roles become filled
with sub-standard people who merely meet a demographic requirement. Becoming
increasingly dependent upon a section of staff whom you are disadvantaging and
alienating is not a good business model. It is not hard to foresee companies
collapsing as a result, but the cause will never be admitted. It is also easy to guess
that competent men suffering this treatment will form new companies with
predominantly white male staff, putting up two fingers to both the law and social
disapprobation.
But I feel confident that this draconian drive for equalisation will leave the public
sector, with its two-thirds female workforce, untouched. The areas where there
would be real social benefit in greater gender balance is in teaching, nursing,
psychology, counselling and social work. But I doubt that these occupations will
come under any pressure at all to employ more men in their grossly female skewed
professions. Nor will anyone express concern that the blue-collar skilled trades will
continue to be a male monopoly. The drive for more women in professional areas
where they are currently underrepresented is not about fairness or equality; it's
about power. "Diversity" is a strategy to de-power white men and hence to
facilitate socialist State control.
Table 7.3: Percentage of Female Applicants for Tenure-Track Positions Invited for
Interview and Offered Positions at 89 Research Universities in the USA, 2010, from
(Ceci et al, 2014)
There is already evidence that female candidates are preferred for academic posts
in STEM. In chapter two I discussed the 2015 findings of Wendy Williams and
Stephen Ceci, based on fictional applicants to academic posts, which indicated a
preference for female candidates over male candidates by a factor of between two
and three in biology, engineering and psychology (and also in economics as regards
female faculty preference). A long and detailed paper the previous year, (Ceci et al,
2014), indicates an emphatic preference for female candidates across STEM
subjects (Table 7.3). These data suggest that female candidates for STEM tenuretrack academic positions in the USA have on average an 85% greater chance of
being hired than their male counterparts.
7.4 The UK Gender Pay Gap
With the possible exception of sexual assault, the gender pay gap is the issue which
most exercises people advocating for "women's equality". The controversy has
been exacerbated by the legal requirement on UK companies with more than 250
staff to report their gender pay gap data annually. The first deadline was April
2018, (UK Government, 2017a). Data submitted by individual companies provide
ample opportunity for those wishing to play the politician and "cherry pick" data
which suit their purpose. I take a look at the data submitted in section 7.5 below.
Firstly, I review the pay data from the ONS's Annual Survey of Hours and
Earnings (ASHE), which is available for several years the latest being 2017 (Office
for National Statistics, 2017d).
It should be noted that ASHE, which is the source usually quoted in discussions
about pay, relates to surveys of employees only. The self-employed do not feature
in this dataset. It should not be assumed that this excludes only high-earning
business people. Many of the self-employed are tradesmen, for example, whose
earnings may be precarious. Recall it is the self-employed who may legally pay
themselves less than the minimum wage, and frequently do.
These surveys take a 1% sample of data from HMRC PAYE (tax office pay-asyou-earn) returns. The data refer to the UK as a whole. It is important to
distinguish between earnings and pay rate. One person will earn more than another
if he works more hours but their pay rates are the same. Overtime often attracts a
higher pay rate. Thus, a person working the same number of hours as another, with
the same nominal pay rate, will nevertheless earn more if a larger proportion of his
working hours are overtime (antisocial) hours. Finally, one person may earn more
than another due to receiving a performance related bonus. All these things would
complicate comparisons if included. Consequently, it is appropriate to concentrate
upon hourly rates of pay excluding overtime and bonus payments.
Two further factors are of importance. Firstly, the distinction between part-time
and full-time working is important. Full-time working is defined as employees
working more than 30 paid hours per week (for the teaching professions, 25 or
more hours). Secondly, the age-dependence of the gender pay gap is also very
important.
It is usual to concentrate upon the median value of the pay gap, rather than the
mean, since the latter can be sensitive to a small number of outliers. The pay gap is
defined as the difference between men's and women's hourly pay rates expressed
as a percentage of men's pay rate (excluding overtime and bonuses). Table 7.4
shows that the median pay gap for part time workers in 2017 was in favour of
women by 5.1%. For full time workers, the median pay gap was in favour of men by
9.1%. The figures of Table 7.4 apply before tax. After income tax, the median pay
gap for full time workers is about 7% (Collins W. , 2017a). These figures relate to
all ages combined. Figure 7.8 shows the full time gender pay gap as a histogram
against age range. This reveals an important feature: the gender pay gap is almost
zero, within about 2%, between the typical graduate age (22) and 39.
Table 7.4: All-Ages Median Gender Pay Rate Gap Excluding Overtime (UK). 2015
data from (Office for National Statistics, 2015a); 2017 data from (Office for
National Statistics, 2017b). Negative values mean a pay rate gap in favour of
women.
Employment 2015 2017
Full Time 9.4% 9.1%
Part Time -6.5% -5.1%
Figure 7.8: Full-time UK Median Gender Pay Gap as Histogram against Age
Another important feature of the data, which is rarely brought out in discussions of
only median or mean values, is the huge spread of pay rates. Figure 7.9 shows, for
people in the age range 22 to 39, the distribution of full time pay rates, from the
lowest to the highest decile. This Figure also illustrates how tiny is the gender pay
gap in this age range.
Figure 7.10 is a similar graph for the age ranges 40-49 and 50-59. In the latter age
range, for which the gender pay gap is greatest, the pay rate for men varies from
£9.00/hr to £35.68/hr (lower and upper deciles). For women the range is from
£8.18/hr to £27.01/hr. Hence, the gender gap is small compared with the huge range
of pay rates. The overlap of the distributions is more significant than the difference
of their medians.
Figure 7.9: Full Time UK Pay Rate Distributions for Men and Women, Ages 21 to
39
More women than men work part time and the pay gap is in women's favour for
part time working. More men than women work full time and the pay gap is in
men's favour for full time working. Full time working attracts substantially higher
hourly pay rates, on average, than part time working. The pay rate penalty for
working part time is far larger than the gender pay gap, as illustrated by Table 7.5
below.
Some sources combine all workers to produce a "gender pay gap" which covers
both full time and part time working. Because far more women than men work part
time, and more men than women work full time, and because of the very different
pay rates for full time and part time working, this produces a much larger apparent
"gender pay gap", namely 18.4% in 2017. But this is merely statistical
legerdemain. This figure reflects the pay rate penalty for part time working, not
really a gender gap at all.
Figure 7.10: Full Time UK Pay Rate Distributions for Men and Women, Ages 40 to
59
Table 7.5: Full Time and Part Time UK Median Pay Rates Compared, £/hour, 2017
Employment Men Women Gender pay gap
Full time 14.48 13.16 9.1%
Part time 8.76 9.21 -5.1%
In an excellent short summary of pay gap data, Kate Andrews of the Institute of
Economic Affairs has decried the use of misleading measures which purport to be,
but are not, a "gender pay gap", (Andrews, 2017).
So far in this section, all data has applied to the UK as a whole. However there are
substantial differences between the four nations of the UK. The disaggregated
median full time gender pay gaps for the four nations in 2017, taken from Figure 14
of (Office for National Statistics, 2017c), were England 10%, Wales 6.3%,
Scotland 6.6% and Northern Ireland -3.4%. When the then Prime Minister
(Thereas May) refers to the 'burning injustice of the gender pay gap'
,
(Casalicchio, 2018), she, like others of the same view, never mentions that men in
Northern Ireland must, by the same reasoning, also be considered as suffering a
burning injustice. But a more measured perspective is that these gender pay gaps
are tiny in comparison with the gap between the lowest paid and the highest paid
quintiles, as shown by Figures 7.9 and 7.10. The concentration of the popular
narrative on the gender pay gap does not reflect a concern over social injustice, as
its proponents assert. Actually, it deflects attention from the greater pay gap. This
skewed focus reflects the interests of the dominant voices, middle class feminist
women, and their quest for power.
The assertion that the gender pay gap represents "less pay for the same work" is
mere propaganda, which even those who assert it know to be untrue. The
predominant reason for a full time pay gap in favour of men relates to working
hours and years (section 7.6). The absence of any significant pay gap below the age
of 40 does not support the idea of endemic sexism in pay. (Why would the
patriarchy apply their vile misogyny only to women over 40?). Nor does it support
the idea that men on average work in higher paid occupations. For every highly
paid IT professional there is a very badly paid manual worker. Far from women
being disadvantaged when like is compared with like, the increasing education gap
in favour of women is likely to drive the opposite disadvantage. For example, in the
USA, it has been the case for a decade now that unmarried, childless women under
30 living in cities are paid more than men in the same position, by up to 20%
(Luscombe, 2010).
7.5 Gender Pay Gap Reporting: Company Submissions
As of 18th June 2018, 10,522 companies had uploaded their 2017/18 pay gap data,
as per Government requirements. The data can be obtained from (UK
Government, 2018c). Like ASHE, the company reporting data relates only to
employees (agency staff are also included, but not the self-employed). Also
included are data on bonus payments.
The median of the 10,522 submitted median pay gaps is 9.2%. This is in excellent
agreement with the 9.1% median pay gap derived from the ASHE (see Table 7.2).
(In passing I note that the mean of the 10,522 submitted mean pay gaps is 14.3%,
which is also in excellent agreement with the mean pay gap reported by ASHE in
2017, i.e., 14.1%).
The median bonus payment received by men was 19.5%, compared with 17.2% for
women. The median gender gap in bonus payment was 5.0%, substantially less than
the gender gap in normal full time pay rates.
In terms of the overall picture, the pay gap submissions under the new legislation
do not alter what was already known via the ASHE. However, unlike the ASHE,
the new legislation provides published data for each company separately. This
provides an opportunity for people to 'cherry pick' companies according to their
reported pay gaps. The press was full of examples of this in April 2018, the
deadline for submissions. For example, the Independent informed us that, 'Ryanair
pays women 67 per cent less than men, on average….The figures mean that for
every £1 men are paid at Ryanair, a woman is paid just 33p', (Chapman, 2018).
They did not mention that whilst men at Ryanair got an average bonus of 27.8%,
women received an average bonus of 82.8%. Moreover, the pay gap has an obvious
origin in the case of an airline company: most men are pilots, whereas most women
are cabin crew.
Of the 10,522 companies which had submitted data as of 18th June 2018, 1,932
reported pay gaps in favour of women on either a mean or median basis. 15
companies reported median pay gaps in favour of women exceeding 60%. Four of
these were sizeable companies in the 1000 to 5000 staff range. Median pay gaps
ranged up to 197% in favour of women. I note this only to illustrate that the
Ryanair example could be done in reverse, if one were so inclined.
The ONS has a very useful on-line service which provides pay gaps disaggregated
by employment category and based on the 2016 ASHE (Office for National
Statistics, 2016a). The data is based on medians. Most occupations return a
positive pay gap, i.e., in favour of men, because the overall pay gap is in favour of
men. However, there are many employment categories in which men are paid less
(negative pay gap). Some of the employment categories where the pay gap is
negative may surprise. They include, in order of increasing pay gap in favour of
women,
Primary and nursery education teaching professionals;
Chartered surveyors;
Human resources & industrial relations officers;
Child & early years officers;
Civil engineers;
Receptionists;
Electrical engineers;
Therapists;
Musicians;
Veterinarians;
Psychologists;
Security guards & related occupations;
Physical scientists;
Medical radiographers;
Counsellors;
Physiotherapists;
Fitness instructors;
Probation officers;
Midwives
This is just a small sample, and is based on 'all' working, both part time and full
time. The pay gap for midwives is an enormous 62% in favour of women. This may
help explain why only about 100 of the UK's roughly 31,000 midwives are men
(0.3%), though men also face discrimination in that role quite apart from the pay
(Mertz, 2014). The Sex Discrimination Act was passed in 1975, but midwifery was
made an exception due to firm opposition to male midwives from the Royal College
of Midwives. This was not overturned until 1983. One of the first men to qualify
and practice as a midwife, Richard Mountford, finally brought a sex discrimination
case, due mostly to the attitude of GPs rather than the expectant mothers, (Mertz,
2014).
7.6 Working Hours: The Gender Pay Gap is a Work Gap
Those advocating for women will cite the gender pay gap (for full time workers) as
an instance of women's disadvantage. However, it is clear from the data that the
9.1% median pay rate gender gap for full time workers in the UK (in 2017) is
related to men's longer working hours and greater number of continuous years in
their jobs.
The popular narrative regarding women's historical working hours is at variance
with reality. It is worth a brief digression to understand how this false perception
has arisen. With the industrial revolution came the rise of the middle class, or
bourgeoisie. In gender politics this is crucial, because it is in respect of women that
class distinctions became most emphatic amongst the resulting nouveau riche.
Whilst the mill owner could hardly be compared with his workers, he was, at least,
involved in running his business. The hallmark of the middle-class wife, on the
other hand, was complete disassociation from the world of work. At this point one
might be tempted to refer to "the male world of work", but, of course, it wasn't.
The mills were full of women. Women had, in truth, been closely involved in
remunerated work throughout history. From the feudal system and the era of
domestic trades through to the industrial period, women (and children) had worked
alongside men. Sure, women's working years, and hours, were constrained by
childbirth and childcare, and also limited to areas not requiring great physical
strength. Nevertheless, in 1850 to 1900, at least 30% of the workforce were
women (the largest number being in domestic service). To quote Catherine Hakim
(2011),
'Women's full-time employment rate has remained constant, hovering between
30% and 40%, about one-third of the age group since at least 1850 in Britain,
similar to many other European countries.'
The perception that "men did paid work, women did not" was never the correct
story for the working class. The perception that "men went to work, women stayed
at home" was only the norm for middle class woman, the bourgeoisie. The vague
impression amongst the public that the non-working wife was the historical norm is
a result of the dominance of the feminist narrative and the fact that feminism is a
movement of middle-class women. What has changed over the last 50 years is the
large-scale entry of women into the professions (i.e., middle class jobs). What has
not changed greatly is women's proportion of total paid working hours.
Averaged over the year April 2017 to March 2018, the totality of men in the UK
worked 620.1 million paid hours per week compared with women's 409.1 million
hours (Office for National Statistics, 2018e). Thus, men do 52% more paid hours
work than women. The average number of hours worked by part-time workers was
very similar for men and women (16.1 and 16.3 hours respectively). But for fulltime workers, men worked on average 39.1 hours compared to women's 34.1 hours
in their main job.
In December 2018 there were 17.7 million men and 15.0 million women employed in
the UK, (Office for National Statistics, 2018h). Women's employment is strongly
skewed towards part-time working, with 42% of employed women working parttime compared to only 13% of men (House of Commons Briefing Paper, 2018).
Hence, the number of workers in the UK in 2017/18, disaggregated by part time or
full time working is as given in Table 7.6. Three times as many men as women work
more than 45 hours per week (White and Witty, 2009).
Table 7.6: Number of Workers in UK
millions Full Time Part Time
Men 15.4 2.3
Women 8.7 6.3
Rates of pay increase with seniority and experience, which in turn result from
working more hours and accumulating more continuous years in the job. The
percentage differences between men's and women's working hours are very
substantial, far greater than the gender pay gap. The former is therefore the most
likely cause of the latter. Consequently, even people (ostensibly) advocating for
women tend to concentrate upon increasing women's paid working hours, arguing
that this should be facilitated by state-subsidised childcare and by encouraging men
to 'lean out', i.e., to work fewer hours and do more childcare.
Whilst this may be the opinion of certain women's advocates, it is not necessarily
the opinion of the majority of women themselves. It is worth considering briefly
women's wishes in respect of employment. This is pertinent because, if women are
being constrained from partaking in paid work as much as they would wish, then
'work and pay' is indeed an area of disadvantage for women. On the other hand, if
women's working patterns predominantly reflect their unconstrained wishes, then
men's substantially larger number of working hours represent men's positive
contribution to family life, and society generally, rather than being an aspect of
"patriarchal dominance".
The opinion of both men and women in the UK on these issues is revealed by the
British Social Attitudes Survey (2012). The data summarised below refers to both
male and female respondents, but, interestingly, there was generally little
difference between the responses of men and women to these questions.
As is common with surveys, similar questions can elicit very different answers
depending on how the question is phrased. For example, responding to the question
'a man's job is to earn money; a woman's job is to look after home and family',
Figure 5.2 of the British Social Attitudes Survey (2012) records that only 13%
agreed. This is not surprising because the phrasing of the question makes it sound
like a vote for patriarchal oppression. People have been primed by the popular
narrative to react to, and resist, suggestions which sound like "a woman's place is
in the home".
But other questions reveal that, in truth, this sentiment does continue to colour
what most people think – or, at least, a man's place is definitely not in the
home. For example, Table 5.3 of the survey gives the responses to the question
'what is the best and least desirable way for a family with a child under school age
to organise family and work life by sex'. This is how Glen Poole (2014b)
summarised the responses,
69% of us think dad should be the primary earner;
9% of us think mum and dad should share the earning responsibility equally;
Zero percent think mum should be the primary earner;
73% of us think dads should work full time;
5% of us think dads should work part time;
Zero percent of us think dads should stay at home full time.
No one (within rounding) approves of a man being a full-time stay-at-home dad,
and no one wants to see a woman as the primary earner. Table 5.1 of the survey
reveals that only 5% of respondents think mums should work full time before the
children start school.
Overwhelmingly, people (of both sexes) expect men to be the primary resource
provider. One of the disadvantageous aspects of this for men is that they have no
choice. Provision of resource is a man's only "permitted" role (in the sense of
being the only role which the majority of society sanctions as desirable). In
contrast, according to Table 5.1 of the survey, women have a range of options (not
working or working part time or working full time) which society regards as
roughly equally acceptable,
33% think mums should stay at home until the children start school;
43% think mums should work part time until the children start school;
28% think mums should work full time once the kids start school;
52% think mums should work part time after the kids are at school.
Those who advocate for increasing women's working hours and getting more
women working full time do not reflect the majority opinion of women themselves
(nor men's opinion, not that anyone is interested in that). Dench (2010) summarises
the choice of many women to work part-time, and the disconnect between women's
wishes and the lobbying by women's advocacy groups, as follows.
(page 28) 'What is very significant here is that women working part-time are not
only happier in themselves and their family lives than those working full time, but
also than housewives not working at all. Unfortunately, many analysts and
commentators in this field have been reluctant to acknowledge this; and those like
Catherine Hakim who have recognised women's attachment to domestic life –
including the preference of many to look after their children themselves – have
come under heavy attack.'
Referring to these critics, Dench writes,
(page 29/30) 'The reason for this hostility seems to be that, in the eyes of
commentators such as these, traditional family practices, even or especially
modified traditional practices, are not connected to women's own desires, but are
cultural inventions which constrain women into particular roles that are against
their better interests. Crompton and most other academic commentators in this
area do not seem to believe that any woman really wants to play a central part in
family life – which they tend to dismiss as unwelcome "conventionally assigned
family responsibilities", which get thrust upon women from the outside. These
would not be chosen by free women who were allowed to exercise their own wills.'
7.7 Spending and Wealth by Sex
A generation or two ago, working class men were generally paid weekly in cash.
Each man received his wages in a brown paper envelope every Friday. For most of
these men, a small domestic ritual followed. On returning home, the man would
present said brown paper envelope of cash to his wife, proudly confirming he had
done his duty. The wife would then return a small amount to the man for his
'spending money', keeping the rest for the housekeeping of which she was in
charge, (Scruton, 1999). It was accepted that the wife's role was to manage the
household finances. This was not an enviable task when a small sum had to be
stretched over the many necessary expenses of a family with several children. No
doubt there were some men who kept their wives short of money, for selfish
reasons, but the above vignette illustrates the approved social norm at the time.
How much have things changed? Men still earn more than women. In the tax year
2015/16, men in the UK earnt 91% more than women: £680 billion to women's £356
billion, mainly due to working more hours (UK Government, 2018a). Men may earn
more, but who actually spends the household money? It is rather hard to obtain
quality data on spending by sex, surprisingly. The UK Government conducts
regular surveys of household spending in the UK, but in recent years the data has
not been disaggregated by sex, e.g., (Office for National Statistics, 2018d). One
must distinguish between two things,
Direct spending: that is cash personally handed over by the individual, or card
purchases or electronic purchases authorised by the individual;
Indirect spending: in which the individual exercises influence or control over a
spending decision, to an equal or dominant degree, even if the direct spending is by
another person, usually a partner.
There are two means of obtaining data on spending; by survey or by detailed diary
keeping. Most reported data are obtained by survey. However, this is an imprecise
measure because it relies on memory and interpretation of the questions asked.
Indirect spending can only be gauged from surveys. For direct spending, however,
the better method is to arrange for a group of people to log everything they spend
over a given period, down to the tiniest level. Such studies are scarce. In the next
section I use the results of a UK study using spending diaries from year 1993/4.
However, these data are a quarter century old as I write, and over that period
women have become dominant in educational attainment and entered the
professions in greater numbers. I include this older study because of the detailed
breakdown by sex, but also because it provides an historical marker. In the section
that follows I look at more recent data, for both the UK and the USA, which
confirms that women have now become dominant in spending.
7.7.1 UK in Year 1993/4
The data from the 1993/4 spending diary study has been used by Pahl (2000) to
identify the proportion of spending in various categories according to sex, see
Table 7.7. Recall that this is historical data – the picture is rather different now.
Table 7.7: Breakdown of Household Direct Spending by Sex (Pahl, 2000)
Items % of total spent by women
Women's clothes 90%
Children's clothes 85%
Food 80%
Educational courses 79%
Child care/school expenses 78%
Medical/dental 59%
Household goods 51%
Tobacco 43%
Recreation 42%
Men's clothes 40%
Holidays 36%
Gambling 35%
Meals out 34%
Repairs to house 33%
Motor vehicles 31%
Alcohol 27%
The percentages of spend by women given in Table 7.7 can be used together with
the spend by category given in (Office for National Statistics, 2018d) to deduce the
weekly spend in pounds by women, and hence the total weekly spend by women,
Table 7.8. The result is that I estimate that UK women in 1993/4 directly spent
about 51% of the household monies.
Table 7.8: Average Weekly Household Direct Spending by Category and Sex
(Disaggregation by sex based on 1993/4 data, but spend in 2017 pounds)
Item of Expenditure Total Weekly Spend, £ % Spent by Women
Weekly Spend by
Women
Food and non-alcoholic
drinks
58.00 80% 46.40
Alcoholic drink, tobacco
and narcotics (1)
11.90 35% 4.17
total clothing for women 12.90 90% 11.59
total clothing for men 8.20 40% 3.27
total clothing for children 4.10 85% 3.47
Housing, fuel and power
(2)
72.60 50% 36.30
Household goods and
services
39.30 51% 20.04
Health 7.30 59% 4.31
Transport (3) 79.70 31% 24.71
Communication (2) 17.20 50% 8.60
Recreation and culture 73.50 42% 30.87
Education 5.70 79% 4.50
Restaurants and hotels (4) 50.10 35% 17.54
Miscellaneous goods and
services (5)
41.80 74% 30.93
All expenditure groups 482.20 51% 247
Some care is necessary in the interpretation of this result. The ONS survey data on
which it is based samples households of all types. (A total of 5,040 households were
surveyed in the 2017 dataset). This includes people living on their own, singleparent households, childless adults living with parents, and gay and lesbian couples.
Consequently, whilst it is tempting to interpret Table 7.8 in the context of two
heterosexual adult households, the data can only be a rough guide to this. Women
outnumber men in the UK population by around one million. Some 28% of
households (7.7 million) now comprise a lone adult, and lone women outnumber lone
men by 585,000. In addition, 10% of households (2.7 million) consist of a singleparent with child(ren), of which 92% are women (Office for National Statistics,
2017g). Only about 61% of households consist of two adults, with or without
children.
Pahl (2000) also includes data on how many items were purchased by cost. Women
directly bought substantially more items than men (69%), but these were mostly
low costs items, see Table 7.9. Assuming prices at the mid-range shown in Table
7.9, and ignoring the small number of items over £1000, this Table suggests that
women account for 54% of household spending (£2,401,000 out of £4,423,000 below
£1000, noting that the data relate to spending over a two week period by the
respondents to the survey only). This is quite close to the estimate based on Table
7.8. However, the data in this section, as well as being historical, relates to direct
spending. It fails to account for a woman's influence over spending decisions which
are directly made by her male partner (and vice-versa).
(1) average of 43% for tobacco and 27% for alcohol
(2) assumed 50/50
(3) taken as that for "motor vehicles"
(4) average of 36% for holidays and 34% for eating out
(5) estimated, includes items such as hairdressing, toiletries, jewellery
Table 7.9: Direct Spending by Women by Cost of Item, 1993/4, (Pahl, 2000). The
data relate to spending over a two week period by the respondents to the survey.
Cost of Individual Items
Under £10 £10-100
£100-
1000
Over
£1000
% of all items bought by women 71 52 39 38
Total number of items bought 281,811 31,492 2,330 105
Total cost, £ 1,409,000 1,732,000 1,282,000 ?
Spent by women, £ 1,000,000 901,000 500,000 ?
7.7.2 Wealth and Spending, UK and USA, 2008 to 2018
Pay and earnings are not the best indicators of financial privilege. Earnings, after
all, are just that – earned. The better measures of privilege are wealth and
spending. Wealth is cash and assets held personally in the name of the individual.
And spending may be direct or indirect, an important distinction which many
sources fail to make clear. In this section I have recourse to sources which are
neither national statistics nor academic. It is with some reticence that I use these
sources because I am uncertain of the provenance of their data. Please treat the
data in this section with caution. Had I better sources to quote I would have done
so. The data relates to years from 2008 to 2018.
Worldwide, men are on average wealthier than women. However, in the UK and
USA, women now own more wealth than men on average. As early as 2005 women
in the UK already owned 48% of Britain's assets, and this will be well over 50% by
now, (Carvel, 2005). The Bank of Montreal's Wealth Institute concluded that by
2015 women in the USA 'controlled 51% of personal wealth', (Gorman, 2015).
They also advised that, by 2015, women held the majority (52%) of management,
professional and related positions in the USA. Other sources indicate that women
held the majority of private/personal wealth in the USA as early as 2012, and also
by that date the majority of stocks, (Krasny, 2012), (Walter, 2012).
By 2016, 46% of the UK's 376,000 millionaires were women, (Gotts, 2017). The
same source quotes leading gender analysts, Catalyst.Org, as estimating that, by
2017, 'on average, 67% of all UK household consumption is controlled or influenced
by women. And it is much greater in many key household areas'. The same source,
as well as research by Gloria Moss, reader in management and marketing at
Buckinghamshire New University, (Bignell, 2013), indicate that women in the UK
buy 93% of food, 83% of all "shopping" purchases, and 'make the decision or
influence the purchase of 92% of holidays'. These findings do not surprise, but
more surprising is that UK women buy 60%-65% of cars and 55%-61% of home
computers, though the sources may be guilty of blurring the distinction between
"buying" and "influencing the purchase".
A survey of 1,260 respondents living as (heterosexual) couples was reported by
(Pew Research, 2008) and confirmed that it is women who dominate in financial
decision making. In respect of major household purchases, their result was 'a large
plurality of couples (46%) jointly make decisions about buying major items for the
home. But, in families in which one person makes most of these decisions, it's the
woman and not the man who has the last word when purchasing big-ticket items for
the home (30% vs. 19%)'. Qualitatively the same result was found in answer to the
question 'who mostly manages the household finances?'. More men answered that
their female partner generally managed the finances than vice-versa (30% vs.
23%). And more women than men answered that they tended to manage the
finances themselves (45% vs. 37%).
In 2009, the Harvard Business Review indicated that women controlled two-thirds
of consumer spending in the UK, and nearly three-quarters in the USA, (Silverstein
and Sayre, 2009). Other sources say that women in the USA 'account for 85% of
all consumer purchases', (girlpowermarketing, 2018), (she-conomy, 2013). The
sources cited in this section indicate that women in the USA purchase the following
percentages of specific items (but noting again that the sources may blur the
distinction between "buying" and "influencing the purchase"),
93% of food;
91% of houses;
92% of holidays;
89% of bank accounts;
80% of healthcare products and services;
60% to 68% of new cars;
51% to 61% of home electronics
66% of PCs
58% of all online purchases.
Half of products typically marketed to men are actually purchased by women.
Recall that women earn substantially less than men. It seems clear, therefore, that
the tradition represented by the handing-over of the brown paper pay packet still
lives on, albeit in mutated form. Men earn more, but women spend more, ergo
there is a transfer of money from men to women. Is this male hegemony?
7.8 Income Taxes
In this section I address only income tax, not National Insurance or any other form
of taxation. Income tax data is taken from (UK Government, 2019a) and working
hours data from (Office for National Statistics, 2019a). Women comprise 47% of
the UK workforce, and yet men pay vastly more income tax. In 2016/17 men paid a
total of £127.0 billion in income tax compared to women's £47.6 billion. So women
pay 27% of the total income tax to men's 73%, i.e., men are paying 167% more tax
than women despite being only 13% more of the workforce. Similar figures apply in
the years since 2013/14 (see Table 7.10). Clearly a 167% greater tax bill does not
arise due to a median 9.1% greater hourly pay rate. The reason men pay more tax
is because they earn more, and they earn more primarily because they work longer
hours. In 2016/17, the totality of men in the UK worked on average 620 million
hours per week, compared to women's 403 million hours, i.e., men work 54% more
hours.
Far more women than men work part time. And even women who work full time
work shorter hours than men on average (34.4 hours per week versus 39.4 hours
per week, 2016/17). Because of the way the tax system works, with increasing tax
rates as earnings increase, men's 54% greater number of working hours becomes a
167% greater tax bill. (There is also a contribution from higher average pay rates
and a larger number of men who are very high earners). In effect, the taxation
bands are set to clobber men and spare women. This is illustrated by calculating
the income tax per hour worked (Table 7.11). Men pay tax at a rate which is 74%
greater than women's tax rate (£3.94 per hour versus £2.27 per hour in 2016/17).
Table 7.10: Total Income Tax by Sex (UK)
Year Men (£M) Women (£M)
Excess of Men over
Women
2013/14 120,051 44,650 169%
2014/15 121,119 45,489 166%
2015/16 130,000 48,300 169%
2016/17 127,000 47,600 167%
Table 7.11: Income Tax Rate by Sex (UK)
Year Men £/hr Women £/hr
Excess of Men over
Women
2013/14 3.91 2.26 73%
2014/15 3.86 2.24 72%
2015/16 4.09 2.35 74%
2016/17 3.94 2.27 74%
This, incidentally, is why the Government (and globalists like the World Economic
Forum) are very keen to get more women working full time. They have their eye
on the huge disparity between the male tax contribution into the Exchequer, £127
billion, and the relatively small female contribution of £47.6 billion. They see
considerable scope for pushing the latter closer to the former, and the key is
women's working hours. This is why Governments, the EU, the UN, the WEF, etc.,
are more than happy to go along with the feminist agenda on women's pay. The
feminist narrative plays right into their hands. If the Government were to tell
women to stop doing frivolous things like childcare and get out of the house and
work longer hours, it would not go down too well. But along come the feminists who
tell women to make themselves financially independent of the evil patriarchy by
being career minded and keen to work full time. Don't do childcare, ladies, that's
just a patriarchal con – displace those nasty men from their cushy satisfying
careers. Tell women that those darned men are oppressing them by keeping them
from working full time, and they might be more likely to fall for it. It isn't working,
but you have to admit it's a cunning plan.
7.9 Pensions
Pensions are a very involved topic. Here I attempt only the crudest guide to this
arcane subject. It is important to do so because there are large sex differences in
pension statistics. In fact, despite the popular focus on the gender pay gap, it is for
pensions that the numerical gap between the sexes is larger.
7.9.1 Occupational and Personal Pensions; the Private and Public Sectors
In the UK there are three broad classes of pension: the State pension, private (or
personal) pensions, and occupational pensions. Occupational, or workplace,
pensions may relate to the private or public sectors. Personal pensions are
essentially a form of investment saving. Neither the Government nor your
employer is involved in a personal pension. It is an arrangement between you and
the financial institution offering the investment service (usually an insurance
company).
Almost everyone who is a long-term UK resident will be entitled to a State pension,
once they reach State Pension Age (SPA), though the amount of the pension will
vary (see section 7.9.2). Many people have a personal or occupational pension in
addition to their State pension, especially those who are, or were, more highly paid.
Unlike the State pension, which is payable only after SPA, personal and
occupational pensions may be payable earlier, depending upon the scheme
conditions, but benefits will be reduced if paid before the scheme's full pension age.
A major advantage of occupational pensions over personal pensions is that the
employer invariably makes a contribution to your pension pot in addition to your
own contribution. The employer's contribution is usually substantially greater than
your own, boosting your savings considerably. The self-employed do not have this
option, nor do employees of small companies which have no company pension
scheme. There was a vogue for opting for personal pensions in the 1990s, even
when an occupational scheme was available, but it never made financial sense.
In the UK, payments into a pension scheme can attract tax relief. I will spare you
any further discussion of that except to note that such tax relief can be a
substantial benefit to higher rate income tax payers, though availing oneself of it
means reducing current disposable income in favour of net benefit on retirement.
Pensions may be of two broad types: defined contributions or defined benefits. In
defined contribution schemes, the benefits to which you are entitled on retirement
(e.g., a monthly pension payment or a lump sum payment) relate to the amount of
money that has accumulated in your 'pension pot'. Personal pensions are invariably
defined contribution schemes.
Defined benefit schemes, in contrast, entitle the pensioner to payments calculated
according to a fixed formula depending upon salary history and years of service.
The gold standard is a "final salary" scheme in which an annual pension is
calculated as some fraction of the member's final salary, e.g., 1/80'th of the final
salary for every year's service. Pensions under defined benefit schemes are usually
guaranteed to rise annually according to some fixed formula linked to inflation.
Defined benefit schemes usually also contain provisions for a deceased member's
spouse. If the deceased was drawing a pension, a common entitlement was a
widow's (or widower's) pension at half rate. If the deceased was still working and
contributing pension payments, the widow's terms were often very generous. My
father used to say he was worth more dead than alive, which was also true of
myself when I was still working full time.
Defined benefit schemes are advantageous for the scheme member, providing both
greater security and more generous pay-outs than defined contribution schemes.
However, they present a risk to the scheme fund which is difficult to manage
because the obligations to pensioners are not directly linked to the funds' ability to
pay.
It used to be common for large companies to offer defined benefit schemes.
However, the financial cost and risk has led to almost all such schemes in the UK
private sector being closed to new members. Private sector defined benefit
schemes are almost extinct as regards new members. The largest private defined
benefit scheme still open in the UK is the Universities Superannuation Scheme, but
the scheme is actively attempting to close to new members and switch to defined
contributions, as other schemes have done already, (Fox, 2018). In contrast, most
public sector occupational pension schemes were – and remain – defined benefit
schemes. Since private sector defined benefit schemes have been obliged to close
for fear of becoming insolvent, why have public sector pensions been able to sail
blithely on as defined benefit schemes, to the considerable advantage of their
members? The answer lies in the different funding arrangements for private and
public sector pensions.
Private sector pensions, whether defined benefit or defined contribution schemes,
involve payments being invested, usually in stocks and shares. At any time, the
scheme fund has a definite value: the total value of all its assets, mostly said stocks
and shares. This is just like the investment savings of a private individual, but on a
larger scale. Such schemes are said to be "funded".
Public sector schemes, however, are not funded. In public sector schemes, pension
payments docked from an active member's monthly pay go to the Treasury. The
Treasury spends the money. There is no pension pot corresponding to public sector
pensions. Public sector pensions are unfunded. Instead the Government undertakes
to honour the pension entitlements of public sector scheme members, assuming it
will be able to do so – and this means assuming that future tax revenues (plus
pension payments) will cover the bill. The reader may think this sounds rather like
a Ponzi scheme. I couldn't possibly comment.
There is no such thing as pension security. Private sector pensions are subject to
stock market performance. Public sector pensions are subject to the whims of
Government, and the economy of the country. But at least funded schemes are
subject to the rigours of actuarial accounting. It is because of this that the private
sector has managed its way out of defined benefit schemes, which accounting has
identified as representing future commitments that may be unmeetable. Public
sector schemes have been slower to accept that defined benefit schemes are an
obligation which they may not be able to honour.
But the most pernicious thing about the unfunded public sector is that it places the
burden of funding pensioners on younger people. It is effectively a way of passing
on debt to the next generation. In funded schemes, in contrast, one effectively
saves for one's own retirement.
To make this worse, most public sector schemes, including those for teachers and
NHS staff, are of defined benefit type. The difference in pension benefits between
a member of these public sector schemes and a member of a private sector
"defined contribution" scheme, assuming they both contribute exactly the same
payments, is now so great that it has been dubbed "pensions apartheid", (Morley,
2016). Morley gives the following numerical example (using figures which prevailed
in 2016),
'A fully qualified nurse aged 25, earning £21,692 and joining the pension scheme
today, will typically contribute 7.1% of salary each year to fund their retirement. If
they work for 40 years, stay in the same band of earnings throughout and attain
4% annual increases in pay, they could retire on an annual pension of £30,700 in
today's money. This income is guaranteed by the state and will also increase each
year in line with inflation, protecting its value over time.'
Morley contrasts this with someone in the private sector,
'Taking into account current annuity rates, if someone wanted to purchase the
same level of income for life at the age of 65…. This would involve the nurse
contributing 43% of her gross salary into a pension, assuming her fund grows by
5% a year excluding charges.'
One needs to be careful, however. Does the 43% figure quoted refer to a private
pension, as opposed from a typical private sector pension scheme? The difference
is the contribution to the member's pension pot made by the employer, which is
substantial. Not so substantial as to make up the difference between 7.1% and
43%, however, so the illustration still stands as an indication of the greater benefit
of the public sector scheme, though not quite as marked as those numbers suggest.
However, it may not be far off as the median employers' contribution to private
sector defined contribution pensions is now very small (only 2.1%, see below).
Figure 7.11: Median Contribution Rates to Workplace Pensions by Sector, to 2014,
taken from (Taxpayers' Alliance, 2018)
A similar but more recent numerical example has been given by the Taxpayers
Alliance (2018), as follows. Making contributions of 8.5% of the average national
wage of £28,600, they report that a 25-year-old starting in a private sector job can
expect to save a lump sum capable of buying an annuity of £6,412. In the public
sector the same contributions on the same wage would earn an annual income of
£17,563. They claim that the private sector worker would have to save 30% of their
salary to retire with a pension as large as the public sector worker's pension. These
calculations are based on the assumption that the public sector employer
contributes to the pension at 12.5%, whereas the private sector employer
contributes only 4%, which is reasonably indicative of the difference in median
rates. The comparison between private and public sector pensions is illustrated by
Figure 7.11.
The median contributions to occupational pensions by both employers and
employees, disaggregated by sector, are given by (Office for National Statistics,
2015h). These data include both defined contribution and defined benefit schemes.
The averages over age bands are plotted against year, up to 2014, in Figure 7.12.
Since 2014 the weighted-average contribution rates for occupational defined
contribution schemes have fallen further, reaching just 1.2% for employees and just
2.1% for employers by 2017, see Figure 7 of (Office for National Statistics, 2018v).
The reason for this is partly the obligation on employers for automatic enrolment of
new employees, and the resulting substantial increase in the number of people with
workplace pensions. However, it also reflects the closing of defined benefit schemes
in the private sector. By 2017, those defined benefit schemes which still existed in
the private sector had radically higher contribution rates (6.0% for employees and
19.2% for employers). However, the very low contribution rates in defined
contribution schemes will now increase. As from April 2019, legislation requires the
minimum employer's contribution to be 3% and the minimum employee's
contribution to be 5%, (The Pensions Regulator, 2019).
The difference in contribution rates between the private and public sectors is stark
and does seem to justify the claims of "pension apartheid". It arises primarily from
the persistence of defined benefit schemes in the public sector, the closure of such
schemes in the private sector, and the larger employers' (i.e., the public's)
contribution in the public sector.
And yet the public sector is entirely funded by taxes originating from the private
sector. (Yes, I know people employed in the public sector also pay tax, but let's not
pretend that one can pick oneself up by one's own shoelaces). Moreover, two-thirds
of public sector employees are women, but men pay 73% of the income tax and men
are the majority of private sector employees. Thus, it is predominantly women who
are the beneficiaries of employment funded predominantly by men, and it is
predominantly women who benefit from the highly advantageous public sector
pensions whilst their funders, predominantly men, have far less favourable pension
terms.
Figure 7.12: Occupational Pension Contribution Rates by Sector
7.9.2 The State Pension
Most UK residents will qualify for a basic State pension when they reach their
State Pension Age (SPA). Before 2010, the SPA was 60 for women and 65 for men.
Between 2010 and 2018 the SPA for women was increased to that of men, i.e., 65.
The SPA for both sexes was then raised to 66, 67 or 68, according to birth date,
keeping the sexes equal. There are plans to increase the SPA further.
For people reaching their SPA prior to April 2016 there were two distinct State
pensions: the basic State pension (BSP) and the State Earnings Related Pension
Scheme (SERPS). As the name implies, the latter was related to earnings, whereas
the former was not. Many members of an occupational pension scheme would be
"contracted out" of SERPS, and hence this second State pension would not be
applicable to them. For people reaching their SPA since April 2016 SERPS no
longer applies.
People do not directly pay into the State pension. Instead, eligibility depends upon
National Insurance (NI) payments or credits. The complete rules on NI are
complicated. For people who are working, the payments increase with salary. For
those on low pay the rate is zero but NI credits are received. People who are
unemployed but registered as Jobseekers can still get NI credits. Similarly, the
disabled and people on sick leave or maternity leave can gain NI credits, as can
people on a range of benefits (working tax credit / universal credit). The amount of
State pension you will eventually receive depends upon the number of years you
have paid the required NI, or received credits, but it does not depend upon the
amount paid. Thus, people on high salaries will pay more NI contributions than
those on low pay, but receive the same pension for the same number of years paid.
People on higher salaries will generally also pay into a separate personal or
occupational pension rather than relying entirely on the State pension.
Before 2010, men needed to have paid 5 years more NI than women to qualify for
the full State pension. Since 2016 this has been equalised to 35 years for both
sexes. The pension payable reduces pro-rata with years of contribution, but
requires at least 10 years NI to receive any pension.
For married (or formerly married) people reaching their SPA before April 2016,
but with an incomplete NI record, they could claim NI credit based on their
spouse's NI record, and hence receive a pension up to 60% of their spouse's (or exspouse's) BSP. For divorcees, the ex-spouse need not know about this claim.
Overwhelmingly, this would be wives, or ex-wives, claiming credit for their
husband's, or ex-husband's, NI record. However, this is no longer applicable for
new retirees.
People claiming child benefit for a child under 12 also receive NI credits and hence
will ultimately benefit in terms of their BSP. Again, this will overwhelmingly be
women. Many people will see such provision as reasonable to avoid penalising via
their pension those who opt for full-time childcare. At the present time, the role of
stay-at-home-parent needs encouragement rather than penalising.
The changes to the BSP have removed the earlier, explicitly gender based,
inequalities. However, not everyone sees it that way. The campaign group Women
Against State Pension Inequality (WASPI) has claimed – as their name suggests –
that this equalisation is actually inequality. In particular, they claim that many
women were unaware of the changes, which came as a shock when they realised
they would have to work 5 or 6 years longer before receiving a pension. But the
law to change the pension age for women was passed in 1995, and the changes
were phased in between 2010 and 2018, so they had plenty of time to accommodate
the changes. Their campaign, though extremely vociferous, has failed to gain much
sympathy, commentary being along the lines 'The WASPI campaign's unreasonable
demand', (Coppola, 2016), and 'WASPI's is (Mostly) a Campaign for Inequality',
(Pemberton, 2017). The fact that it is entirely unambiguous that the change in
women's SPA to equal that of men is a change from inequality to equality does not
prevent a campaign claiming the opposite. The granting of an unjustified judicial
review to this campaign is characteristic of how society is always ready to
capitulate to women claiming unfairness, regardless of merit (Peachey, 2018).
7.9.3 Numbers of Payees and Recipients
Official sources can mislead the unwary with jargon. "Members" of a pension
scheme include three different classes of people: those who are "active", those
who have frozen benefits within the scheme but are not active, and those who are
currently receiving a pension from the scheme. The active members of a scheme
are those who are contributing payment into the scheme, or having contributions
made on their behalf. People who have moved from one scheme to another, often
because they have changed jobs, will have frozen benefits in one or more schemes,
as well as being active in another scheme.
Figure 7.13 shows the number of people drawing a State pension against year, a
total of 12.8 million in 2018. The number of men drawing a State pension has
increased steadily as the number of men aged 65 and over has increased. However,
the number of women drawing a State pension has reduced since 2011 as the effect
of women's SPA increasing from 60 to 65 has taken effect. There will always be
more women pensioners, however, due to men's shorter average lifespan. For the
same reason, despite the equalisation of pension age, women will, on average, draw
a pension for longer than men (currently by about 4 years).
The disparity between the sexes in this respect used to be far worse. In 1951 the
mean life expectancy at birth was only 66 for men and 72 for women, i.e., one year
and 12 years longer than their respective State retirement ages at the time. Most
men before 1951 would not live to draw a pension (not only because they might die
before 65, but also because the State pension age prior to 1940 was 70). A man
who lived to 65 to start drawing his State pension in 1970 could expect to live
another 12 years, (Office for National Statistics, 2015j). A woman who lived to 60
to start drawing her State pension in 1970 could expect to live another 21 years,
hence drawing her pension some 9 years longer than the man.
Figure 7.14 shows the number of men and women who are paying into personal
pensions in the UK, from (UK Government, 2018t). As of 2016/17 this was 6.0
million men and 4.2 million women. This compares with the number of men aged 16
to 64 of 20.5 million and the number of women aged 16 to 64 of 20.7 million.
Figure 7.13: Numbers of Men and Women Drawing a State Pension
Figure 7.14: Numbers of Men and Women Paying into Personal Pension Schemes
Figure 7.15 shows the numbers of people paying into occupational pension schemes
by sector, from (Office for National Statistics, 2018v). Membership of private
sector occupational pension schemes has tripled since 2013, due to the introduction
of a legal obligation on companies to automatically enrol new employees. Active
membership of occupational pension schemes was 15.1 million in 2017, split
between the private sector (8.8 million) and the public sector (6.3 million). From
the same source, Figure 7.16 shows the number of people in receipt of pensions
from occupational schemes: 5.2 million in the private sector, and 5.0 million in the
public sector.
Figure 7.15: Number of People Paying Into Occupational Pension Schemes by
Sector
Figure 7.16: Number of People in Receipt of Pensions from Occupational Schemes
by Sector
Recall that the public sector accounts for just 16.5% of employment in the UK, and
in the past this would have been a smaller percentage. And yet the number of public
sector pensioners is essentially the same as the number of private sector
occupational pensioners. This is another aspect of the advantageous pension
provisions for public sector workers (two-thirds of whom are women).
7.9.4 Gender Pension Inequality?
In the recent past there was explicit discrimination against men compared with
women in State pension provision, men receiving their basic State pension five
years later than women and requiring five years more NI contributions to get the
full pension. 70 years ago, most men did not live long enough to receive a pension.
50 years ago men could expect to live little more than half as long after retirement
as women. State pension reforms, finally enacted only in 2018, have removed the
explicit gender discrimination in State pension age, but men can still expect to draw
their State pension for around four fewer years than women.
On average, women receive smaller pensions than men, but the gap is closing. In
the case of State pensions the gap is reducing partly because of the equalisation of
the State pension age: 'while in February 2018, the average weekly amount of
State pension received by women was 82% of that for men, for those in the new
system it was 95%.', (Thurley and McInnes, 2018). The gender gap in State
pension would be larger were it not for the NI credits awarded to those eligible for
childcare benefit for children under 12. Most people will consider that provision to
be reasonable to avoid penalising stay-at-home mothers (or fathers) years later via
their pensions.
The average man's total pension, including occupational or personal pensions, is
larger than the average woman's – and for the usual reason: the years women
leave full time work for childcare (or opt for part time work by preference). For
funded schemes in the private sector this is unavoidable since such schemes are
necessarily geared to contributions.
The persistent inequalities of outcome for the two sexes do not result from explicit
discrimination but from differing contributions, resulting, as usual, mostly from
childcare. However, the greatest inequality is not that between the sexes but
between the public and private sectors. The retention of defined benefit schemes
by the public sector, which the private sector cannot afford, together with the
generous employers' contributions in the public sector, make a public sector
pension worth two or three times as much as a private sector pension for the same
cost to the employee. This is an indirect discrimination against men as the public
sector is two-thirds women and is funded by taxes, 73% of which are paid by men
predominantly working in the private sector with inferior pension arrangements.
The equalisation of SPA does not mean its effects have immediately ceased. My
own occupational pension would be 4% larger if I were female, other things being
equal.
It is probably still the case that many married women pay scant attention to
pensions. If I may indulge in personal anecdote. During my working life I frequently
considered moving jobs but was constrained by the potential loss of an existing
beneficial pension scheme and uncertain transfer terms. In effect, a large swathe
of my life ended up being controlled by pension constraints. In contrast, my wife
had negligible pension provision, despite being a self-employed professional (but
working only part-time). She never gave her pension any thought, just relied upon
me (hence making my own prudence that much more necessary). I eventually made
separate pension arrangements for my wife, in addition to my own, providing her
with a personal pension largely at my own expense. I expect I shall be drummed out
of the Patriarch's Union if they find out.
7.10 Housework and Unpaid Caring
7.10.1 Men and Housework
Who does more housework, men or women? There are many informal surveys and
also a large academic literature on the subject. Care is needed because many
informal surveys are clearly skewed. For example, that carried out by (Mumsnet,
2014) surveyed only women. Moreover, it included 54 chores of which almost all
were traditional "housewife tasks" and just one was "DIY". It would be possible to
survey against a list of many different categories of DIY task, and just one task
called "housework" – and to ask only men (though I'm not aware of anyone having
done so). Such surveys are not helpful.
The survey of 1001 British adults, commissioned by BBC Radio's Woman's Hour
and carried out by (ComRes, 2015) indicated that, on average, women do 11.5
hours of housework per week compared with men's 6.1 hours, a difference of 5.4
hours. Averaging results for both sexes indicated that single people did the least
amount of housework (7.2 hours per week) and that divorced people did most (11.6
hours). Averaging over both sexes, people working full time did 7.0 hours of
housework per week, compared with 10.6 hours for people working part time. The
latter observation, together with the greater proportion of women working part
time, suggests that the bulk of the gender difference in housework effort may be
mostly a reflection of who is working part time rather than full time.
Section 7.6 identified that men do 620.1 million hours of paid work per week
compared with women's 409.1 million hours, a difference of 211 million hours.
Dividing by the 17.7 million working men, this suggests an average of 12 hours per
week additional paid work being done by each working man. (Alternatively,
dividing by the number of men of working age, 20.5 million, gives an average of
10.3 hours per week excess paid work by men). This is substantially larger than the
5.4 extra hours of housework identified by (ComRes, 2015) as being done by
women, or even the 8.3 hours extra identified by (Kan and Laurie, 2016). This
suggests that when both paid work and unpaid housework are considered, men do
more work than women in total rather than less.
However, surveys may be unreliable because they depend on people's memory and
their accurate estimation of the time taken over tasks. Academic work tends to be
based on studies in which participants are asked to keep detailed time diaries. A
sample of the results of these studies are as follows. Burda, Hamermesh and Weil
(2013) conclude in their Abstract,
'Time-diary data from 27 countries show a negative relationship between GDP
per-capita and gender differences in total work – for pay and at home. In rich nonCatholic countries, men and women average about the same amount of total work.
Survey results show scholars and the general public believe that women work
more.'
The Abstract of Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer and Robinson (2000) reads,
'Time-diary data from representative samples of American adults show that the
number of overall hours of domestic labor (excluding child care and shopping) has
continued to decline steadily and predictably since 1965. This finding is mainly due
to dramatic declines among women (both in and out of the paid labor market), who
have cut their housework hours almost in half since the 1960s: about half of
women's 12-hour-per-week decline can be accounted for by compositional shifts -
such as increased labor force participation, later marriage, and fewer children. In
contrast, men's housework time has almost doubled during this period (to the point
where men were responsible for a third of housework in the 1990s), and only about
15% of their five-hour-per-week increase can be attributed to compositional
factors. Parallel results on gender differences in housework were obtained from
the National Survey of Families and Households estimate data, even though these
produce figures 50% higher than diary data. Regression results examining factors
related to wives' and husbands' housework hours show more support for the timeavailability and relative-resource models of household production than for the
gender perspective, although there is some support for the latter perspective as
well.'
Catherine Hakim (2007) summarised the position thus,
'The key finding is that when all forms of work are added together, men and
women do exactly the same total hours of productive activity: just under eight
hours a day. As expected, men do substantially more hours of paid work, while
women's time is divided fairly evenly between paid and unpaid work. Men and
women do roughly equal amounts of voluntary work—contrary to the popular myth
that women do vastly more than men.'
7.10.2 Men as Unpaid Carers
Most people have the impression that almost all unpaid caring is done by women,
for example see (Thomson, 2017). But the evidence contradicts this impression. A
report from (Men's Health Forum, 2014) showed that, over all age ranges, men are
42% of unpaid carers,
'More than four in ten (42%) of the UK's unpaid carers are male, dispelling the
stereotype that caring is a female issue, according to a new report from the Men's
Health Forum and Carers Trust. The report 'Husband, Partner, Dad, Son, Carer?' was
commissioned to look into the experiences and needs of male carers and to help raise
awareness of the fact that male carers may not be getting the support they need. Martin
Tod, chief executive of the Men's Health Forum said: "The UK's 2.5 million male carers
have been ignored for too long. They make a vital contribution, but face real extra health
and work challenges that aren't always properly addressed".'
Men's contribution to unpaid caring takes on a rather different perspective when
combined with full time working. The (Office for National Statistics, 2013)
provides data on unpaid caring in England and Wales. For example,
(page 14) 'In 2011 in England, 116,801 men and 81,812 women were in full-time
employment while providing 50 hours or more unpaid care (per week); in Wales the
equivalent numbers were 9,320 and 5,068 respectively.'
Men make a greater contribution to unpaid caring than women when over 65.
(Office for National Statistics, 2013) provides the following information,
'In the age category 65 and above, the disparity reversed, with the percentage of
men in both England and in Wales providing unpaid care exceeding the percentage
of women.'
In fact, a greater percentage of men over 50 than women under 50 perform caring
roles. It is particularly noteworthy that men do more of the caring in the retired
age range, in view of men's shorter life expectancy.
7.11 The Empathy Gap in Work, Pay, Wealth, Spending and Taxes
The empathy gap in the context of work and pay is manifest in the perception that
"women work more but are paid less", together with men's greater earnings being
presented as a key aspect of patriarchal power. This has the perverse effect of
portraying men's positive contribution to family life, and society generally, as
oppression. The evidence is that the situation is rather more nuanced, and
considerably less one-sided.
Since 1971 women's economic inactivity has reduced from 45% to an all-time low
of 26%. In contrast, men's economic inactivity has increased from 5% to 17%. The
dominant reasons for the increase in men's economic inactivity are full time
education and long-term sickness. A further contribution is the increase in the
number of men in a full-time home-keeping role, now about a quarter of a million in
the UK. For women this is just under 2 million.
The unemployment rate is currently the same for men and women, and is at a fourdecade low. Prior to 2018, men's unemployment rate had been greater than
women's for 37 years. Recessions affect men's employment more than women's.
Employment is gender-polarised: most occupations have significantly different
numbers of male and female employees. Of 331 employment areas just 73
occupations (22%) have employee numbers within plus or minus 30% of equality.
151 (46%) have an excess of male employees over female employees exceeding
30%. 107 (32%) have an excess of female employees over male employees
exceeding 30%.
Across all areas, women are 46% of those employed, men 54%. But in the public
sector, women comprise about two-thirds of employees, twice as many as men. The
education sector is roughly 78% female. NHS employees are roughly 75% women.
At present there are pressures to increase diversity within companies. This is
interpreted to mean reproducing the nation's demographic distribution within each
company. It is beyond the scope of this book to critique this initiative. However, the
extent of polarisation in employment at present indicates the scale of the
redistribution of workers which would be required to achieve such an objective.
The requirement to reproduce the macro-demographics within, not just every
company, but at every level of seniority within each company, represents a
massively over-constrained problem. So far the drive for increasing diversity has
been confined to areas where women or minorities are underrepresented, and also
in occupations which might be deemed desirable. There is less appetite for
rebalancing in areas where men are underrepresented, as we saw in the case of
education (see sections 2.6 and 2.7). Nor is the idea so popular in those occupations
which currently result in the majority of fatal workplace accidents or fatal
occupational illnesses, which society and feminists are content to remain a male
preserve (see section 3.4).
The median gender pay gap for full time employees across the whole UK was 9.1%
in favour of men in 2017. However, the full time pay gap is negligible below the age
of 40. The pay gap varies significantly across the four nations of the UK. In
Northern Ireland the median full time pay gap is in favour of women (-3.4%). The
part-time median pay gap, UK wide, is in favour of women (-5.1%).
Legislation to force UK companies with more than 250 employees to report their
gender pay gap data resulted in 10,522 companies submitting data for 2017/18 by
18th June 2018. Of the 10,522 companies, 1,932 reported pay gaps in favour of
women on either a mean or median basis. Women's employment is strongly skewed
towards part-time working, with 42% of employed women working part-time
compared to only 13% of employed men.
The 2012 British Social Attitudes Survey revealed that 69% of people believe that
fathers should be the primary earner for the family, and 73% believe that fathers
should work full time. No respondents (to within rounding) thought the mother
should be the primary earner, and only 9% thought that mum and dad should share
the earning responsibility equally. Based on this survey, those people who advocate
for increasing women's working hours and getting more women working full time –
and more men working part time in favour of childcare - do not reflect the majority
opinion of women themselves (nor men's opinion). The British Social Attitudes
Survey appears to suggest that women's preference for part time working reflects
their unconstrained wishes, as does men's preference for full time working.
Over the UK as a whole, men work 52% more paid hours than women and earn
about 91% more. But women now spend more money – or influence the spending of
more money – than men, so there is a net flow of money from men to women for
the purposes of spending.
Men pay 73% of the income tax into the Exchequer. This funds the public sector,
two-thirds of whose employees are women. The public sector enjoys far more
lucrative pension provisions than the private sector, similar provisions having
almost disappeared from the private sector due to unsustainable costs. The
previous explicitly sexist State pension rules have now been equalised, but not
without cries of "inequality" from adherents of the "equality is inequality" school
of thought. Women do have smaller pensions on retirement than men, due to lesser
contributions, despite provision for NI credits associated with child benefit and
similar arrangements for other benefits. However the gap is reducing. And women
receive a pension for longer on average than men. There are a million more women
than men in receipt of a State pensions, and it used to be far more.
Over the last 40-50 years, the time spent by women on housework has reduced
substantially, whilst the time men spend on housework has increased substantially.
Nevertheless, men still do less unpaid housework than women, though the bulk of
the difference can be attributed to who is more likely to be working part-time, or
not at all. Combining paid working hours and unpaid household work, men and
women work either about the same number of hours on average, or men work
rather more.
Men and women do about the same amount of unpaid voluntary work. Contrary to
popular belief, men carry out a substantial proportion of unpaid caring (42%), and
a larger proportion of men than women are unpaid carers in the over 65 age range.
Substantially more men than women do 50 or more hours of unpaid caring weekly
as well as working full time.
All these observations together imply that men's substantially larger number of
paid working hours, and hence greater earnings, represent a positive contribution
that men make to family life, and society generally. Men's longer paid working
hours lead to men's far larger payments into the Exchequer in tax which funds the
welfare state and the public sector, from which women benefit more than men. In
short, the economy is "gendered" in the sense that money flows from men to
women. The presentation of this male contribution as 'patriarchal dominance' is a
calumny. The acceptance by the public of the feminist narrative on the pay gap to
the neglect of all the other factors addressed in this chapter is an aspect of the
empathy gap.
8. Imprisonment
The quality of mercy is not strain'd,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath: it is twice blest;
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes:
William Shakespeare (1564 – 1616), The Merchant of Venice
The claims of an opinion to be protected from public attack are rested not so much
on its truth, as on its importance to society.
John Stuart Mill (1806 – 1873) On Liberty
At the time of writing there are 21 times more men than women in prison in
England and Wales. The reasons for this extremely large sex ratio are examined in
this chapter. The statistics on deaths and self-harming in prison are reviewed, and
the sexes compared. The personal characteristics of prisoners are also considered.
They are far from a random cross-section of the population. Prisoners do not
naturally attract public compassion; many have committed heinous acts. Yet
compassion may be appropriate, if only from the utilitarian perspective that
understanding may be a necessary precursor to effective rehabilitation. An issue to
be exposed is whether such compassion is distributed equally between the sexes.
8.1 Harsher Treatment for Men
8.1.1 Harsher Treatment Over Time
Men are convicted of more crimes than women. It is not surprising, then, that there
are more men in prison. In England and Wales at 29th June 2018 there were 79,142
men and 3,819 women in prison (UK Government, 2018g), i.e., 95.4% men and
4.6% women, or nearly 21 times more men. The number of prisoners was down
slightly from a year earlier, 81,856 men and 4,007 women (UK Government,
2017c), but the longer-term trend has been for an increasing population of male
prisoners.
The following historic data is taken from House of Commons Briefing Paper 'UK
Prison Population Statistics' (House of Commons, 2017). The percentage of
prisoners in England and Wales who are women has remained in the range 3% to
5.5% since the end of the second world war (1946). At that time the number of
women prisoners was about 1,000, and reached a peak of 4,467 in 2005, but has
been reducing since.
Figure 8.1 shows that the prison population is five times greater now than it was in
1946. Because men have comprised ~95% of prisoners throughout this period,
Figure 8.1 can be taken as roughly indicative for male prisoners alone. Whilst the
population of the country has increased since 1946, this does not explain the
massive increase in prison population. Figure 8.2 shows the prison rate, i.e., the
number of prisoners per 100,000 of the population. This has also increase
massively, by more than 3.6 times, from below 50 in 1946 to about 180 in 2016.
Figure 8.1: Increase in Number of Prisoners with respect to 1900 (House of
Commons, 2017)
Figure 8.2: Increase in Prisoners per 100,000 of the Population (House of
Commons, 2017)
It is worth noting how anomalous this increasing prison population appears when
compared to the crime data, taken from the Crime Survey for England and Wales
(Office for National Statistics, 2018n). Figure 8.3 shows how the volume of crimes
in England and Wales has fallen precipitously since 1995, now standing at one-third
of its peak level (based on like-for-like counting, see Figure 8.3). This includes all
crimes, most of which are minor in nature and would not result in a prison sentence.
However, we shall see that serious crimes, such as violent crimes and homicides,
have also reduced steeply over the last couple of decades.
The reasons for this gross mismatch between plummeting crime rates and the
rising prison population are beyond the scope of this review to elucidate fully.
However, clarification of the reasons is clearly called for, especially in view of the
concentration of disadvantage in this demographic, as we shall see. At least part of
the reason is a trend for longer sentences (for men), which we shall also see below.
Another reason is the increasing numbers of men imprisoned for sexual offences.
Figure 8.3: Decline in All Crime from the Crime Survey for England and Wales
(CSEW). (Office for National Statistics, 2018n)
8.1.2 Harsher Treatment by Sex
The huge preponderance of male over female prisoners (21 to 1) is only partly, but
not entirely, due to men's greater criminality. In round numbers men are convicted
of rather fewer than 3 times more crimes than women. However, this includes the
more minor "summary" offences, for which a prison sentence is unlikely, and, if so,
would only be a very short sentence. Men are convicted of about 6 times more
serious (indictable) offences than women, and these will account for the majority
of prisoners. There is therefore a mismatch between the ratio of the number of
serious crimes for which men and women are convicted (i.e., the factor of 6) and
the fact that there are 21 times more men in prison. The conviction data for
England and Wales in 2017 is summarised in Table 8.1, (Ministry of Justice, 2018a).
Table 8.1: Convictions in England and Wales, 2017 (Ministry of Justice, 2018a).
Includes trials at all courts, and offenders of all ages, ethnicity, etc,
Offence Type
Number Convicted in
2017
Ratio Men/Women
Men Women
Indictable or Triable Either
Way
190,966 32,423 5.9
Summary 617,624 260,114 2.4
Total 808,590 292,537 2.8
In fact this mismatch appears to be gender bias (a gender disparity factor of 21/6 =
3.5). There is a popular mythology that women are treated more harshly in the
criminal justice system (see section 8.2), but the evidence is very much in the
opposite direction.
Of course, it does not follow immediately that this factor of 3.5 represents unfair
treatment of men compared with women. The most obvious hypothesis would be
that men's crimes are more serious on average. However, this easy assumption is
challenged, if not discredited entirely, by two observations which are detailed
below: firstly, a disparity to men's disadvantage is evident across all major offence
categories, and secondly, the pattern of men's and women's offending is quite
similar, with the exception of sexual offences.
8.1.2.1 Gender Disparity by Offence Category
8.1.2.1.1 Gender Disparity in Sentencing to Immediate Custody
The sentencing data tool from (Ministry of Justice, 2018a) can be used to extract
the numbers of men and women sentenced (in any way) across 12 offence
categories, as well as how many were sentenced to immediate custody. Hence, the
percentage of convicted men who were sentenced to prison can be found for each
of these 12 offence categories, as can the corresponding percentages for convicted
women. For example, 24,754 men were convicted of violence against the person
(VAP) in 2017, of whom 11,031 were sent to prison (45%). In the same year, 3088
women were convicted of VAP, of whom 658 were sent to prison (21%). The
gender disparity in VAP was thus 45%/21% = 2.1 in 2017.
Table 8.2 gives the percentage of convicted offenders who were sentenced to
prison for each of the 12 offence categories, and hence a disparity factor for each,
in year 2017. The gender disparity is greater than 1, indicating that a convicted
man is more likely to be imprisoned than a woman convicted of the same offence,
and this is true for all offence categories.
Table 8.2: Gender Disparities on Sentencing for Various Offence Categories, 2017.
Data from (Ministry of Justice, 2018a). See text for definition of this disparity.
Offence Category
Percentage of convicted
men sent to prison
Percentage of convicted
women sent to prison
Disparity on
imprisonment
Violence against the person
(VAP)
45% 21% 2.1
Sexual offences 60% 53% 1.12
Robbery 70% 68% 1.04
Theft 33% 20% 1.63
Criminal damage or arson 33% 24% 1.34
Drug offences 23% 15% 1.51
Possession of weapon 36% 23% 1.56
Public order offences 31% 20% 1.57
Miscellaneous crimes
against society
32% 19% 1.75
Fraud 27% 11% 2.48
Summary Offences (NonMotoring)
4.5% 0.5% 8.7
Summary Offences
(Motoring)
0.8% 0.1% 6.7
All offences 9.7% 2.5% 3.9
All indictable offences 34.2% 19.5% 1.75
This is not new, and 2017 is not an uncharacteristic year. Figure 8.4a plots the
gender disparity on imprisonment for indictable offences, calculated in the same
manner, for years 2006 to 2016, (Office for National Statistics, 2018w). Figure 8.4b
is the equivalent for summary offences, and shows very large disparity factors, up
to a factor of 10. Similar data for years 1999 to 2009 can be obtained from
(Ministry of Justice, 2012). Based on all offences (summary offences and indictable
offences) the disparity on imprisonment has increased from 2.4 in 1999, to 3.4 in
2009 and to 3.9 in 2017, the latter from Table 8.2. Based on indictable offences
only, the gender disparity based on Table 8.2 for 2017 is 1.75.
Figure 8.4a: Gender Disparity on Sentencing to Immediate Custody, 2006-2016 (All
Offences)
Figure 8.4b: Gender Disparity on Sentencing to Immediate Custody, 2006-2016
(Summary Offences)
In 2016 the Ministry of Justice published a report 'Associations between being male
or female and being sentenced to prison in England and Wales in 2015' (Hopkins,
Uhrig, and Colahan, 2016). This MoJ analysis was based on multivariate logistic
regression models to account for possible dependences of imprisonment on not only
sex and offence category but also ethnicity, age and previous criminal history. This
allowed the associations between sex and imprisonment to be examined under
similar criminal circumstances. Moreover, the MOJ used 20 offence categories,
more than the 12 categories in Table 8.2. The MoJ's headline finding was that under
similar criminal circumstances the odds of imprisonment for males were 88% higher
than for females, i.e., an imprisonment disparity factor of 1.88 in 2015. This is quite
close to the disparity of 1.75 for indictable offences in 2017 from Table 8.2 even
though based on a different methodology.
The MoJ rightly note this disparity might not be gender bias but rather that there
could be systematic differences between the sexes in offending severity even within
the same offence category. Essentially this is a recognition that even 20 offence
categories may provide insufficient granularity. This does need further
investigation, though it is worth noting that analyses of USA data, e.g., that by
Sonya Starr of the University of Michigan in 2012 (see section 8.1.2.7), indicate a
similar gender sentencing disparity based on far greater granularity. Some of the
findings of the MoJ report for year 2015 were as follows (pages 3 and 4),
Females were less likely to be imprisoned than males, 8% of those sentenced versus
18% of men.
The most common offence for both sexes was Violence Against the Person (VAP)*,
accounting for 22% of women convicted and the same percentage of men convicted.
However, whilst 20% of men convicted for VAP were imprisoned, only 7% of
women convicted for VAP were imprisoned. (*For women, theft also accounted for
22% of convictions).
The second most common offence for both men and women was drink-driving,
accounting for 15% of women's convictions and 12% of men's. However, whilst
about 700 men were imprisoned for drink-driving, seemingly no women were
(though "0%" may be rounded).
31% of men convicted of fraud or forgery were imprisoned, compared with 18% of
women.
23% of men convicted for handling stolen goods were imprisoned compared with
10% of women.
63% of men convicted for domestic burglary were imprisoned compared with 35%
of women
13% of men convicted of public order or harassment offences were imprisoned
compared with 4% of women.
20% of men convicted for vehicle-related theft were imprisoned compared with 6%
of women.
4% of men convicted of welfare fraud were imprisoned compared with 2% of
women. (This was a rare instance of the absolute number of women offenders
exceeding that of men).
11% of men convicted of absconding/jumping bail were imprisoned compared to 7%
of women.
Women are systematically less likely to be imprisoned in every offence category. It
is rather hard to understand why women's offending should be less serious in every
category, including such things as fraud, forgery, handling stolen goods, vehicle
related theft and jumping bail. A harsh penalty, such as imprisonment, for drinkdriving is because of the danger this represents to the public. In what way is the
danger less if the drink-driver is female? Yet no women were imprisoned for drinkdriving to men's 700, despite drink-driving accounting for 15% of women's
convictions.
8.1.2.1.2 Gender Disparity in Sentence Length
It is not only in the probability of being sentenced to immediate custody (assuming
conviction) in which there is a gender disparity. Assuming a man and a woman are
both convicted within the same offence category, and further assuming that both
are sentenced to prison, the man can expect a longer sentence. The gender
disparity in this case is defined as the ratio of the sentence lengths. These
disparities on sentence length are plotted in Figure 8.5a for years 1999-2009 based
on the same 12 offence categories as Figure 8.4 (Ministry of Justice, 2012). Figure
8.5b plots similar data for years 2006-2016 and for indictable offences. For all but
one or two offences, the disparity is greater than one, i.e., men receive longer
prison sentences even when a woman is convicted and sentenced to prison for the
same offence category. Across all offences in 2009, the disparity in sentence length
was about 1.4. But the average custodial sentence for men has been increasing over
the last 11 years, as shown by Figure 8.6. That for women has not increased. The
gender disparity in sentence length has therefore been increasing: in 2015,
averaged over all offences, it reached 1.78 (Ministry of Justice, 2016a).
In 2016, Baroness Corston wrote an article in the Guardian attempting to refute
claims that it is men, not women, who are treated more harshly in prison sentencing,
(Corston, 2016). The article was sub-titled 'Labour peer Jean Corston says there is
indisputable evidence that the justice system treats women harshly'. In the article
Corston noted that, in 2009, 'women were sentenced to an average of 17.9 months
in prison for violence against the person, compared with 17.7 months for men'.
These figures are correct and correspond to a disparity on sentence length of 0.99.
The data point in question is indicated by the black arrow on Figure 8.5a. Readers
will come to their own view as to whether the point picked fairly represents the
totality of the data in Figures 8.5a and 8.5b. Moreover, the Baroness was unmoved
by the fact that the disparity on imprisonment for VAP in 2009 was over 2.
Figure 8.5a: Gender Disparity on Sentence Length, 1999-2009 (assuming a prison
sentence has been awarded), data from (Ministry of Justice, 2012)
Figure 8.5b: Gender Disparity on Sentence Length, 2006-2016 (assuming a prison
sentence has been awarded), data from (Office for National Statistics, 2018w).
Figure 8.6: Average Custodial Sentence Length for Offenders Sentenced to
Immediate Custody, by Sex, 2005 to 2015. From (Ministry of Justice, 2016a).
The Ministry of Justice (2016a) have provided an opinion on the reason for the
increasing average custodial sentence length (ACSL) for men,
'The overall increase in male ACSL is in part caused by changes in legislation and in
part by the impact of sexual offences. More male offenders are being sentenced for
sexual offences, and these sentences are getting longer (with the ACSL increasing
by 20 months), which is driving up the overall average. The largest increase in
ACSL within this offence group was for rape of a female child under 13 by a male,
for which ACSL has more than doubled and the number sentenced to immediate
custody is four times higher than in 2005.
The total number of males sentenced to immediate custody for sexual offences in
2015 was around 4,000, up from 2,700 in 2005; this change could be related to
improved reporting and recording of sexual offences, as well as an increased public
focus. The number of females sentenced to immediate custody for sexual offences
was much smaller - 57 in 2015, up from 23 in 2005.'
A number of concerns arise in the context of sexual offences. These issues will be
addressed in chapters 19 and 20.
8.1.2.2 Gender Parole Disparity
Prisoners on determinate sentences do not usually serve their full sentence. The
parole system usually permits prisoners to be released early. The proportion of
sentence served differs systematically for men and women. In 2015, 2016 and 2017
the median release for male prisoners was 53%, 58% and 59% of their full sentence
respectively (Ministry of Justice, 2018b). For women prisoners the median sentence
actually served was 46%, 46% and 47% of their full sentence respectively.
Consequently, there is a gender disparity in the proportion of time served, over and
above the awarded sentence length, of between 1.15 and 1.26. Figure 8.7 shows how
the actual prison time served by male and female prisoners has changed since 2002.
That for women has decreased slightly. But for men, the mean time served has
increased substantially (by more than 50%).
Figure 8.7: Actual Time Served in Prison by Sex. Data from (Ministry of Justice,
2018b). Note the large difference between mean and median terms.
The difference in early release between the sexes is not due to better behaviour in
prison by women. In fact, the number of disciplinary offences per 100 prisoners is
similar in men's and women's prisons, perhaps with somewhat more in women's
prisons, see Table 8.3.
Table 8.3: Disciplinary Offences within Men's and Women's Prisons. Data for 2005
to 2009 from (Ministry of Justice, 2010b), data for 2010 and 2015 from (Ministry of
Justice, 2016b). Incidents per 100 prisoners.
Sex 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2015
All Offences
/
Adjudications
Men 143 131 133 133 124 210 170
Women 193 204 189 180 150 160 210
Violent
Offences /
Assaults
Men 23 22 22 22 21 - 24
Wornen 33 33 30 31 24 - 20
8.1.2.3 Other Known Disparities
Women who are convicted are more likely than convicted men to receive a
conditional discharge or unconditional discharge, more likely to be given a
suspended sentence, and more likely to be given a community sentence. These
disparities have been quantified by Collins (2018a). The likelihood of a prosecution
resulting in a conviction is subject to less disparity, but where there is disparity it is
men who are more likely to be convicted.
An issue which receives less attention is the use of cautions. Following an arrest,
the police have an alternative to pressing for a prosecution. They may instead
offer the arrestee a caution. If the arrestee accepts the caution, prosecution, and
any further action, is avoided. However, by accepting the caution the arrestee is
admitting guilt, and will then have a record to that effect. Where the arrestee is
indeed guilty, to accept a caution is to be let off lightly compared with the possible
consequences of being prosecuted and convicted.
Figure 8.8: Gender Disparity on Cautions, 2006-2016
To evaluate a gender disparity on cautions, the number of cautions per 100
prosecutions for the same offence is first calculated. The caution disparity is then
defined as the number of cautions accepted by women per 100 prosecutions of
women divided by the number of cautions accepted by men per 100 prosecutions of
men for the same offence. The resulting caution disparities are plotted in Figure 8.8
for 2006 to 2016 and for ten indictable offences. The caution disparity is almost
always larger than 1, i.e., more women than men escape prosecution by accepting a
caution. The caution disparity is particularly large for VAP offences in recent years
(about 4). Consequently, claims about the relative number of violent offences
committed by men and women based on conviction data alone will be misleading, as
more women than men who are arrested for violence will avoid prosecution via a
caution (quantified in section 9.1.2).
8.1.2.4 Pattern of Offending by Gender
To rationalise the disparities observed above, the argument is sometimes made that
women's pattern of offending is different from men's, implying that it is generally
less serious even in the same offence category. But actually women's and men's
patterns of offending are very similar, as shown by Figure 8.9 (arrests) and Figure
8.10 (prisoners). Note that these Figures do not show absolute numbers, but the
proportions of offenders of the same sex. The volume of offending (at least as
indicated by convictions) would be far greater for men than for women. However,
Figures 8.9 and 8.10 do faithfully depict the pattern of offending by sex, i.e., which
types of offences are most common. The only major difference in pattern of
offending is for sexual offences and there are particular issues associated with that
(see chapters 19 and 20). Further evidence for similar patterns of offending by the
two sexes is the closely comparable distribution of legal aid amongst crime
categories (Figure 8.11). The commonest reason for a man to be arrested is for
violence. Some people might be surprised to learn that the same is true for women
(Figure 8.9). Similarly, the largest proportion of male prisoners were sentenced for
violence against the person (VAP). It may surprise some people that the same is
again true for women (Figure 8.10). This point is brought out clearly in the report
'Statistics on Women and the Criminal Justice System 2015', (Ministry of Justice,
2016a), which states,
(page 118), 'For both male and female prisoners, the most common offence group
for which they were convicted at 30 June 2015 was violence against the person
(25% and 27% respectively).'
The exception to the generally similar pattern of offending between the sexes is sex
offending. Sex offences accounted for about 5% of men sent to prison in 2017,
(Ministry of Justice, 2018a), but about 16% of male prisoners are inside for sex
offences, see Figure 8.10. The distinction arises from the long sentences awarded
for sex offences. Sex offences are perhaps the most extreme example of gender
disparity. Sex offences committed by women are regarded as less serious than those
committed by men, even when perpetrated against children. And female sex
offending against adult males is popularly regarded as a virtual impossibility. These
matters are taken up in chapter 20.
8.1.2.5 Overall Gender Disparity in Criminal Justice
The criminal justice process consists broadly of four sequential processes, (i)
Arrest, (ii) Decision to Prosecute, (iii) Conviction, and, (iv) Sentencing. In the
foregoing sections I have addressed quantitatively only gender disparity in
sentencing, assuming all is fair up to and including conviction.
Figure 8.9: Proportion of Arrests within each Offence Group by Sex, 2015/16. From
(Ministry of Justice, 2016a) Figure 4.05.
Figure 8.10: Proportion of Sentenced Prisoners by Offence Group and Sex, June
2015. From (Ministry of Justice, 2016a) Figure 7.08.
Figure 8.11: Proportion of Legal Aid Workload in Magistrates' Courts by Offence
Group and Sex, 2015. From (Ministry of Justice, 2016a) Figure 5.10.
Given the strong case for gender bias in sentencing, it is natural to be concerned
that there might also be gender bias in the earlier three steps in the criminal justice
process. Obtaining data on these earlier steps is not so easy. In particular, if the
police do not arrest a person, then that person and their potential misdemeanour
never appear in any statistics. Consequently, the disparity in sentencing must be
interpreted as a lower bound to the overall disparity in the criminal justice process.
I have noted above that there is a small disparity in conviction rate and a large
disparity in the use of cautions (Figure 8.8), both to men's disadvantage.
Given conviction, the overall disparity on imprisonment comprises: disparity in
being sentenced to immediate custody for the same crime category; disparity in
sentence length awarded for the same crime category; and disparity in the
proportion of time actually served (parole). For the most recent years for which
data has been obtained (2015 to 2017) these disparity factors have been estimated,
above, to be 1.88, 1.78 and about 1.2 respectively. The product of these provides the
overall prison-time disparity of 1.88 x 1.78 x 1.2 = 4.0.
This overall disparity is more than enough to account for there being 21 times more
men in prison despite the number of indictable offences committed by men
exceeding that committed by women only by a much smaller factor (about 6).
It has not been conclusively proved that this disparity is gender bias, rather than a
pervasive tendency for men's offending to be more serious across all offence
categories. However, that assumption is seriously challenged by the similarity of
men's and women's patterns of offending, as well as the occurrence of gender
disparity across all offence categories. If you run over someone due to driving
drunk, why should you be more culpable if male? Similar remarks apply for fraud or
theft or any of the majority of offences which do not involve violence or a sexual
offence. Even that proviso about violent offences appears to be only popular
prejudice. Table 1 of Lightowlers (2018) provides a breakdown of VAP offences into
six sub-offences of varying severity. The pattern of offending across these six VAP
sub-offences is again very similar for the two sexes (Figure 8.12). This seems to be
a convincing refutation of the "pattern of offending" explanation of the gender
disparities.
Any residual doubt that the criminal justice process is systemically sex biased is
unlikely to survive consideration of the policies that are in operation, as we shall see
next.
Figure 8.12: Pattern of Offending by Sex across Six VAP Sub-Offences
8.1.2.6 Sex Bias by Policy?
The different treatment of men and women in the criminal justice process is driven
by policy as well as by sentiment. This is illustrated here by two documents and
also a Government announcement in June 2018. The documents are the Corston
Report (Corston, 2007) and the Equal Treatment Bench Book (Judicial College,
2018). The latter is the formal guidance to judges on "equality", covering issues
relating to race, religion, sexuality and gender, as well as specific issues like
modern slavery, the treatment of children, etc. The Corston Report, authored by
former Labour MP Jean Corston, now in the House of Lords, concerned women in
prison. The report effectively formed an agenda which was later taken up in
policies and embodied in the Equal Treatment Bench Book. The line of argument
within the Corston Report is clear from a few quotes,
(page 23) 'Equality does not mean treating everyone the same'
This is the most succinct expression of one perspective regarding what constitutes
"equality". The most benign view is that this is a view focused on outcomes. But
more bluntly, it is an identity political credo in which some identity groups are more
deserving than others. We will see below that this perspective is enshrined in the
Equal Treatment Bench Book and hence is being used to legitimise different
treatment of men and women in criminal justice. One may object to it on principle,
if one believes that equality does mean treating everyone the same, as I do. But,
even if one does not object on principle, there are major problems with this view in
practice due to the ambiguity in what the outcomes might be.
(page 3) 'Prison is disproportionably (sic) harsher for women because prisons and
the practices within them have for the most part been designed for men'
This asserts that the outcome of imprisonment is harsher for women because the
practices of imprisonment are the same as they are for men. The outcome is
different, because the treatment is the same - it is claimed. Why should the
outcome be different for women, unless they are intrinsically more vulnerable? In
other words, the Baroness's view is based on the traditional gender scripts. It is
actually an appeal to gynocentricity: women must be treated better than men. But
why should we be unconcerned about imposing treatments upon men which are
deemed too harsh for women unless there is an empathy gap? Here we see
"outcomes" as a subterfuge for the unequal allocation of compassion. Much of the
rest of the Corston Report betrays this disconcerting lack of concern for men - a
rich source of illustrations of the empathy gap - as the following extracts illustrate.
(page 18) 'Women commit a different range of offences from men. They commit
more acquisitive crime and have a lower involvement in serious violence, criminal
damage and professional crime'
Women do commit a smaller volume of crime, but, as we have seen, their pattern of
offending - including violence - is similar to men's (Figures 8.9-12).
(page 19) 'Drug addiction plays a huge part in all offending and is
disproportionately the case with women'
Drug addiction does indeed account for a large part of offending, for both men and
women. But a larger proportion of men than women are arrested and imprisoned
for drug offences (Figures 8.8-10). In 2017, 19 times more men were sent to prison
for drug offences. So Corston's claim that women are disproportionately affected
is false. Drugs cause more than double the number of premature deaths in men
than women (Table 3.1).
(page 19) 'Outside prison men are more likely to commit suicide than women but
the position is reversed inside prison'
Of all the examples of the empathy gap this is perhaps the most egregious, as well
as being untrue. Prison suicide is considered in section 8.6.1. Averaged over the
last 10 years, the rate of suicide in men's prisons, per 1000 prisoners, is comparable
with, but slightly greater than, that in women's prisons. The actual number of men
killing themselves in prison was 22 times the number of women prisoners killing
themselves over the same period.
(page 20) 'Self-harm in prison is a huge problem and more prevalent in the
women's estate'
It is true that the rate of self-harming by female prisoners, say per 1000 prisoners,
is greater than the rate for male prisoners. Nevertheless, in year 2015/16 about 8
times more male prisoners self-harmed (section 8.5). Ask yourself, why is Baroness
Corston unconcerned about that?
(page 58) 'Women must never be sent to prison…to teach them a lesson'
Whilst I am not against a focus on rehabilitation, for both sexes, this is an
extraordinary recommendation. Punishment has always been seen as a valid aspect
of justice, and one which victims, and the public generally, have a right to expect.
Yet this policy appears to have been adopted, as of June 2018 (see below) – but
only for women. Turning now to the Equal Treatment Bench Book (Judicial
College, 2018), some extracts are as follows.
(page 3) 'True equal treatment may not, however, always mean treating everyone
in the same way. As Justice Blackmun of the US Supreme Court commented: "In
order to get beyond racism, we must first take account of race. There is no other
way. And in order to treat some persons equally, we must treat them differently."'
(page 6-16, in the context of gender) 'true equal treatment may not always mean
treating everyone in the same way'
This is the same perspective on "equality" as espoused by the Corston Report, and
informs the tenor of both. Here it is less carefully phrased: it claims that different
treatment may be 'true equal treatment'. It begs the question, just how differently
must people be treated in order to be "equal"? And which groups are to be
favoured with "more equal" treatment? One presumes the latter question is
answered thus: the favoured groups are those explicitly mentioned in the Equal
Treatment Bench Book. So, we see that this judicial guidance is actually a manual
for identity politics. The Equal Treatment Bench Book quotes Baroness Hale from
her 2005 Longford Trust Lecture (Hale, 2005)
(page 6-16) 'It is now well recognised that a misplaced conception of equality has
resulted in some very unequal treatment for the women and girls who appear
before the criminal justice system. Simply put, a male-ordered world has applied to
them its perceptions of the appropriate treatment for male offenders…. The
criminal justice system could … ask itself whether it is indeed unjust to women.'
Baroness Hale is now President of the Supreme Court and the most senior judge in
the land. This quote states that, in the Baroness's opinion, treating women in the
same way that men are treated is a 'misplaced conception of equality'. This is the
same sentiment again. Women should be treated differently from men, and this can
only mean more leniently than men. Hence, for women to be treated equally (i.e.,
justly), they must be treated preferentially. This is what gynocentrism looks like.
For this to be justified, even by the standards of this identity-group perspective, it
has to be established that women are endemically socially disadvantaged compared
with men. This book challenges that presumption, but the Equal Treatment Bench
Book is nevertheless predicated upon that position. The direction of argument of
its 24 pages is faithfully captured by the following few extracts.
(page 6-2) 'Women remain disadvantaged in many public and private areas of their
life; they are under-represented in the judiciary, in parliament and in senior
positions across a range of jobs; and there is still a substantial pay gap between
men and women.'
A more balanced perspective on pay, employment and associated issues has been
given in chapter 7. Claims of endemic female disadvantage are an article of faith
rather than an empirical truth. Regardless of that, what are these matters doing in
a document which is supposed to guide the treatment of criminals?
(page 6-2) 'Women are still the primary carers of children. Overall, 73% of women
with children work, including 53% of women with children under five, but they still
spend three times as much time as men on caring for children. Many women also
provide unpaid care by looking after an ill, older or disabled family member, friend
or partner.'
A more balanced perspective on caring and total working hours has been given in
chapter 7.
(page 6-3) 'Sexual harassment remains a problem for women both in and outside
work. According to a survey, 85% of women aged 18–24 have experienced
unwanted sexual attention in public places and 45% have experienced unwanted
sexual touching. 52% of women in a 2016 TUC poll had experienced some form of
sexual harassment at work.'
How low has our criminal justice process sunk that these wild feminist statistics
are included in a document with such serious implications? Sexual offending against
men and boys is addressed in chapter 20. It fails to have the same sociopolitical
impact as offending against women and girls.
(page 6-3) 'Women can be subject to domestic and gender based violence, some of
which is evident and overt; some which is less so, such as coercive control, which
has a profound and pervasive impact on a woman's autonomy and well-being. On
average, two women in England and Wales are killed every week by a current or
former male partner.'
The reader will have got the measure of this discourse. The emphasis on pay,
domestic work, sexual assault and violence clearly establishes its feminist origins.
Note the loaded language "gender based violence". Academic research repudiates
the bulk of domestic violence being classed as "gender based", as discussed in
chapter 9 along with men and boys as victims of violence. But again, violence
against men and boys fails to have the same sociopolitical impact as such offences
against women and girls. Finally, this quote,
(page 6-2) 'Of course, men can suffer from gender discrimination too. This chapter
reflects the reality that this is rarer.'
No, it does not. It reflects the reality of gynocentrism. It reflects the reality of the
grip that gynocentric feminism now has on all aspects of our society, including
criminal justice.
One may object to the line taken by the Equal Treatment Bench Book in two
ways: empirically or on principle. One may object based on the principle that social
disadvantage should not justify preferential treatment in criminal justice. The
dictum "equality does not mean treating everyone the same" repudiates that
principle (wrongly, in my opinion). But once that dictum is accepted, if it can be
argued that women suffer substantially more social disadvantage than men, then
preferential treatment of women will be the result. This is the purpose of the
discourse alluded to above. An equal, or greater, social disadvantage of men cannot
be acknowledged without undermining that position. The empirical challenge to the
position adopted by the Equal Treatment Bench Book is that men are indeed at an
equal or greater social disadvantage. The objective of this book is to demonstrate
that discrimination against men is not rarer, but endemic and ignored.
The latest development in the different treatment of male and female offenders is
an explicitly declared change in Government policy. Following the closure in 2016
of Holloway, at one time western Europe's largest women's prison, it had been the
intention to build five new community prisons for women. In June 2018 these plans
were cancelled. Lord Chancellor and Justice Secretary, David Gauke, announced a
new policy to 'divert the most vulnerable women in the criminal justice system
away from custody' (UK Government, 2018h). The new strategy is intended to
'break the cycle of female offending' and will involve only sending women to prison
in the last resort, more often putting the emphasis on rehabilitation. In contrast, it
is still planned to build up to six more prisons for men, with the potential to expand
the current male prison population by a further 10,000 (Ford, 2018). Here we see
the two strands of policy made explicit: compassion for women, punishment for
men.
8.1.2.7 Evidence of Gender Disparity from the USA
There have been a number of studies on gender disparity in sentencing in the USA.
Perhaps the most thorough is that of (Starr, 2012). Its headline conclusions are,
This study finds dramatic unexplained gender gaps in federal criminal cases.
Conditional on arrest offense, criminal history, and other pre-charge observables,
men receive 63% longer sentences on average than women do.
Women are also significantly likelier to avoid charges and convictions, and twice as
likely to avoid incarceration if convicted.
These conclusions are broadly consistent with my findings, above, for the UK.
8.2 Pop Goes the Woozle
The subject of women prisoners is replete with woozles.
Woozle (noun, idiomatic): A widely quoted claim which has gained acceptance
through repetition but which has no, or insufficient, basis in fact.
Sometimes a claim about women prisoners is made which the listener is implicitly
invited to assume must be different for men, but actually is not. These are not quite
woozles but I will classify them as such because they have the same misleading
effect. Examples of woozles and are as follows.
Woozle: Eighty-four per cent of women's prison sentences are for non-violent
offences
It is important to distinguish between the proportion of people sentenced to prison
per year for a given offence, and the proportion of people currently in prison for a
given offence. It is correct that 84% is a typical figure for the proportion of women
sentenced to prison for non-violent offences in a given year, but so it is also for
men (Ministry of Justice, 2018a). As for people in prison for violence, the report
(Ministry of Justice, 2016a) states (page 118), 'For both male and female prisoners,
the most common offence group for which they were convicted at 30 June 2015
was violence against the person (25% and 27% respectively).'
Woozle: Women are more likely than men to be imprisoned for a first offence
False. This is perhaps the most frequently repeated woozle in the context of
criminal justice. The report (Ministry of Justice, 2016a) states (page 98), 'In 2015,
the most common disposal for offenders convicted of an indictable offence with no
previous sanctions was a community sentence for both males (33%) and females
(29%). However, males were much more likely to receive an immediate custodial
sentence (25%) than females (14%). In comparison, a higher proportion of females
received suspended sentences and conditional discharges compared with males'
,
see Figure 8.13.
Woozle: Women are more likely than men to be imprisoned for minor offences like
shoplifting
False. The report (Ministry of Justice, 2016a) states (page 152), 'The custody rate
in 2015 for females sentenced for shoplifting was 15%, and for males was 22%'. It
also states that, 'For both sexes, 89% of offenders sentenced (for shoplifting) had a
previous caution or conviction for shoplifting.'
Woozle: Men's harsher sentencing is due to their offending history
The degree of recidivism is not markedly different between men and women and
does not appear to account for different sentencing. Quotes from (Ministry of
Justice, 2016a) are,
(page 11) 'Males were more likely to be sentenced to immediate custody and to
receive custodial sentences of 6 months or longer than females with a similar
criminal history.'
(page 11) 'Although males were more likely to reoffend, females had a higher
number of proven reoffences on average per reoffender.'
Figure 8.13: Proportion of Offenders Sentenced for an Indictable Offence who have
No Previous Sanctions, by Sentencing Outcome and Sex, 2015
Woozle: Most women in prison had been caring for dependent children
False. Page 2 of the report (Ministry of Justice, 2015) identified that, 'Between
24% and 31% of all female offenders were estimated to have one or more child
dependents. Among the different disposal types, women receiving immediate
custody were significantly less likely to have child dependents (between 13% and
19%).'
8.3 Characteristics of Prisoners
Prisoners, and ex-prisoners, are not a representative cross-section of society. They
are a separate demographic, strongly skewed to multiple disadvantages. The
report 'Prisoners' childhood and family backgrounds', (Williams, Papadopoulou and
Booth, 2012) provided the following results, based primarily on a survey of 1,435
prisoners serving sentences between 1 month and 4 years. The survey involved
both sexes but the results were weighted to match the prison population, i.e., 95%
men, so the results can be taken as applicable to male prisoners to a good
approximation.
24% had been in care as a child (page ii);
29% had been abused as a child (page ii);
41% had observed violence in the home as a child (page ii);
31% had a family member who had been imprisoned (page ii, 84% of 37%);
27% had a family member with a drug or alcohol problem (page 13);
59% had regularly played truant from school, 63% had been suspended, and 42%
had been permanently excluded or expelled (page ii);
The following responses relate to prisoners' living arrangements as children and
refer to arrangements which applied "most of the time until age 17". Other
arrangements might prevail at other times. From page 8,
53% had not lived with both natural parents as a child;
34% lived with one natural parent only;
6% lived with one natural and one step parent as a child;
13% lived with grandparents, foster parents, in institutions, etc.
Williams et al quote a 2004 survey which indicated that 43% of male prisoners who
reported having dependent children had been living with their children prior to
imprisonment, compared to 58% for female prisoners. The 2014 report 'A
Presumption Against Imprisonment' (British Academy, 2014) tells us that,
68% of prisoners were not in paid employment prior to being imprisoned (page 42)
59% of young offenders have learning difficulties or borderline learning difficulties
(page 43)
47% of prisoners have no educational qualifications (page 42)
15% of male prisoners were homeless prior to being imprisoned (page 42)
Risk factors for future offending and antisocial behaviour include low family
income, delinquent or convicted family members, histories of violence, parental
mental illness, parental substance abuse, poor relationships with parents, low IQ
and low school attainment. That these factors are also disproportionately present
in child offenders can be seen in the next Section.
8.3.1 Children in Prison
The secure estate for children consists of secure children's homes (for age range
12 – 16), secure training centres (up to age 17), and young offender institutions (15
– 18). In 2002 the total number of children under 18 in custody, including both
sentenced and remanded children, peaked at 3,145. This has reduced dramatically
since then, due to adopting policies based on prevention and more flexible
community sentencing. As of April 2018 there were 940 under 18s in custody, of
which 913 are boys and just 27 were girls, i.e., 97.1% are boys and 2.9% girls
(Ministry of Justice, 2018c).
In her 2017/18 Business Plan, the then Children's Commissioner for England, Anne
Longfield, reported that she, together with Dame Louise Casey, had visited 10 of
the children in the secure estate 'to learn about their lives before entering custody
and understand the factors that led to them being imprisoned and what, if anything,
could have been done to change their trajectory', (Longfield, 2017), page 12. One
can have little objection to this, it seems to be exactly what a Children's
Commissioner should do. But she picked only girls, despite 97.1% of the children in
question being boys, (Longfield, 2018b). An empathy gap, perhaps?
The report 'Fractured Families', (Centre for Social Justice, 2013), stated that
'their extensive research…..showed that 76% of children and young people in
custody had an absent father and 33% an absent mother' (page 60). The Prison
Reform Trust (2013) quotes the same figures. An earlier report 'Punishing
Disadvantage: a profile of children in custody', (Prison Reform Trust, 2010), used a
sample of 200 children receiving custodial sentences in 2008 to conclude the
following description of the multifaceted disadvantages of this demographic –
recalling throughout that children in custody are 97% boys,
Around half were living in a deprived household or unsuitable accommodation prior
to imprisonment (page viii);
Just under half had run away or absconded at some point in their lives (page viii);
Two-fifths are known to have been on the child protection register or had
experienced abuse or neglect (page viii);
31% of boys had the literacy level, and 38% of boys the numeracy level, expected
of a seven-year-old (page 4);
Around one-quarter of boys and one-half of girls had been in care (page 3).
11% had attempted suicide (page 61).
8.3.2 Prisoners' IQ
There is a further disadvantage which receives less attention but should not be
hidden: IQ. A decade ago, research by Liverpool University based on a cross
section of male and female prisoners in the UK concluded that the average IQ of
prisoners was 87, an intelligence which nearly three-quarters of the general public
would exceed, (BBC News, 2007). Some 6,000 UK prisoners (about 7%) were
estimated to have IQs below 70, some three times the prevalence of such
extremely low IQs in the general public. Poor conduct in prison is also found to be
worse for lower IQ prisoners. Diamond et al (2012) concluded that, 'individual's
IQ, as well as the average IQ of the prison unit, was significantly and negatively
related to violent prison misconduct'. In the USA, studies have found that, for
chronic adult offenders, the average IQ is 85, one standard deviation below the
population mean. A study of Texas inmates who entered the prison system in 2002
indicated that approximately 23% of the inmates scored below 80, an intelligence
with a prevalence of only 9.1% in the general public, (Ellis and Walsh, 2003)
Many people will have little patience with what may seem like making excuses for
people who have committed heinous crimes. How much intelligence does it take,
they might argue, to know that savagely beating someone is wrong? Nevertheless,
statistically speaking at least, most people are being incarcerated, in part, for the
crime of lacking intelligence.
Harrington and Bailey (2005), page 38, report the IQ level of 301 children and
young people in trouble with the law (in custody and in the community) aged
between 13 and 18 years old. 36% were found to have a low IQ (70-79) and 23% to
have an extremely low IQ (under 70). Note that in the general public, IQs in these
ranges would apply for only 6.8% and 2.3% of the population respectively, so 59%
of young offenders have an IQ that would have a prevalence in the general public
of only 9.1%. Only 15% of the sample had an IQ in the average range (90 – 109),
within which half the general population would lie, whilst fewer than 3% had above
average intelligence (compared to 25% of the general public). Whilst a fractured
family background, and the other disadvantages itemised above, will contribute to
the educational failure of imprisoned children (and adults), it would be unwise to
ignore the even more intractable issue of intelligence. This will be uncomfortable
for some, but the challenge for a decent society is to find a beneficial and fulfilling
occupation for everyone, regardless of intrinsic capacities – physical or mental.
8.4 Male Prisoners and Their Families
A Ministry of Justice report, (Williams, Papadopoulou and Booth, 2012), provided
the following information on page iii (recalling that 95% of adult prisoners are
men),
54% of all prisoners reported having children under the age of 18;
61% of prisoners reported being single when they entered custody;
24% were living with a partner;
8% said they were married;
74% of prisoners reported being close to their families;
63% reported providing, and 73% receiving, emotional support from their families;
88% reported wanting their families involved in their lives;
40% saw the support of their families as important to preventing them reoffending
in future;
36% thought that being able to see their children was important to preventing
them reoffending in future;
The small proportion of married prisoners compared with the many who have
dependent children is noteworthy. The vast majority of prisoners felt they had let
their family down by being sent to prison (82%). The Prison Reform Trust (2013),
page 5, quoted research indicating that the likelihood of reoffending was 39%
higher for prisoners who had not received visits whilst in prison compared to those
who had. Unfortunately, despite the evident importance of contact with their
families, the report 'Reducing re-offending by ex-prisoners', (Social Exclusion
Unit, 2002), notes that over 40% of prisoners lose contact with their families after
entering prison.
8.5 Self-Harming in Prison
Women prisoners have a higher incidence of self-harm, short of suicide, than male
prisoners. In the year ending March 2016, 31% of female prisoners in England selfharmed, on average 6.7 times each, compared to 11% of male prisoners, an
average of 3 times each (Ministry of Justice, 2018d). However, this disguises the
scale of the problem with male prisoners. The numerical preponderance of male
prisoners means that nearly eight times more male prisoners than female prisoners
self-harmed in the year to March 2016 (8,842 men cf 1,170 women). Moreover,
whilst the number of female prisoners self-harming has decreased somewhat over
the last ten years, the number of men self-harming is rising steeply (Figure 8.14),
nearly doubling in ten years.
Similarly, whilst the number of incidents of women prisoners self-harming has been
decreasing, the number of incidents of male prisoners self-harming is rising steeply
(Figure 8.15), doubling in the last seven years. This is a rather different reality to
that depicted by Baroness Corston (section 8.1.2.6). The number of incidents of
self-harm is roughly double the number of assaults on other prisoners, which in turn
is about three times higher than the number of assaults on prison staff (in 2015/16).
Figure 8.14: Number of Prisoners of Each Sex Self-Harming per Year
Figure 8.15: Number of Incidents of Self-Harming in Prisons per Year by Sex
8.6 Deaths in Prison
Data on deaths in prisons in England and Wales have been taken from the charity
Inquest (2018). Figure 8.16 shows how the number of deaths of men in prison has
varied since 1990, distinguishing between self-inflicted deaths (suicide) and other
causes. Figure 8.17 compares the total numbers of deaths of men and women in
prison. Self-inflicted and non-self-inflicted deaths are discussed separated below.
8.6.1 Suicide in Prison
The number of suicides in prison fluctuates from year to year. In England and
Wales, 2016 was the worst year for men with 108 suicides. 2003 was the worst year
for women with 14 suicides. Over the last ten complete years (2008 – 2017) the
average number of prisoner suicides in England and Wales was 71 men per year
and 3.2 women per year. Over this ten year period the average suicide rate per
1000 prisoners was thus about 0.93 per year for men and about 0.8 per year for
women. Hence, the suicide rates for men and women have been similar, but slightly
worse for men, but 22 times more men than women have killed themselves in
prison.
For both male and female prisoners, the rate of suicide far exceeds that of free
individuals. In 2015 the UK-wide average (age adjusted) suicide rates were 0.16
per thousand and 0.05 per thousand for males and females respectively
(Samaritans, 2017). Thus, a man in prison is about 19 times more likely to kill
himself than a free women (0.93/0.05), and a woman in prison about 16 times more
likely. Figure 8.16 indicates an upward trend in male prisoners' suicides. However,
the really marked trend is the steep increase in deaths of male prisoners by natural
causes (though one hesitates to use the word "natural" in a prison environment).
8.6.2 Deaths in Prison from 'Natural' Causes
Figure 8.17 compares the total deaths of men and women in prison. The contrast is
stark. Not only are there far more deaths of men than women, but the former is
increasing steeply, mostly due to "natural" causes. In 2017 some 284 men died in
prisons in England and Wales, 181 of them from "natural" causes. For women the
numbers were 8 and 3 respectively. Since the start of the millennium, the number
of deaths of male prisoners from "natural" causes has nearly quadrupled (Figure
8.16).
Figure 8.16: Deaths of Men in Prison in England and Wales by Cause
Figure 8.17: Total Deaths of Men and Women in Prison in England and Wales
The reason for the huge increase in the number of non-self-inflicted deaths of male
prisoners is due to the increased proportion of older male prisoners in gaol. The
number of men over 60 in prisons in England and Wales has doubled in the last
decade. It has been suggested that convictions for historic sex offences are the
major contributor to this ageing male prison population. Increasing numbers of
prisoners have mobility problems, using wheelchairs or Zimmer frames. These
prisoners can find it impossible to access the exercise yard, or attend classes
required for parole purposes. Some stop taking showers for fear of slipping. Some
have dementia and no longer know where they are, or why, (Hill, 2017).
8.7 The Empathy Gap in Imprisonment
Imprisonment provides a perfect example of male disposability, gynocentrism and
lack of male in-group preference. That men are far more readily incarcerated than
women is emphatically clear from the data (male disposability), and a preferred
treatment of women is now enshrined in policy at several different levels
(gynocentrism). The public would probably agree that everyone should be equal
before the law. Yet there is no public outcry, even from men, that this principle is
violated in respect of sex (lack of male in-group preference). The hypothesis of
male utility is consistent with the prevalence of low IQ prisoners. Men with low IQ
will have greater difficulty in fulfilling a societal obligation regarding utility, but
this obligation is inapplicable to women.
The traditional gendered psychology regards men as agentic, powerful and
responsible, whilst women are regarded in this outmoded view as non-agentic,
vulnerable, and in need of protection. If the agentic, powerful and responsible
become criminal, clearly they deserve punishment. If the non-agentic, powerless
and vulnerable become criminal, then society is more likely to regard a
compassionate response, rather than punishment, to be appropriate. Hence, the
traditional gendered psychology drives a disparate perspective to male and female
offending. This becomes a pernicious, and unjust, phenomenon when the traditional
gender norms no longer reflect social or political reality (if they ever did).
Feminists may appeal to "historical power imbalances" to rationalise different
treatment of men and women. One may dispute that view of the past. But
irrespective of that, the present reality is that women are far from powerless, even
in the traditional male domains. In the context of criminal justice this is particularly
marked. The Head of State in the UK has been a woman since 1952; our Prime
Minister was (at first publication) a woman and a self-declared feminist; the Home
Secretary had then been a woman for 10 of the previous 12 years; the head of the
largest police force in the UK, the Metropolitan Police, is a woman; and the most
senior judge in the land, the President of the Supreme Court, was then a woman
and an ardent feminist. Until November 2018, the Director of Public Prosecutions
had also been a feminist woman for the previous five years. These women led a
criminal justice system which is sex biased by policy. If any other group with such
power were favouring their own, it would be called corruption.
Policy on imprisonment is driven by two themes. On the one hand there is the
successful lobbying for a more lenient, compassionate, approach for women –
driven by gynocentrism. On the other hand, there is the unwavering political
necessity to be seen to be "tough on crime". If leniency is the policy for women, on
whom is the policy of toughness to be enacted? In June 2018 the Government
announced the new policy to avoid sending women to prison wherever possible (UK
Government, 2018h), whilst simultaneously planning to expand the country's
capacity to imprison men (Ford, 2018). Here we see the two strands of policy made
explicit: compassion for women, punishment for men.
The entitlement of women to different treatment, in order to be "equal", is
argued, at different times, on the following grounds. Firstly, that of historical
power imbalance. A debate about past realities can be avoided. It is morally
illiterate to claim present benefit based on injustice to someone else in history.
Secondly, it is argued on the basis that women remain endemically disadvantaged in
society generally. But this is a perspective which the entirety of this book
challenges. In any case, injustice is not neutralised by more injustice. The third
argument which is deployed is that women are currently treated more harshly by
the criminal justice system, e.g., (Corston, 2016). This chapter has, I think,
demolished this untruth. A fourth argument which is used is that women offenders
have a background of being abused, by men, and that their offending is, in truth, at
the behest of, or caused by, men. MP David Lammy tells us that 'Most Women in
Prison Are There Because of a Man', (Wearmouth, 2019). This is a denial of
female agency, stemming with painful obviousness from traditional gender norms.
There is nothing progressive about it. This argument also raises the issue of the
disadvantaged background of female offenders. But the demographic and personal
characteristics of offenders are the same for men and women. Finally, it may
simply be claimed that equal treatment is harsher for women and therefore
unequal, (Corston, 2007). In truth, all these arguments are attempts to rationalise a
deep seated bias, a prejudice, whose origin is gynocentrism and male disposability
and their result: the empathy gap.
9. Violence and Abuse
Social scientists are often motivated by an ideologically based view of their subject
that makes it hard for them to think beyond a narrow range of acceptable
theoretical stances. This is particularly apparent in research on violence between
intimate partners.
Louise Dixon, John Archer, Nicola Graham-Kevan (2012)
There are as many violent women as men, but there's a lot of money in hating men,
particularly in the United States - millions of dollars. It isn't a politically good idea
to threaten the huge budgets for women's refuges by saying that some of the
women who go into them aren't total victims.
Erin Pizzey
During all the years that I specialised in working with violent women and their
children, I could never come to terms with the fear men had of violent women.
Erin Pizzey, Women or Men, Who Are the Victims? (2000)
In this chapter the statistics on violent offences are reviewed, firstly looking at the
overall data and then focusing on domestic violence and domestic abuse offences.
The emphasis is on the breakdown by sex of the victims of violent crime. However,
it would be misleading not to address also the sex of the perpetrators of violence.
The chapter delves quite deeply into domestic abuse because this is such a major
concern of women's advocates, and also because it features so prominently in the
Family Courts. In the case of domestic abuse it is not only the statistics of
offending which are of interest, but also the issue of service provision to victims
and how this differs for the two sexes. A similar skew will be seen, in reverse, as
regards provision of programmes assisting perpetrators to amend their ways. We
will see that violence and abuse is perceived very differently according to the sex
of the perpetrator and the sex of the victim. Sexual offences are not considered in
this chapter (see chapters 19 and 20). Data in this chapter will be for England and
Wales unless otherwise stated.
9.1 All Violence
9.1.1 Victims
In the last chapter we saw that the crime surveys for England and Wales indicate
that the totality of crime has been falling since 1995 (Figure 8.3). The same is true
when attention is restricted to violent crimes, see Figure 9.1, data taken from
(Office for National Statistics, 2018x). In addition to these data from the Crime
Survey for England and Wales (CSEW), the same source also provides data for
police recorded crimes. These are also plotted on Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1: Violence Against the Person Offences, Comparing Police Recorded
Incidents with CSEW Data, 1981-2018 (year ending March of that year)
It is generally believed that the CSEW provides a better picture of crime
prevalence than police records, due to variability and incompleteness in police
recording – at least until very recently. The ONS Notes which accompany this
dataset caution,
'The National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS) was introduced in April 2002,
although some forces adopted NCRS practices before the standard was formally
introduced. Figures before and after that date are not directly comparable. The
introduction of NCRS led to a rise in recording in year ending March 2003 and,
particularly for violent crime, in the following years as forces continued to improve
compliance with the new standard.'
This may explain why the police records of violent crime shown in Figure 9.1 lie
substantially below the CSEW estimates, until 2018. The ONS also note, (Office for
National Statistics, 2018y),
'CSEW is the best measure of trends in the most common types of violence. For the
offences that it covers, the CSEW provides the best measure of trends for the
population. It has used a consistent methodology since the survey began in 1981.'
However, it now appears that the police data and the CSEW have converged to
close agreement. It is worth emphasizing that the police recorded data prior to 2018
were probably underestimates. Thus, whilst Figure 9.1 shows that police records of
violent crime have increased over the last 4 or 5 years, this may not be a genuine
increase in the underlying rate of such crimes as the CSEW shows no such increase.
Figure 9.2: Percentage of Adults Aged 16 or Over who were Victims of Violent
Crime in the Indicated Year (CSEW data)
Figure 9.3: Percentage of Adult Victims of Violence by Perpetrator Type
Based on the CSEW, violent crimes in 2018 have fallen to about one-third of their
peak prevalence in 1995. (In contrast, the reader may wish to glance back at the
increase in the prison population over that period, Figures 8.1 and 8.2). Figure 9.2
indicates the percentage of adults aged 16 or over who were victims of violent
crime in each of the years 2010 to 2015, (Ministry of Justice, 2016b). Men are the
victims of violent crime just under twice as frequently as women. Figure 9.3 breaks
down adult victims of violence by three classifications of perpetrator: domestic,
acquaintance or stranger. Women are about twice as often the victims of domestic
violence (considered in more detail in the next section) but men are more often the
victims of acquaintance or stranger violence, especially the latter, and these
categories of perpetrator are more common.
The most serious crime is homicide. Figure 9.4 shows the number of victims of
homicide by sex for years 1997 to 2017, (Office for National Statistics, 2018z).
More than twice as many men are the victims of homicide as women (71% cf 29% in
2017). Homicides of men (but not of women) have increased over the period 2015 to
2018, though they are still below the rate prior to 2009. Figure 9.5, based on police
recorded crime data, shows that this recent upward trend is shared by the other
serious crime categories "attempted murder" and "causing death or serious injury
by driving", (Office for National Statistics, 2018aa). Figure 9.5 gives homicide data
both from the official Homicide Index and also from police records. The two can
differ. Police recorded crime data on homicide represent the recording decision of
the police based on the available information at the time the offence comes to their
attention. Homicide Index data take account of the charging decision and the court
outcome in cases that have gone to trial.
Figure 9.4: Homicides in England and Wales, 1997 - 2017
Figure 9.5: Number of Police Recorded Serious Crimes, 2002-2018
The data for homicides and attempted murders plotted in Figures 9.4 and 9.5 have
been adjusted by subtracting certain exceptional homicides. These were, (i) in year
2002/3, 172 homicides attributed to Harold Shipman in previous years but coming to
light in the official inquiry in 2002; (ii) in year 2005/6, 52 homicide victims of the 7th
July 2005 London bombings, plus an estimated 230 attempted murders; (iii) in year
2016/17, 96 victims of the 15th April 1989 Hillsborough stadium fire, which were
classified as unlawful killings at the inquest in 2016; (iv) in year 2017/18, 35
homicide victims of the Manchester Arena bombing together with the London
Bridge/Borough Market and Westminster attacks. These attacks, combined with
the terrorist-related incident at Parsons Green Underground station in September
2017, also accounted for about 337 attempted murders. All those figures have been
subtracted from the raw data before plotting Figures 9.4 and 9.5.
The upturn in the number of the most serious crimes in the period 2013-2018, as
shown in Figure 9.5, would appear to be genuine, rather than data collection
inaccuracies – particularly in the case of homicides which is largely a matter of
counting bodies. This is despite the continuing fall in violent crimes overall (Figure
9.1). Note, however, that the volume of the most serious crimes in Figure 9.5 is
extremely small compared to the total violent crimes, Figure 9.1. And, despite
recent rises, homicide rates remain below their peak rates in 2001 to 2009.
During 2018 and 2019 there has been much press attention to rising violent crime
levels in London, particularly knife crimes, Figure 9.6. The volume of knife crime
has indeed been rising in London, as it has in England and Wales as a whole. In the
year ending September 2018, the rate of knife crime in London was 1.68 per 1000
population, compared with less that half that rate in England and Wales as a whole,
0.73 per 1000, (Office for National Statistics, 2018ab). The greatest incidence of
knife crime outside London, at a rate of 1.1 to 1.2 per 1000, was in Greater
Manchester, West Yorkshire and the West Midlands.
Figure 9.6: Trend in Knife Crime, England and Wales, 2011 to 2018
The same source indicates that, in the year ending September 2018, the homicide
rate in London, at 16 per million, was higher than in England and Wales as a whole,
but not dramatically so (13 per million), and was substantially lower than in the
worst regions, namely Greater Manchester where the homicide rate was 29 per
million. The second highest homicide rates in that year were in Sussex and
Cleveland (21 per million), but low statistics will mean that this will vary from year
to year. The increased number of homicides in England between 2016/17 and
2017/18 can be accounted for by the increases in London and Greater Manchester
alone. The high level of homicides and knife crimes in these cities, and in West
Yorkshire and the West Midlands, is likely to be demographic related, but
exploration of that issue is beyond the scope of this book. (The nominal knife crime
rate and homicide rate in the City of London are extremely high, but this is an
artefact of the small number of people living there compared with the very large
number of people working in, or visiting, the City. For example, the homicide rate
was notionally 130 per million, but that corresponds to just one homicide!).
In summary, whilst there are some localised increases in some of the most serious
violent crimes, the overall picture is of falling violent crime (Figure 9.1) and men
account for roughly twice as many victims of violent crime as women (Figures 9.2,
9.3 and 9.4). This greater victimisation of men is particular to violent crime. When
other crime is considered, there is little difference in the victimisation of men and
women, Figure 9.7. In the umbrella category of "personal crime", men are again the
majority of victims, but only by 26%, (Office for National Statistics, 2018ac).
Figure 9.7: Adult Victims of All Crime and Personal Crime by Sex and Age (2018)
As children, the excess victimisation of males over females is especially marked,
and now applies for all crime and non-violent crime and well as for violent crime,
see Figure 9.8, (Office for National Statistics, 2018ad). The number of boys aged 10
to 15 who are victims exceeds the number of girls as follows: for violent offences by
93%; for robbery by 350%; for theft by 69%; and for all crime by 67%.
9.1.2 Perpetrators
In years 2007 to 2017, between 6.3 and 8.2 times more males than females were
sentenced for violence against the person offences, (Office for National Statistics,
2018ae). For example, in 2017 there were 24,754 males and 3,088 females
convicted and sentenced for violence against the person (VAP) offences in England
and Wales. In 2014, and restricting to the adult age range, these figures were
18,145 men and 2,160 women sentenced for VAP offences.
Figure 9.8: Percentage of Children Aged 10 to 15 as Victims of Crime, 2018
A slightly different picture emerges if MOJ reoffender statistics are used, (Ministry
of Justice, 2016c). These data define "offender" as including, not just people who
are convicted and sentenced in court, but also people accepting a caution,
reprimand or warning. These data indicate the number of male VAP offenders in
England and Wales in 2014 was 18,757, not much greater than the above sentencing
figure. In contrast, the number of female VAP offenders in 2014 was 4,296,
substantially larger than the number sentenced, implying that a much larger
proportion of female VAP offenders receive a caution, warning or reprimand, rather
than a court appearance. On this basis, the ratio of male to female VAP offenders
was 4.4 in 2014.
A crude estimate of the percentage of men who commit a VAP offence at some time
in their lives can be made using the 2014 reoffender data, (Ministry of Justice,
2016c). Of the 18,757 male offenders, 4,319 were reoffenders (the average number
of reoffences for these recidivists was 2.78). Accounting for this, the number of
first-time male VAP offenders in 2014 was 14,438. Multiplying this by a nominal
average adult lifetime (say 79 – 16 = 63), and dividing by 2 to account for half of the
offenders having died, gives about 450,000 men still living who have committed a
VAP offence at some time in their life. This estimate is very crude because it fails to
account for the varying rate of offending, which was greatest in 1995. Dividing by
the adult male population of England and Wales of about 23 million suggests that
about 2.0% of men in England and Wales have, at some time in their lives,
committed a VAP offence. Around 77% of these will have committed only one such
offence in their life. Thus, about 0.5% of men are repeat VAP offenders.
Carrying out an estimate on the same basis for female offenders (4,038 first-time
VAP convictions in 2014) suggests that about 130,000 women in England and Wales
have committed a VAP offence (0.55%).
9.2 Violence and Abuse Within the Home: Men as Victims
Violence within the home presents a very different gender distribution from
violence outside the home. Compared to outside the home, within the home women
are a larger proportion of both victims and perpetrators. There is a great weight of
empirical evidence that the incidence of domestic abuse suffered by men is
comparable to that suffered by women. Researchers have been reporting for over
40 years that domestic abuse (DA) of men is not rare, for example (Steinmetz,
1977) and the many early studies by Murray Straus, the history of which has been
accessibly summarised by Linda Kelly (2003). And yet the narrative to which the
public is exposed paints a very different picture, one in which domestic violence, or
other domestic abuse, overwhelmingly involves female victims and male
perpetrators.
There has been dispute within the academic literature for decades regarding the
relative significance of domestic abuse against men and women, for example the
rather highly charged rebuttal of Steinmetz by Straton (1994). There are too many
academic exchanges to be summarised here, but the reference trail can be picked
up from (Bates, Graham-Kevan and Archer, 2014) or (Bates, 2016).
The general public do not read the academic literature. Their views tend to be
shaped by the media, which in turn is influenced on this topic by the women's
refuge charities. This lobby, together with all governmental and international
agencies, present a perspective on domestic abuse as a gendered crime,
perpetrated overwhelmingly by men against women. For example, Women's Aid
(2018a) informs us that 'in the vast majority of cases it (domestic abuse) is
experienced by women and is perpetrated by men'. Similarly, Sandra Horley
(2014), then CEO of Refuge, said, 'the vast majority of domestic violence is
perpetrated by men against women'. The same view is echoed by UNICEF (2006),
as follows: 'although men are sometimes victims, the vast majority are women'.
These claims regarding the "vast majority" of victims will be examined against the
best available data in this chapter.
It is important to recognise that this gendered perspective on domestic abuse –
including the claim that male victims are relatively rare – is a cornerstone of the
dominant prevailing theory of gender, feminism. For example, Sandra Horley
(2018) writes, 'domestic abuse needs to be considered within a broader context of
VAWG (violence against women and girls), recognising the root causes as male
power and control, gender inequality and discrimination against women'. Similarly,
Women's Aid (2018b) state their belief as,
'Women are the overwhelming majority of victims of domestic abuse. Domestic
abuse is a violation of women and their children's human rights. It is the result of
an abuse of power and control, and is rooted in the historical status and inequality
of women in society.'
(Refuge, 2018) states,
'Inequality between the sexes means that men have more power than women –
inevitably some men abuse or exploit that power.'
And Women's Aid (2018a) again,
'Domestic abuse is a gendered crime which is deeply rooted in the societal
inequality between women and men. It takes place "because she is a woman and
happens disproportionately to women."'
The last quote also explains the usage of the term "gendered" in this context.
Clearly, there is no room within this perspective for widespread domestic abuse of
men, since the perspective itself denies it explicitly: domestic abuse, it is claimed,
'takes place because she is a woman, and is rooted in the inequality of women'.
This perception of domestic abuse rests upon both universal female victimhood and
also universal male culpability. Vera Baird, former Solicitor General for England
and Wales and currently Northumbria Police and Crime Commissioner, expressed it
thus,
'it was essentially the Refuge Movement that first counted the figures and
demonstrated that domestic violence was not something that was done by a few
cruel and unusual men', (Baird, 2011).
In other words, Baird claims that domestic violence towards women is a generic
trait of men. In this she aligns with the dominant narrative on gender. A theory of
gender which requires this interpretation is therefore refuted if the empirical
evidence shows widespread domestic abuse of men. There will therefore be
resistance to accepting such empirical evidence by proponents of the feminist
patriarchal 'power and control' theory. Kelly (2003) expresses this viewpoint thus,
'Domestic violence can more broadly be described as the male "way of doing
power"…..Domestic violence is not viewed as just another tool used by men in the
subordination of women. Rather, it is considered "one of the most brutal and
explicit expressions of patriarchical domination." Such strong roots in patriarchy
have produced an equally strong force against accepting female violence…..
Despite the wealth and diversity of the sociological research and the consistency of
the findings, female violence is not recognized within the extensive legal literature
on domestic violence. Instead, the literature consistently suggests that only men
commit domestic violence. Either explicitly, or more often implicitly, through the
failure to address the subject in any objective manner, female violence is denied,
defended and minimized.'
Kelly opines that a successful challenge to the patriarchal understanding of
domestic violence would therefore fatally undermine the prevailing dominant
discourse on gender (feminism). Male victimisation is therefore vigorously refuted
by adherents of the dominant narrative.
It is often presumed that domestic violence was 'discovered' in the early 1970s
with the opening of the world's first refuge for battered women in Chiswick,
London, (Pizzey, 2011). In truth there was an attitude at that time that what went
on between man and wife behind closed doors was their own affair. But that does
not mean that domestic violence was entirely ignored and unpunished, even much
earlier. Actually, tough measures, including flogging, were enacted by Parliament in
the early Victorian era against men who beat their wives, including the 'Prevention
and Punishment of Aggravated Assaults on Women Act', (Hansard, Aggravated
Assaults Bill, 1853). Centuries earlier still, in the Elizabethan period, domestic
disputes and violence were a considerable proportion of indictments for violence
brought before Courts, (George, 2002). Nevertheless, it is certainly the case that
there has been an immeasurably greater focus on domestic abuse since Erin
Pizzey's work in the 1970s.
9.2.1 Incidence of Male Victims: Survey Data
The best source of data on the incidence of domestic abuse in England and Wales is
the CSEW (Crime Survey for England and Wales). As the name implies, these data
are obtained from surveys, not recorded police data or logged crimes. Except
where otherwise indicated, the data below relates to the CSEW for the year
ending March 2017 and has been taken from the dataset 'Domestic abuse in
England and Wales - Bulletin tables' as well as the companion dataset 'Domestic
abuse in England and Wales - Appendix tables', (Office for National Statistics,
2017p).
When interpreting the domestic abuse data from these surveys it is important to
appreciate the questions asked which elicit positive responses recorded in the
surveys. There are different sets of questions for domestic abuse, partner abuse,
sexual abuse and stalking. Domestic abuse may be carried out by any family
member upon any other family member, whereas "partner abuse" refers to
intimate partners. "Family abuse" refers to domestic abuse excluding partner
abuse. Partner abuse includes abuse by former partners. They may be former
partners at the time of the abuse. There is no requirement that the partner is
cohabiting with the victim, nor even that they have ever cohabited. An example of
the type of questions asked is illustrated for partner abuse in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1: Example of a Survey Question in the CSEW: "Indicate whether, in the
last year, your partner or ex-partner"…
Prevented you from having your fair share of the household money
Stopped you from seeing friends and relatives
Repeatedly belittled you to the extent that you felt worthless
Frightened you, by threatening to hurt you or someone close to you
Pushed you, held you down or slapped you
Kicked, bit, or hit you with a fist or something else, or threw something at you
Choked or tried to strangle you
Threatened you with a weapon, for example a stick or a knife
Threatened to kill you
Used a weapon against you, for example a stick or a knife
Used some other kind of force against you
None of these
Have never had a partner / been in a relationship
Don't know/can't remember
Don't wish to answer
Not all the categories relate to physical violence, and there is a wide range of
severities. The survey relates to people from age 16 to 59. Respondents are asked
about incidents both in the last year and over life. In the data below, the "last year"
refers to April 2016 to March 2017.
7.5% of women and 4.3% of men reported domestic abuse in the last year;
5.9% of women and 3.0% of men reported partner abuse in the last year;
2.0% of women and 1.6% of men reported family abuse in the last year;
From the above, rather more than 1 in 3 victims of domestic abuse or partner abuse
are men;
20% of incidents of violence against the person against men were domestic
violence;
At least 13.4% of victims in prosecutions for domestic abuse were men (17% of
those where sex was stated);
8.2% of defendants in prosecutions for domestic abuse were women;
Police reported prevalence of domestic abuse is 0.8% (average over England and
Wales);
Domestic abuse prevalence estimates from the CSEW have reduced by 33%
between 2004/5 and 2016/17, contrary to the impression one often gets from the
media. Thus, the CSEW indicates that domestic abuse is now at about one-fifth its
peak incident rate in 1994 (see Figure 9.9);
Only 5% of clients using IDVA (independent domestic violence advisor) services
were male.
Figure 9.9: The Reducing Number of Incidents of Domestic Abuse (1981 – 2018,
CSEW) (Office for National Statistics, 2019b)
For the first time, the 2017 CSEW on domestic abuse includes extensive data
provided by Women's Aid and Safelives, which are organisations with self-declared
partisan positions on the nature of domestic abuse – see section 9.2. Although such
data is not flagged as "National Statistics" most readers will interpret its presence
in an ONS report as indicating some degree of official approval. Also for the first
time, the 2017 CSEW uses the term "femicide", a term created by the feminist
lobby to distinguish it from "homicide". The reason for distinguishing killing of
females from killing of males by using a distinct term has not been explained. One
might surmise that it is to facilitate a perspective, and perhaps ultimately a legal
recognition, that femicide is more heinous than the mere killing of males.
9.2.2 Severe Force
The CSEW used to report the incidence of the most severe type of physical
violence under a category "severe force". For male victims, between 2009/10 and
2012/13 the incidence of "severe force" increased from 0.8% to 1.0%, whilst for
women it decreased from 1.5% to 1.1% (relating to incidence in the last year).
Thus, incidence in the severe force category had become essentially equal for the
two sexes by 2012/13. Incidence in this category has not been reported by the
CSEW since. However, Mankind Initiative (2017) identify that,
'Of those that suffered from partner abuse in 14/15, 29% of men and 23% of
women suffered a physical injury, a higher proportion of men suffering severe
bruising or bleeding (6%) and internal injuries or broken bones/teeth (2%) than
women (4% and 1% respectively). Only 27% of men sought medical advice whilst
73% of women did.'
In the year ending March 2018, a larger proportion of partner abuse against men
was physical force (46%) than was the case for women victims (28%), (Office for
National Statistics, 2018af). To put this in context, the majority of partner abuse
victims (74.5%) did not sustain a physical injury as a result of the abuse, and for
those that did sustain an injury, these were often relatively minor injuries.
However, emotional/psychological effects of abuse may be severe. The same
source reveals that 11.0% of men and 7.2% of women who reported partner abuse
tried to kill themselves as a result of the abuse experienced in the last year (for
adults aged 16 to 59 years).
9.2.3 Demographic Dependence of DA
The risk of domestic violence decreases with age. Teenage men are about three
times more likely to suffer domestic abuse as men over 55. Teenage women are
about twice as likely as women over 55 to suffer domestic abuse. Some DA support
web sites will state that anyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, whether
wealthy or poor. Whilst strictly true, this obscures a marked dependence of
incidence upon socioeconomic class. In 2007, the published data suggested that
where household income was greater than £40,000 a woman's risk of suffering
domestic abuse was about one-third that for households with an income of less than
£10,000. For men, the risk would be halved in the higher earning demographic,
(Home Office Statistical Bulletin, 2009). The latest data indicates an even more
marked effect of socioeconomic class. Where household income was greater than
£50,000 a woman's risk of suffering domestic abuse was little more than one-fifth
that for households with an income of less than £10,000. For men, the risk was
about one-third in the higher earning demographic, (Office for National Statistics,
2018af).
9.2.4 Domestic Violence and Marital Status
An issue which is rarely brought out in discussions on DA statistics is that the
overwhelming bulk of the survey respondents reporting DA are not married. Recall
that partner abuse can relate to an ex-partner, and there is no requirement for
cohabitation, either at the time of the incident or any other time. Of adult women
reporting domestic abuse in the survey, only 5% were married. For men the
corresponding figure is 7%. For both sexes, domestic abuse is most common for
those who are divorced or separated, followed by single people. Married people
have the lowest incidence of domestic violence for both sexes, see Figure 9.10,
based on (Office for National Statistics, 2017u)
Figure 9.10: Domestic Abuse by Marital Status (2016 CSEW)
The peak in domestic abuse for those divorced or separated raises an obvious
question: are they causally connected? If so, does the separation precipitate the
abuse, or vice-versa? The CSEW does not enlighten us on this point. However it
seems more likely that the separation precipitates the abuse rather than the
reverse, because otherwise it is hard to understand why the incidence is not greater
in the married/cohabiting categories. Another question which arises in this context
is whether the abuse relates to the ex-partner or a new partner.
9.2.5. Repeated Domestic Abuse
Women's Aid (2018a) declare that, 'women are more likely than men to experience
multiple incidents of abuse'. However, Figure 9.11 plots the data on repeat
incidents of partner abuse from (Office for National Statistics, 2016b) and shows
that there is very little difference between the sexes, except for a slight difference
in the "more than 50 times" category, which is rare for both sexes. (Note that
about two-thirds of survey respondents either declined to answer this question or
replied "don't know". The data in Figure 9.10 has been renormalised to total
100%). Taking repeat incidents into account, men are the victims in about one-infour incidents (as contrasted with being about one-in-three victims).
Figure 9.11: Repeat incidents of partner abuse by sex of victim (2015 CSEW)
9.2.6 Reports to Police, Prosecutions and Convictions
Figure 6 of the 2017 CSEW Bulletin Tables indicates that 24% of all domestic
abuse offences recorded by the police in England and Wales in 2016/17 were
against male victims (hence 76% against female victims). The same percentages
apply when confined to the "violence against the person" sub-category of domestic
abuse. However, a very different gender split is found in prosecutions for domestic
abuse. Table 24 of the 2017 CSEW Appendix Tables indicates that 91.7% of
defendants in such cases are men, and only 8.2% are women. The sex of the
victims is not always recorded, but where it is recorded 17% of victims are men
and 83% women. The 2018 Violence Against Women and Girls Report indicates
very similar data: defendants 92.1% men, 7.9% women; victims 16.5% men, 83.5%
women, (Crown Prosecution Service, 2018). The variation in these statistics since
2010 is shown in Figure 9.12.
The reason for the greater attrition of cases against male victims is unknown. It
might reflect perceived severity of the offence (perceived, that is, by the police or
prosecuting authorities), or it might reflect the judged likelihood of gaining a
conviction. In either case it seems likely that such judgments are influenced by
gender bias in the perception of the seriousness of violence perpetrated by men or
by women, and also the gender bias in the perception of the harm of violence to
male or female victims.
Figure 9.12: Defendants and Victims in Prosecutions for Domestic Abuse
9.2.7 Domestic Homicides
Figure 9.13 plots the number of homicides in England and Wales by the sex of the
victim, showing separately the data for different relationships with the perpetrator,
using data taken from (Office for National Statistics, 2017v). In round terms, there
are about twice as many female victims of domestic homicide as male victims of
domestic homicide. In contrast, for homicide committed by acquaintances or by
strangers, male victims are 5 or 6 times more numerous than female victims.
Overall, in 2016, men accounted for 69% of all homicide victims, but 34% of
domestic homicide victims. Note that the latter is consistent with the CSEW
evidence on the relative prevalence of domestic abuse of male victims (i.e., one-inthree).
Figure 9.13: Number of Homicides in England and Wales by Sex of Victim and
Relationship with the Perpetrator (Office for National Statistics, 2017v)
If attention is confined to homicides committed by partners or ex-partners, in
2015/16 there were 77 female victims and 28 male victims. It is sometimes stated
that two women per week are killed by their partner or ex-partner in England and
Wales (Women's Aid, 2018c). In recent years it would be more accurate to state
that two people per week are killed by their partner or ex-partner, of which around
one-quarter are men.
Perpetrators of partner homicides do not form a representative cross-section of the
public. Bridger et al (2017) reviewed 188 cases of intimate partner homicide
recorded in England and Wales between April 2011 and March 2013. The dataset
contained 162 (86%) female and 26 (14%) male victims. These figures are reversed
for perpetrators as all the relationships were heterosexual in nature. The
perpetrators were 46% unemployed, 58% non-earning, and 29% employed in
unskilled work. Hence, partner homicides are extremely skewed to the lowest
socioeconomic groups.
Gender issues in relation to the homicide of children are less often discussed. In
particular, data on the sex of perpetrators of child killing in the UK are difficult to
obtain, not being specified in ONS datasets (though some information is available
from Crown Prosecution Service reports, see section 9.3). This is odd in view of the
prominence given to the sex of partner killers and the sex of perpetrators of
homicide generally. Table 3 of the domestic abuse dataset, (Office for National
Statistics, 2018c), gives a breakdown of the suspected perpetrators of domestic
homicides. But this Table is grossly misleading as regards the cases where the
perpetrator is a parent (i.e., the victim is their son or daughter), because the Table
is restricted to adult victims,16 years or older, not children. Some data on the sex of
perpetrators of child killing was obtained via a Freedom of Information enquiry to
the Home Office (2018). The number of homicides of children under 16 per year by
a parent, averaged over the 20 years 1998 to 2017, was 21 perpetrated by fathers
and 11 perpetrated by mothers. However, there are some difficulties with this
dataset. Firstly, as will be seen below, around 20% of child killings involve both
parents, and it is not clear how this has been addressed. (If the homicide has been
assigned to the father in such cases, then the killings by mothers and fathers would
actually be much closer to parity). Also, cases where the suspect has killed
themselves or died before trial have been assumed guilty. There are also issues
related to the completeness of the homicide statistics in relation to infanticide and
death through neglect, co-sleeping, etc., as discussed further below.
The following data is taken from (Office for National Statistics, 2016c) and (Office
for National Statistics, 2018f). Table 9.2 gives the number of homicides of children
and young adults by sex of the victim. These data have been averaged over a range
of years to smooth the data because the statistics are small. There is a slightly
greater number of boys than girls who are victims of homicide at all ages. This
excess of male homicide victims becomes emphatic in the teenage years, and even
more so in the early twenties.
Table 9.2 relates to all homicides. Between 2006 and 2017 an average of 62% of
homicides of children under 16 in the UK were carried out by a parent or both
parents (although there are signs in the last year of data that this proportion may be
falling to less than half). A similar percentage (59.7%) is indicated across a range of
countries, (Stockl et al, 2017).
Table 9.2: Number of homicides per year of children and young adults by sex of
victim, England and Wales
Age range Averaged over years male female
Under 1 2006-2017 10 8
1 - 4 2006-2017 9 8
5 - 15 2006-2017 12 7
15 - 19 2012-2015 29 7
16 - 24 2006-2017 90 24
The excess of fatalities of boys over girls is reflected in data from the USA,
(NCANDS, 2016), which reports that, 'boys had a slightly higher child fatality rate
than girls at 2.87 boys per 100,000 boys in the population compared with 2.11 girls
per 100,000 girls in the population'. The same source informs us that, 'nearly
three-quarters of child fatalities were attributed to neglect only or a combination
of neglect and another maltreatment type'. In contrast, more than half of child
fatalities involved no element of physical abuse. Neglect, in other words, is the
principal child killer rather than violence (at least in the US).
Per year of age range, the homicide rate of children over one year old is
substantially less than that for adults of pre-retirement age, see Figure 9.14. In
sharp contrast, however, infants under one year old suffer by far the greatest
homicide rate. US data confirm this same, very emphatic, pattern of high infant
homicide rates (Figure 9.15). The greater prevalence of homicide of infants is of
significance when considering the sex of perpetrators. In English law, infanticide is
defined as the killing of a child under one year old by the child's mother. The
purpose of introducing the law of infanticide was explicitly to facilitate mitigation
for mothers killing their infant children, infanticide being regarded as a lesser
offence than murder or manslaughter. Such mitigation, or the offence of infanticide
itself, is not available for men.
Figure 9.14: Number of homicides per year of victims' age range (England &
Wales)
In the late 1960s / early 1970s, there were typically around 18 convictions for
infanticide per year. In recent years there is perhaps one conviction for infanticide
per year on average, (Office for National Statistics, 2018f). Moreover, the
convictions for infanticide in recent years are almost always the outcome of an
initial indictment for murder, (Crown Prosecution Service, 2014). Prosecution for an
initial charge of infanticide almost never happens now. This begs the question: are
infanticides being registered as homicides, as they should be? The sentence
awarded for a conviction for infanticide is never imprisonment. Even a suspended
sentence is unusual. Generally, a hospital sentence, probation or a supervision order
is awarded.
Figure 9.15: Number of homicides per year of victims' age range (USA). Copied
from (Children's Bureau, 2018)
The sex of perpetrators of child homicide is less than clear in the general literature.
For example, (Debowska et al, 2015) cite a number of sources which variously claim
greater female perpetration, greater male perpetration, or about equal – although
there appears to be a consensus regarding mothers being the predominant
perpetrators of the homicide of younger children. The major USA study, (NCANDS,
2016b), is more helpful, concluding that,
'In 2016, parents - acting alone or with another parent or individual - were
responsible for 78% of child abuse or neglect fatalities. More than one-quarter
(27%) of fatalities were perpetrated by the mother acting alone, 16.8% were
perpetrated by the father acting alone, and 20.1% were perpetrated by the mother
and father acting together. Nonparents (including kin and child care providers,
among others) were responsible for 16.7% of child fatalities, and child fatalities
with unknown perpetrator relationship data accounted for 5.3% of the total.'
The corresponding report for the following year, (NCANDS, 2017), indicates that
80.1% of child fatalities due to abuse or neglect were the responsibility of one or
more parent. Only 15.2% were attributed entirely to non-parents. The mother
acting alone was responsible in 30.5% of cases, the father acting alone in 15.5% of
cases, and the mother and father both responsible in 22.3% of cases. The mother
together with a non-parent were responsible for the child death in a further 10.8%
of cases. All told, the mother was implicated in 63.6% of cases. The father was
implicated in 38.8% of cases. This is a clear indication of greater perpetration by
mothers than fathers based on a large USA dataset. For the UK, examination of all
serious cases reviews over the 7 year period from 2009 to 2015, (Bradford R. ,
2018a), provided the following conclusions,
Where culpability was established, the mother was the lone perpetrator in 36% of
cases and either a lone or a co-perpetrator in over half of cases (58%).
Mothers were more likely to be responsible for a child death than fathers and male
partners combined.
Single mothers were the demographic most likely to be responsible for the deaths of
children.
Another very large study, covering a wide range of countries, has recently been
published in the BMJ, (Stockl et al, 2017). This involved a systematic review of
9431 studies which, after screening, led to the inclusion of 126 studies which all
reported the number or proportion of perpetrators of child homicide. Key findings
(medians) were,
Over the 44 countries for which there was relevant data, parents committed 56.5%
of child homicides, with parents killing rather more girls than boys;
Data from 33 countries distinguishing the perpetrators of parental homicides of
children under the age of 18 years showed that mothers committed just over half of
all parental homicides (54.7%);
Across all homicides of children (under 18), boys were the victims substantially
more often than girls (70% cf 30%), the homicide of boys increasing dramatically in
late adolescence;
Over the 14 countries for which there was relevant data, parents committed 77.8%
of homicides of children under one year old;
Over the 12 countries for which there was relevant data, mothers committed 71.7%
of parental homicides of children under one year old;
Over the 13 countries for which there was relevant data, almost all neonaticides
(killing within the first day of life) were committed by mothers (median 100%, interquartile range 92.9% to 100%). Fathers committed extremely few neonaticides
(median 0%, inter-quartile range 0% to 6.7%).
The study found that acquaintances committed only 12.6% of child homicides, but
this increased to 36.9% for adolescents. Step-parents committed only 7.2% of
parental homicides (hence 4% overall).
A review of the serious case reviews to which the Children And Family Court
Advisory and Support Services (CAFCASS) have contributed in recent years,
(Green and Halliday, 2017), provided the following results, from 49 cases of child
death. The father was involved in 33% to 41% of the child deaths, whereas the
mother was involved in 47% to 55% of the child deaths (and the mother's partner in
12% of the deaths). All these sources concur that mothers are responsible for
rather more child homicides than fathers, or men in general, especially as regards
younger children.
Despite this, the advice of the London Safeguarding Children Board (2017b) in
respect of protecting children from domestic abuse recognises only the dangers to
children posed by men. In being so limited this procedure omits at least half the risk
to children. And yet both the review of serious cases by Bradford (2018a) and that
by Green and Halliday (2017) have highlighted many cases where exactly this
refusal to acknowledge that mothers too can pose a risk to children has had fatal
consequences. Some of these are celebrated cases which have been much in the
news. The skewed perception of domestic abuse as "gendered", and hence the
exclusive province of male perpetrators, is thus more than a male disadvantage: it
permits children to be exposed to avoidable risk by a refusal to accept reality.
There are two further contributions to the overall homicide rate of infants which do
not appear in the statistics. (I do not include abortion here, the statistics for which
would render homicides statistically insignificant). These are neonaticides and
covert homicides passed off as sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), or "cot
death". No one knows what proportion of SIDS is actually covert homicide.
However, the variation of the rate of SIDS with marital status is rather alarming,
see Table 9.3 based on (Office for National Statistics, 2018m). Here the term "joint
registrant" refers to the father being named on the birth certificate, in contrast to
"sole registrant" where that is not the case. The incidence of SIDS per 100,000 live
births has a consistent trend with marital status. The rate is least for married
couples, greater for cohabiting joint registrants, greater still for non-cohabiting
joint registrants, but greatest for sole registrants (lone parents, generally single
mothers). The rate of SIDS is 7 or 8 times greater for a single parent family than a
married couple family.
Table 9.3: Rate of SIDS ("Cot Death") by Marital Status (per 100,000 live births)
Marital Status 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Married 8 7 17 15 17
Joint Registrants,
Same Address
20 30
Joint Registrants,
Different
Address
40 44 66 67 82
Sole Registrant 55 58
Neonaticide is the killing of a newborn baby within its first 24 hours of life.
Debowska et al (2015) note,
'some women give birth unassisted, kill the neonate, and dispose of the body
immediately after birth.'
Similarly, Craig (2004) observes,
'It is very difficult to get accurate figures on the incidence of neonaticide and
infant homicide since many cases are never discovered; official figures are likely to
be an underestimate'
Resnick (1970) opines,
'hundreds and possibly thousands of neonaticides still occur in Britain each year'
And Steven Pinker (1997), referring to the USA, rather graphically described it
thus,
'Every year, hundreds of women commit neonaticide: they kill their newborns or
let them die. Most neonaticides remain undiscovered, but every once in a while a
janitor follows a trail of blood to a tiny body in a trash bin, or a woman faints and
doctors find the remains of a placenta inside her.'
9.2.8 International Studies of Domestic Abuse
The academic literature on domestic violence is huge. It would not be appropriate
to attempt a review here. However, there are a couple of references worth
mentioning briefly. The first is the compendium of 'References examining assaults
by women on their spouses or male partners: An annotated bibliography' by Martin
Fiebert (2014). Quote,
'This annotated bibliography describes 343 scholarly investigations (270 empirical
studies and 73 reviews) demonstrating that women are as physically aggressive as
men (or more) in their relationships with their spouses or opposite-sex partners.
The aggregate sample size in the reviewed studies exceeds 440,850 people.'
Earlier versions of this review have appeared as peer reviewed publications, each
succeeding paper accumulating further evidence, (Fiebert, 1997), (Fiebert, 2004),
(Fiebert, 2010), (Fiebert, 2012).
The other international study which is particularly worth noting is the Partner
Abuse State of Knowledge (PASK) Project. This was published in May 2013 in the
journal 'Partner Abuse' and is the most comprehensive review of domestic
violence research literature ever carried out, (PASK, 2013a). This unparalleled
three-year research project was conducted by 42 scholars at 20 universities and
research centres. John Hamel, PASK Director, said,
'The purpose of this project is to bring together, in a rigorously evidence-based,
transparent and methodical manner, existing knowledge about partner abuse, with
reliable, up-to-date research that can easily be accessed by anyone. PASK is
grounded in the premises that everyone is entitled to their opinion, but not to their
own facts; that these facts should be available to everyone, and that domestic
violence intervention and policy ought to be based upon these facts rather than
ideology and special interests.'
The headline finding of the PASK review was that,
'men and women perpetrate physical and non-physical forms of abuse at
comparable rates, most domestic violence is mutual, women are as controlling as
men, domestic violence by men and women is correlated with essentially the same
risk factors, and male and female perpetrators are motivated for similar reasons.'
A key numerical result from the PASK Project was,
'Among large population samples, 57.9% of inter-partner violence (IPV) reported
was bi-directional, 42% unidirectional; 13.8% of the unidirectional violence was
male to female (MFPV), 28.3% was female to male (FMPV)'.
In contrast to the CSEW, which indicates that about 1 in 3 victims of partner abuse
is male, the international PASK Project implies that men experience a rather
greater amount of victimisation than women. Their conclusion is that, as regards
unidirectional partner violence, men are victims twice as frequently as women.
It is claimed that women may be impacted more by domestic violence. Certainly, it
is likely that a given degree of physical force may cause greater injury to a woman
than to a man, though this will depend upon the individuals. But this should not, in
my opinion, confuse the issue of equal culpability. In practice, however, it probably
does. Moreover, the PASK project observes,
'There was a relative dearth of research examining the consequences of physical
and psychological victimization in men, and the studies that have been conducted
have focused almost exclusively on sex differences in injury rates….. Relatedly,
there is limited research on the psychological consequences of abuse on male
victims, and the research that does exist has yielded mixed findings (some studies
find comparable effects of psychological abuse across gender, while others do not).'
(PASK, 2013b)
In this context, recall from section 9.2.2 that the 2017/18 CSEW reported that
more men than women who reported partner abuse in the UK in that year tried to
kill themselves as a result of the abuse. So the psychological impact of partner
abuse on men is no less than that upon women.
9.2.9 Dads as Victims of Domestic Violence
Fathers who are subject to partner abuse whilst living with their children face a
particular problem. In the context of partner abuse against women victims, it has
long been unacceptable to ask, foolishly, "why does she not just leave?" Yet the
same unthinking question is still acceptable in the context of abused men: why does
he not just leave her? The complete answer is complex. But, where children are
present, the answer may be very simple: he sticks around for fear that the children
will become the target of abuse in his absence. Men face an acute difficulty in this
respect because, not only are refuges for men a rarity, but there are almost none
to which a father may flee with his children.
The Welsh Dads Survey carried out by the charity FNF Both Parents Matter
Cymru (2017) provided many comments which alluded to domestic violence against
the respondents themselves, or their children, by their partner. In 2018 the same
charity conducted a survey specifically for male victims of domestic abuse, though
not specific to Wales. Some results were,
681 men who responded identified as a victim / survivor of 'Domestic Violence &
Abuse' as set out in the UK Government definition;
92.6% of the respondents were from the UK;
15% of respondents did not identify as white British (12.2% identified as black,
Asian or mixed race). 13.7% declared a disability;
93.75% of victims were no longer living with their abuser;
95% of reported abusers were identified as female, 3% as male.
The survey obtained respondents' answers to questions relating to, (a) the nature
and prevalence of any physical abuse, (b) the nature and prevalence of any nonphysical abuse, (c) for those who did not seek help as a victim of domestic abuse,
what prevented them from doing so?, and, (d) what sort of help would have made
things better? A few salient findings were as follows,
Just over half of male victims did not appreciate at the time that what they were
experiencing was abuse, they didn't know where to turn for help, and they did not
expect to be believed;
69.7% of respondents had faced prejudice or stereotyping as a victim of abuse
because they were a man (e.g., police telling them to 'man up', social workers
assuming that they must be the perpetrator, DV support services asking them
questions to determine whether their partner was the 'real' victim, etc.);
When asked how important it was that services for male victims should be
grounded in the experience of men and separated from services primarily designed
for women, 82.3% of respondents thought this Important or Essential.
9.2.10 Domestic Abuse Services: The Sexes Compared
Data from Women's Aid Federation of England, reported in (Office for National
Statistics, 2017p), indicated there were 3,798 beds in women's refuges in England
in 2017, up from 3,467 in 2010. Pro-rata this suggests nearly 4,500 bed places in
women's refuges in the UK as a whole. In contrast, Mankind Initiative (2017)
identifies only 105 refuge beds potentially available for male victims, of which only
31 are dedicated for male victims. There are no refuge or safe houses at all in
London for male victims. Moreover, there is no provision for men to flee domestic
violence with their children.
In Wales, in year 2015/16, a total of 1,518 women were referred to, and
accommodated at, a refuge. The corresponding figure for male victims was 41. The
extent of support provided to victims of domestic abuse in Gwent in 2015/16 has
been provided in Table 7.3 of Appendix 3 to the Gwent Regional Violence Against
Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence Strategy 2017-2022 (Gwent
Partnership Board on VAWDASV, 2016). Support for victims of DA were provided
to 2,478 women and 69 men. In North Wales the corresponding figures were 2,401
women and 32 men, as quoted by FNF Both Parents Matter Cymru (2018) and
referenced by the National Assembly for Wales Petitions Committee (2018).
Clearly, there is a massive disproportion in service provision for male and female
victims. The provision of refuge space for male victims is around 0.7% to 2.8% of
that for female victims. This is glaringly inconsistent with the relative prevalence
of abuse suffered by men (34% based on the CSEW; 24% of police reports in the
UK; 17% of victims in prosecutions). Whilst there may not be a need for equal
refuge space for men, there is an obvious and huge shortfall in service provision to
men at present. The almost complete lack of facilities for fathers to flee with their
children can be particularly problematic for abused men.
Figure 9.16: The Duluth Model's "Power & Control Wheel"
9.2.11 Perpetrator Programmes
There are 'treatment' programmes to correct the behaviour of perpetrators of
partner abuse. In the UK, as in most countries, these programmes – perhaps better
called re-education programmes – are based on the Duluth model. The Duluth
model originated from cases in Duluth, Minnesota, studied by Ellen Pence and
Michael Paymar (1993). It is based on the patriarchal power and control theory of
domestic violence which admits of no motive other than an assumed male desire for
dominance over women. Consequently it does not, and cannot, recognise that men
can be victims, or that women can be perpetrators. The mindset of the model is
adequately portrayed by its (now infamous) power & control wheel, reproduced as
Figure 9.15. It recognises only female victims and male perpetrators.
In the UK, perpetrator programmes are accredited through the charity Respect
whose Accreditation Standard is explicitly applicable only to male perpetrators
abusing female victims, (Respect, 2012). Moreover, the accreditation effectively
ensures that only programmes conforming broadly, if not necessarily in name, to
the Duluth "male power & control" theory can be accredited. For this reason,
perpetrator programmes which are based on any other understanding or
methodology will find it far harder to get funding, or to be accepted by authorities
such as the courts or social services, due to lack of accreditation.
Unsurprisingly, given that male power and control is a false view of domestic
violence in the great majority of cases, Duluth programmes have a woeful record
of success, despite the man's further contact with his children often being
dependent on completing such a programme. A thorough review of studies
appraising the efficacy of Duluth-type programmes is beyond the scope of this
book, but it is valuable to make some passing observations. Consider firstly the
study by Dutton and Corvo (2006) from which the following are quotes,
'The Duluth model's negligible success in reducing or eliminating violence among
perpetrators in tandem with the iron-grip of prohibition of other approaches is
perhaps its most damaging feature.'
'Dutton (2003) argued that Duluth models had two major flaws that were
contraindicative of effective treatment; they attempted to shame clients and, in
taking a strong adversarial stance to clients (based on a view of male sex role
conditioning as a major issue in domestic violence), failed to establish a therapeutic
bond with their clientele.
The single most predictive factor for successful therapeutic outcome (even those
labelled "interventions") is the therapeutic bond. However, it becomes extremely
difficult to form a positive relationship when the therapist is required to assume
that strategic intentional domination is the sole motive for all clients and to
presumptively disbelieve any claims of mutuality raised by clients.'
More recently the report, 'Transforming Rehabilitation: a summary of evidence on
reducing reoffending', (Ministry of Justice, 2014), contains this statement,
'The most recent systematic review of US evidence indicates that the Duluth
Model appears to have no effect on recidivism. However, this review also identified
substantial reductions in domestic violence reoffending by offenders who had
attended other interventions.'
The US reference in question was, 'What works to reduce recidivism by domestic
violence offenders?', (Miller, Drake & Nafziger, 2013). A more recent review of
the effectiveness of perpetrator programmes has reconfirmed the woeful record of
Duluth, or feminist-patriarchy based, programmes, and also indicated that CBT
(cognitive behaviour therapy) modalities are no better, (Voith et al, 2018).
In the UK in 2006/7, the programme DVIP (Domestic Violence Intervention
Project) had 230 referrals but only 33 men completed the course, i.e., a completion
rate of a woeful 14%, (DVIP Accounts, 2007). Moreover, taking into account its
limited effectiveness even for men who completed the programme, as DVIP
admitted before a Home Office Select Committee (2008), DVIP can be concluded
to have been effective in 23 cases out of 230, i.e., 10%. In the absence of a control
group this might even be consistent with zero effectiveness.
It is worth noting that one of the originators of the Duluth model, Ellen Pence, was
ultimately to reject the model herself, based on hard practical experience. The
following extracts are taken from 'Co-ordinating Community Responses to
Domestic Violence: Lessons from Duluth and Beyond' by Melanie Shepherd and
Ellen Pence (1999),
'He does it for the power, he does it for control, he does it because he can – these
were the jingles that, in our opinion, said all there was to say.'
On the next page she clarifies how wrong they were,
'By determining that the need or desire for power was the motivating force behind
battering, we created a conceptual framework that, in fact, did not fit the lived
experience of many of the men and women we were working with. Like those we
were criticising, we reduced our analysis to a psychological universal truism. The
Domestic Abuse Intervention Programme staff - like the therapist insisting it was
an anger control problem, or the judge wanting to see it as an alcohol problem, or
the defence attorney arguing that it was a defective wife problem - remained
undaunted by the differences in our theory and the actual experiences of those we
were working with. We all engaged in ideological practices and claimed them to be
neutral observations.
I found that many of the men I interviewed did not seem to articulate a desire for
power over a partner. Although I relentlessly took every opportunity to point out
to the men in groups that they were so motivated and merely in denial, the fact
that few men ever articulated such a desire went unnoticed by me and many of my
co-workers. Eventually we realised that we were finding what we had
predetermined to find.'
In the face of all these negative observations it is remarkable that the ideological
stranglehold of Duluth on perpetrator programmes is still firmly in place in the UK
(and elsewhere). This means that perpetrator programmes that could work, for
either sex, have been pushed to the margins and all but eliminated.
9.3 The Empathy Gap for Men as Victims of Violence
"Men are violent" or "we need to talk about men's violence" are sentiments you
can express publicly without fear of censure or disagreement. You would not be
treated so kindly if you opined that Muslims are terrorists or black men are drug
dealers. All these are examples of castigating the whole for the behaviour of a few.
They are of the same type. The acceptability of one and the political incorrectness
of the others is determined only by their respective identity group status:
oppressor or oppressed. But this status is prejudice dressed up as politics. It
relegates the individual to irrelevance, replacing them with an identity label. You
are undeserving by virtue of an accident of your birth. I have worked all my life
amongst men in an engineering environment and the number of incidents of
violence I have witnessed is zero. Nor do I encounter any of great significance in
my personal life, though I have occasionally seen young women slapping or kicking
their boyfriends in shopping malls. Serious violence does occur, of course, as the
statistics show. But the narrative which presents such violence as a norm is false.
Having said that, it depends upon the sort of society within which you mix.
Undoubtedly, the exposure to violence is strongly demographic related, and that
also is clear from the statistics.
As an illustration of the double standards in operation in the context of partner
violence, consider the cases of MPs David Ruffley, Sarah Champion and Layla
Moran. In 2014, MP David Ruffley was obliged to stand down when it emerged he
had been cautioned by the police for assaulting his former partner, (McGurran,
2014). Whether the assault was a one-off or part of a continuing behaviour pattern
we do not know. Four years earlier Mr Ruffley 'fell in front of a train', (Geater
and Jones, 2010) - see chapter 18 for the relationship between domestic violence
and suicide. As soon as Mr Ruffley's abuse of his ex-partner became known, his
career was over.
Contrast this with the case of Labour MP Sarah Champion. She was in the throes
of divorcing her husband when an argument led to her assaulting him. Both were
cautioned, though it was Mr Hoyland who called the police and Ms Champion spent
time in a police cell. When the story emerged later, she was Shadow Secretary of
State for Women and Equalities and also Shadow Minister for Preventing Abuse.
Many accounts at the time presented Ms Champion's abuse as a one-off event
following years of provocation. However, friends claimed it was not the first time
she had hit him, and that she had been harassing and abusive throughout their
marriage. A picture emerged from some reports of an abusive bully who terrified
her former husband, a classic partner abuse scenario. Mr Hoyland, they said, was
terrified of her. His new partner stated that Mr Hoyland remained deeply
disturbed by what happened in his marriage and still has nightmares about his
former wife, (Powell and Jenkins, 2016). Nevertheless, Champion's Party Leader
leapt to her defence. Mr Corbyn told the Labour Party's Women's Conference
that Champion has 'our total, full and absolutely warm support'. As a result,
Champion retained her job as Shadow Minister (though she lost it over another
issue later). As of March 2019, she remains an MP and is Chair of the All Party
Parliamentary Group on Sexual Violence and Adult Survivors of Childhood Sexual
Abuse. She is also a member of the Women and Equalities Committee (what
message does that send?). Whatever they may profess in public, there can be no
one who doubts that a male MP in the same position would be sacked from his
senior position immediately, be vilified by all, lose the whip and be deselected.
The tolerance of female violence towards men, even when the woman is in a
position of authority, has been illustrated again recently by the case of Lib-Dem
MP Layla Moran. In 2019 she admitted, via Twitter, that she had been arrested for
assaulting her then-boyfriend six years earlier. (Both were initially detained, as
also happened in the Sarah Champion case, illustrating how male complainants of
partner abuse can expect to be arrested). Moran was charged, but charges were
later dropped, (BBC News, 2019). Moran appears to have chosen public confession
six years after the event only because rumours were beginning to circulate, and, it
has been suggested, she might want to clear the decks in preparation for a LibDem leadership bid. Colin Sutton, a retired Metropolitan Police detective chief
inspector, branded the language Moran used in her "faux-confession" as a 'classic
victim-blaming statement of a domestic abuser', (Ward, 2019). Lib-Dem
commenters have praised Moran's courage and declared that she is brave and "an
inspiration", (HEqual, 2019). A spokesperson for the Lib-Dems asked that her
privacy be respected. Where a man would be sacked and disgraced, a woman is
lauded and held up as a role model. What part of gynocentrism and male
disposability do you not grasp?
All western countries have policy directives and specific legal provisions for a
particular class of violent offences: violence against women and girls (VAWG). So
embedded have these sex-based provisions become that the acronym VAWG is a
familiar one. Even if violence were overwhelmingly perpetrated against female
victims this would be prejudicial. But even that is not so.
Ignoring location, violence is perpetrated against male victims roughly twice as
frequently as against female victims. This is true as regards both men and boys. It
is also true for the most extreme cases where homicide results. When attention is
confined to homicides outside the home, men and boys are 5 or 6 times more often
the victims of homicide than women and girls. Adherents of the dominant gender
narrative will generally react to these observations with unconcern, citing
(correctly) that men and boys are also the majority of the perpetrators of these
offences. The implication appears to be that this observation somehow neutralises
any need for concern or compassion for the victims. This is about as clear an
example of victim blaming as one could have – the victim is to blame for his own
injuries, or death, because he shares genital anatomy with his attacker. Such
thinking is the product of the empathy gap, given wings by identity politics, which
allows all males to be lumped together into an undifferentiated and undeserving
mass, with no need to distinguish between villain and victim.
Within the home, women are more often both the victim and the perpetrator,
compared to outside the home. Despite the strong media focus on domestic
violence, the volume of domestic violence offending is significantly less than
stranger or acquaintance violence outside the home (Figure 9.3). Nevertheless, one
in three victims of domestic abuse or partner abuse are male. Where physical
injury occurs, men may be rather more than one in three victims. One in three
victims of domestic homicide are also male (and about one in four victims of
partner homicide are male). But this prevalence of male victims of domestic abuse
is subject to successive attritions, resulting ultimately in a tiny level of service
provision to male victims. The percentages of men through the process diminish as
follows: 34% from crime surveys; 24% from police reports; 17% of victims in
prosecutions; but only about 1% - 3% of the service provision.
The aspect of domestic violence which is least well appreciated by the public or by
social and political narratives, is the extent to which mothers are responsible for
child deaths. Statistics on this issue are incomplete for the reasons discussed in
section 9.2.7. The largest studies indicate that mothers are responsible for more
child deaths than men. MOJ data does not confirm this but there may be
shortcomings in these data. Many culpable child deaths may not feature in the
official homicide records. Nevertheless, one-third of people prosecuted for child
homicide in 2017/18 were female, (Crown Prosecution Service, 2018). Evidence
from Serious Case Reviews supports the contention that mothers are responsible
for more child deaths than are men.
How do these basic facts about violence align with the huge societal, legal and
political focus upon VAWG – and indeed the very existence of the acronym itself?
The facts betray that the VAWG perspective is not so much a product of
compassion for women and girls as it is the product of deliberately withholding
compassion from men and boys. VAWG is also a political propaganda weapon. This
is amply demonstrated by the Crown Prosecution Service's series of VAWG
reports, for example, (Crown Prosecution Service, 2018). The casual reader would
be forgiven for thinking that Violence Against Women and Girls means violence
against women and girls. But within the context of these CPS VAWG reports it
does not. In this context, "Violence" does not mean violence, "Women" does not
mean women, and "Girls" does not mean girls. Instead, VAWG is actually a formal
term meaning a particular category of crime. The offence may not be violent, and
the victim may be a man or a boy. Responding to pressure to clarify this
obfuscation, the CPS have, since 2016, added a footnote stating 'includes data on
men and boys' to this series of CPS VAWG reports.
But the designation of certain categories of crime as VAWG is, at best, misleading.
If this false categorisation of a certain class of offences as Violence Against
Women and Girls were acceptable, it would be equally acceptable to label it as
Violence Against Men and Boys (VAMB), and to subsume all such offences against
females under the label VAMB. But such a thing – which no one would wish to do –
would rightly be seen as a concealment of offences against women and girls. Yet
our society now condones this usage of the VAWG label as a concealment of
offences against men and boys. It is a subterfuge, but is prevented from being
perceived as such by the empathy gap – and lack of male in-group preference –
which result in its toleration.
The mindset which legitimises VAWG results in the introduction of terms such as
"femicide", surely a levering of the empathy gap to suggest that the killing of
females is more serious an issue than the killing of mere males. The instantiation of
the empathy gap as VAWG clearly demonstrates the operation of gynocentrism
and male disposability. Violence suffered by females is perceived differently from
violence suffered by males, and violence perpetrated by females is perceived
differently from violence perpetrated by males.
Yet women can be both strong and violent, men can be weak and vulnerable, and
immature boys have no physical advantage over girls – and still less over adult
women. This minimisation of male victimisation is necessary to protect the
dominant gender narrative; widespread male victimisation by females conflicts
with its basic tenets. The empathy gap facilitates belief in an ideology which cannot
countenance female perpetration and is indifferent to male victimisation.
Criticism of the presentation of domestic abuse as overwhelmingly men abusing
women is invariably interpreted by those advocating this perspective as an attempt
by reactionary forces to re-establish patriarchal power over women. My
perspective is that the "gendered" interpretation of domestic abuse is another
example of the empathy gap in operation. Here we see why the empathy gap must
be kept in place. To allow that domestic violence is gender symmetric fatally
undermines feminist patriarchy theory. To allow equal empathy for men would thus
lead to the collapse of the whole feminist narrative.
10. Family Court Statistics
The feminisation of the state launches a new offensive in the gender war. It is now
an orthodoxy that one of the primary duties of the state is to protect women's
interests against men. Anna Coote and her colleagues write that fathers are no
longer essential to the economic survival of family units. And Polly Toynbee can
calmly incite women to forget about fatherhood and just look to the state for all
the provisions needed to enable them to have careers and operate effectively
without men. Quoting Toynbee: 'What it (the state) can do is shape a society that
makes a place for women and children as family units, self-sufficient and
independent.
Geoff Dench (1940-2018), Transforming Men
These fathers know that they need their families. But they are not making much
impact, and at the level of general principles, in the public arena, the overwhelming
mood, blending feminism and traditional sentiments, is that if women want to
exclude men they should be allowed to.
Geoff Dench (1940-2018), Transforming Men
This short chapter provides some basic information about the operation of the
family courts in the UK and acts as an introduction to the following chapter which
will address whether the family courts are gender biased.
10.1 Family Court Statistics (England and Wales)
The family courts in England and Wales are within the civil jurisdiction, as
contrasted with the criminal courts. Since 2014 the family courts have been in two
branches: the Family Division of the High Court, and the Family Courts formed
from the merger of the family court functions of the magistrates' courts and the
county courts. Cases may be brought as "private law" or "public law". Public law
cases are those brought by a local authority or the NSPCC (National Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Children). These cases generally involve applications
to intervene to protect a child in some way, such as being removed from their
parents into independent care. Private law cases are brought by individuals, usually
separating parents. These cases address divorce and associated financial matters,
and "child arrangements" following parental separation. They also address certain
aspects of domestic violence in as far as it relates to these matters. Here I shall be
exclusively concerned with private law, and specifically child arrangements. The
principal legislation under which the family courts operate in respect of child
arrangements is the Children Act 1989, (UK Government, 1989), with various later
additions. This gives rise to the jargon that the cases that interest us here are
"Private Law Children Act" cases. Figure 10.1 shows the number of cases
completing in the family courts of England & Wales, comparing divorce (including
legal separation) cases and Private Law Children Act cases. In 2017 there were
103,382 and 42,307 such cases respectively. (Due to missing data, prior to 2011,
Figure 10.1 estimates the number of Private Law Children Act cases completing as
a fixed fraction (40%) of the number of matrimonial cases). Note that just under
half of divorce cases involve children under the age of 16. But also note that
roughly half of Private Law Children Act cases relate to parents who are not
married.
Figure 10.1: Divorce and Private Law Children Act Caseload in the Family Courts
of England & Wales, 2006 – 2017 (cases completing)
10.2 The Paramountcy Principle and the Perception of Risk
To quote Hunt & MacLeod, (2008),
'The legal position with respect to child contact after parental separation is that
parents can agree arrangements informally, there is no requirement to seek a
court order. The law does not explicitly seek to influence those arrangements and
there is no statutory presumption that there should be contact. Parents who cannot
agree can apply to the court for a contact order under Section 8 of the Children
Act 1989, which is governed by the welfare principle, i.e., that when determining
any question with respect to a child's upbringing, the child's welfare is the court's
paramount consideration'.
This is the Paramountcy Principle: that it is the child's best interests and welfare
that must be the court's first and paramount consideration. The principle seems
reasonable, even laudable. But it is the interpretation of the principle in practice
which matters. Where the contention lies is how this desirable objective is best
fulfilled. We will see in chapter 11 that in over 90% of cases, the couple's children
remain living with their mother, with a variable degree of lesser contact or
visitation with the father being permitted or agreed, and often no contact at all.
Fathers' groups will contend that this results from a conflation of "the best
interests of the child" with the wishes of the mother, together with a societal bias
towards assuming that children are best cared for by their mother.
Note the statement in the above quote that 'there is no statutory presumption that
there should be contact'. Hence, if one parent leaves the other and takes the
children, the remaining parent is not entitled to any contact with the children
unless he, or she, obtains an order to that effect from the family courts. I note a
peculiar tension between this legal position and the legal obligation on parents to
care for their children, which includes providing them with a home, protection and
essential maintenance. The ejected parent has been rendered unable to fulfil these
obligations in a manner which he, or she, cannot legally circumvent without a court
ruling.
In the above, the term "parent" can be taken to mean a person with parental
responsibility (PR). This is a legal status. The biological mother automatically has
PR. However, biological fatherhood does not automatically confer PR. A man who
was married to the mother at the time of the birth has PR. Note that this is
independent of biological paternity. Also, a man named on the birth certificate has
PR. A man who considers himself the father of a child, and who may indeed be the
biological father, will not have PR if he is not married to the mother and his name
does not appear on the birth certificate, unless he has obtained a court ruling
granting him PR. A man without PR is in a disadvantaged position after parental
separation in respect of obtaining contested child contact.
10.3 Legal Aid, LASPO and the Role of False Allegations
No understanding of the Family Courts is complete without appreciating the
significance of allegations of domestic violence, and the associated issue of legal
aid.
10.3.1 Legal Aid and LASPO
In April 2013 a new Act came into force, the 'Legal Aid, Sentencing and
Punishment of Offenders Act 2012', generally referred to as LASPO, (UK
Government, 2012a). A major purpose of the LASPO Act was to reduce the
financial burden of legal aid on the public purse by withdrawing legal aid from civil
court cases, and therefore from the family courts. However, it was recognised that
some types of civil case should still be supported by legal aid provision, in
particular, private family law cases involving allegations of domestic abuse. A
"gateway" was introduced which set out precisely what would be accepted as
sufficient justification to underwrite a claim for legal aid via a domestic abuse
allegation. The stipulations within the gateway regarding what constitutes
"evidence" do not meet the standards which one would normally associated with a
court of law, after all, these provisions are intended only to guide the allocation of
legal aid, not to decide upon criminal culpability.
10.3.2 The Domestic Violence Legal Aid Gateway
Legal aid is usually subject to means testing, (UK Government, 2018u). However,
there is again an exception. The Legal Aid Agency (LAA) waives the means test in
the case of applications for legal aid for an order for protection from domestic
violence or forced marriage, (UK Government, 2018v). In 2015 the parliamentary
Justice Select Committee held an inquiry into the impact of changes to civil legal
aid under LASPO. In its submission to the inquiry, the Ministry of Justice
summarised the types of evidence needed to activate the domestic violence
gateway as follows, (UK Parliament, 2015),
a conviction, police caution, or ongoing criminal proceedings for a domestic
violence offence;
a protective injunction;
an undertaking given in court (where no equivalent undertaking was given by the
applicant);
a letter from the Chair of a Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference
(MARAC);
a finding of fact in court of domestic violence;
a letter from a defined health professional (which includes a doctor, nurse, health
visitor or midwife);
evidence from social services of domestic violence; or,
evidence from a domestic violence support organisation of a stay in a refuge.
The protective injunctions referred to above are court orders intended to prevent
domestic violence, the so-called non-molestation orders (NMOs) and occupation
orders. The system was later reviewed and new regulations were brought into
force in April 2014 which extended the types of evidence accepted to include,
police bail for a domestic violence offence;
a bindover for a domestic violence offence;
Domestic Violence Protection Notice/ Domestic Violence Protection Order;
evidence of someone being turned away from a refuge because of a lack of
available accommodation;
medical evidence expanded to include evidence from practitioner psychologists;
and,
evidence of a referral to a domestic violence support service by a health
professional.
Before April 2016 there was a 2 year time limit on evidence, except for
convictions. A further review led to more changes which came into force in April
2016, the most significant of which was the extension of the evidence period from 2
years to 5 years. The latest issue has no time limit. This is significant because it
means historical evidence of a great many years vintage, and perhaps relating to a
different relationship, will also count. Also, the range of health professionals who
may provide evidence has now been expanded to include social workers, dentists,
paramedics and radiographers, (Legal Aid Agency, 2018).
Some of these sources of "evidence" are questionable. Evidence of having applied
to, or been referred to, a refuge, irrespective of whether the applicant was
admitted, clearly is not truly evidence of anything. Even a letter of support from a
refuge cannot be taken as constituting evidence in the usual sense, since the
declared policy of women's refuge charities is to "believe the victim" without
question. Whilst this may be a perfectly valid and compassionate approach when
providing support services, it invalidates any claim to constitute real evidence.
Following an allegation of domestic violence, it is common practice for a man's
solicitor to advise that he sign an "undertaking" (listed above as one of the
gateway evidence options). Such an "undertaking" will state that he will not
threaten, harass, intimidate or pester his ex, or other such wording as appropriate,
for example see (Stowe Family Law, 2017). This is advised on the grounds that the
alternative is a more high risk strategy involving asking a judge to make a ruling
on the matter, which may end up with the man being ruled as a domestic violence
perpetrator. Solicitors may convince a man to go down the "undertaking" route on
the grounds that it implies no admission that his ex's allegations are true. What the
man is highly unlikely to be aware of is that, by doing so, he has just provided
sufficient "evidence" to allow his wife to acquire legal aid to deploy against him.
The coup de grâce is this additional ruling, see (UK Parliament, 2015),
'Legal aid is also available for proceedings which provide protection from domestic
violence, such as protective injunctions, without the need to provide evidence of
domestic violence.'
Putting all this together provides a charter for the false accuser. An application for
a protective injunction following from an allegation of domestic violence will be
funded by legal aid, without means testing, and without any need for evidence.
Upon such an injunction being granted, the injunction itself then provides
"evidence" to activate the DV gateway for the granting of further legal aid in the
subsequent private family law proceedings, e.g., over child arrangements. To the
lay person this seems like a well funded mechanism for creating "evidence" out of
thin air.
10.3.3 Prevalence of Allegations of Domestic Abuse
The best data on the percentage of private family law cases involving allegations
of domestic violence was provided by the Ministry of Justice research team as a
private communication to the charity Families Need Fathers Both Parents Matter
Cymru together with HMCTS (Her Majesty's Courts & Tribunals Service). This
indicates that 49.2% of private family law cases in 2016 involved allegations of
domestic abuse. We shall see in chapter 11 that academic studies based on data
from 2004 and 2011 confirm that about 50% of private family law cases for child
contact involved allegations of domestic abuse.
A report was published in July 2017 with joint research by Women's Aid and
CAFASS, the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service,
(CAFCASS and Womens Aid, 2017). It claimed that '62% of applications to the
family court about where a child should live or spend time feature allegations of
domestic abuse'. However, this study was based on a small sample of cases (216) in
which CAFCASS had been involved and may not be representative. Moreover, it is
possible that the definition of "allegation of domestic abuse" used in this study
might have been rather broader than the Court's definition. The report notes that,
'this data includes all records of domestic abuse within the CAFCASS case file,
including any allegations'.
Whether around 50% or 62%, a figure of this order appears anomalous when
compared with the prevalence of domestic abuse estimated from surveys (see
section 9.2.1), although it was noted in chapter 9 that domestic violence is far more
prevalent amongst separated and divorced couples than other couples (see Figure
9.10). In view of the advantage that making such an allegation confers upon the
accuser in the family courts, the implication is that many such allegations are
fraudulent or wildly exaggerated. In this context, note that it is unusual for such
allegations to ever be subject to a "finding of fact" within the family courts (see
section 10.3.6 below).
10.3.4 Which Sex Gets Legal Aid in the Family Courts?
Prior to LASPO, women were awarded 60% of the legal aid in private family law
cases and men 40% of such legal aid. Following LASPO, with the acquisition of
legal aid now largely dependent upon allegations of domestic violence, one could
anticipate that the proportion of legal aid granted to women would increase
markedly. This indeed was the case. Immediately following the introduction of
LASPO in April 2013, women were awarded 85% of the legal aid in private family
law and men just 15% (see Figure 10.2, data provided by the Legal Aid Agency,
private communication to the charity Families Need Fathers Both Parents Matter
Cymru).
Figure 10.2: Proportion of Legal Aid Awarded to Men and Women in Private
Family Law
The result is an invidious but very common situation in which the accuser has legal
representation but the accused does not, thus inverting the original purpose of
legal aid – to allow the impecunious accused to mount a proper defence. The effect
of legal aid being less commonly available in the Family Courts, especially to men,
has led to the rise of Litigants In Person (LIPs). These are people, most often men,
who have no professional legal representation to assist them in court. Instead, they
have to manage the court process themselves, and this may include defending
themselves against serious allegations. They may be aided by a so-called McKenzie
Friend. This is a person without legal training who may advise the LIP, but cannot
actually address the court on his behalf. In child contact cases, where LIPs are
particularly common, the McKenzie Friend is often a man who has been through his
own similar case in previous years and is often obtained via a fathers' group such
as Families Need Fathers. The net result is that a subculture of amateurs has
arisen in the Family Courts: unrepresented men trying their best to negotiate the
system.
This situation has led to men accused of domestic violence being obliged to crossexamine their ex-partner – their accuser – in court. This is an undesirable outcome
for both parties. Women's groups have presented this phenomenon from the
woman's perspective. For example, under the lurid headline 'Revealed: how family
courts allow abusers to torment their victims', Sandra Laville (2016) wrote in The
Guardian,
'Violent and abusive men are being allowed to confront and cross-examine their
former partners in secretive court hearings that fail to protect women who are
victims of abuse, a Guardian investigation has found. Mothers involved in family
court hearings have given graphic descriptions of the "torture" of being questioned
by abusive men – a practice still allowed in civil cases but banned in criminal
courts.'
The language here is highly partisan. It will be true in some cases that the man in
question is indeed a violent abuser; he may even have been convicted of such an
offence. But, commonly, this will not be the case. The man has been accused by the
woman, but no court has yet ruled on the matter. His accuser should rightly be
described as an "alleged victim" and he as the "alleged abuser" or simply as "the
accused". This misuse of language is part of a process which is undermining the
presumption of innocence in cases involving a woman accusing a man. We shall see
below that only a very small proportion of these accusations will ever be critically
examined.
The claim in the above quote that the accused man is "being allowed" to question
his accuser is a loaded, and grossly misleading, presentation of the true position:
the man has no choice but to do so because he has no legal representation to do it
for him. It is not only a case of the practice being "allowed in civil cases but banned
in criminal courts", it is also unnecessary in the criminal court because the man
would have legal aid and be represented.
Following the media highlighting of "victims" being cross-examined by their
"abuser", the matter was quickly taken up by the then-Justice Minister, Liz Truss
who promised a rapid change in the law to ban the practice, (Truss, 2017). This was
to be addressed via the Prisons and Courts Bill, (UK Parliament, 2017b), see para
31V of (UK Parliament, 2017c), but is now a feature of the new Domestic Abuse
Act 2020/21 which has received Royal Assent since original publication of this
book, (UK Government, 2021).
Table 10.1: The Number of Applications for Legal Aid via the Domestic Violence
Gateway which use Various Types of 'Evidence', 2017/18
Type of 'Evidence' Number of Applications
Arrest for DV offence 67
Bind overs 68
DV injunction orders (NMOs or Occupation orders) plus
protection notices (DVPN) or protection orders (DVPO)
3,934
Expert report for court/tribunal 26
Financial abuse 29
Finding of fact 72
Referral to DV support service 454
IDVA 134
Letter from health professional 2,240
Letter from local authority or housing association 75
Letter from DV support organisation 524
MARAC 979
Ongoing criminal proceedings 172
Police bail 126
Refuge admission or refusal 766
Relevant conviction or caution 516
Socialservices letter 354
Undertaking 331
TOTAL of above(1) 10,869
TOTAL applications(2) 10,038
(1)This will exceed the number of DV applications for legal aid because some will cite
more than one type of evidence.
(2)Total applications including a DV component (see Sheet 6_8 of the Legal Aid
Statistics Tables). 9,497 of these are for DV alone, plus a further 541 for both DV and
child abuse.
10.3.5 Routes through the Gateway
In the year 2017/18, the number of applications for legal aid via the domestic
violence gateway which deployed the various different types of evidence are listed
in Table 10.1, (Legal Aid Agency, 2018). How the use of the various types of
evidence has changed since 2013 is shown by Figure 10.3, for some of the larger
contributors. Easily the most commonly cited "evidence" is a domestic violence
injunction order or protection notice, used in 39% of applications for legal aid via
the DV gateway in 2017/18. What emerged in 2017/18 as the clear second most
deployed type of "evidence" is a letter from a health professional (used in 22% of
applications).
Figure 10.3: The Number of Applications for Legal Aid via the Domestic Violence
Gateway which use Various Types of 'Evidence', 2013 to 2018
Findings of fact provide evidence in only 0.7% of applications. Despite the dominant
influence that allegations of domestic violence exercise over the family court
proceedings, it is relatively rare that the allegations themselves are critically
examined (see next section). Relevant convictions or cautions are deployed as
evidence in only 5% of applications. Even if arrests for a DV offence, finding of
fact, and ongoing criminal proceedings are added to the relevant convictions or
cautions, this still only accounts for 8.2% of applications (and many of those
arrested, being proceeded against or cautioned will be innocent). This fact stands in
stark contrast with the presumption which underlies Sandra Laville's article, above,
namely that all the accused are guilty and that no allegations are false.
10.3.6 Statistics of Domestic Violence Remedy Orders
Fathers groups claim that there is evidence of an escalating rate of false
allegations of domestic violence in the family courts, citing the increase in the
number of domestic violence remedy orders made since LASPO was introduced in
April 2013, (Bowcott, 2018). The data, taken from Family Court Statistics
Quarterly to March 2018, do appear to bear out the claim, (Ministry of Justice,
2018f). Figure 10.4 plots separately both the so-called Non-Molestation Orders
(NMOs) and the total orders for domestic violence remedies, which includes also
the so-called Occupation Orders. Prior to LASPO the number of orders had been
falling, probably due to a reducing rate of Children Act cases as a result of the
falling divorce rate (see Figure 10.1). But after LASPO the number of orders does
indeed increase. To gauge the effects of the simultaneous change in the number of
Private Law Children Act cases going through the courts, Table 10.2 gives the
ratio of the number of domestic violence orders to the number of Private Law
Children Act cases. This suggests an increase in the proportion of domestic
violence orders per case, even from a baseline of 2003 when the absolute number
of such orders was larger.
Katie Ghose, then CEO of Women's Aid, was quoted as stating that 'it is
misleading to suggest that this increase in non-molestation orders granted by the
courts is a result of false allegations of domestic abuse to secure legal aid'
,
(Bowcott, 2018). She said "official reports" showed false domestic abuse
allegations were rare. It is not stated to what "official reports" she was referring.
Possibly Ghose meant the 2013 report from the Crown Prosecution Service
Equality and Diversity Unit, 'Cases Involving Allegedly False Rape and Domestic
Violence Allegations', (CPS Equality and Diversity Unit, 2013). This report is
considered in more detail in section 19.6. It did give the impression of
demonstrating that false allegations of domestic abuse are rare, but actually it
merely showed that prosecutions for false allegations of domestic abuse are rare,
which no one disputes.
Table 10.2: Ratio of DV orders to Private Law Children Act cases
Year NMOs All DV Orders
2003 42% 59%
2012 (just prior to LASPO) 51% 58%
2017 61% 66%
Figure 10.4: Number of Court Orders made for Domestic Violence Remedies,
Before and After LASPO
Figure 10.5: Number of Non-Molestation Orders Issued in the Midlands Area,
Showing a Marked Increase after LASPO
The increase in NMOs is more marked in some geographical regions than others.
The increase is most marked in the Midlands (Figure 10.5) and this is driven
predominantly by increases in Birmingham and Solihull.
Are the allegations which lie behind these NMOs valid or false? The review of Hunt
and Macleod examined 308 private law child arrangement cases and found that
exactly half (154) involved allegations of domestic violence. But in only 24 cases
was a "finding of fact" hearing listed, of which 12 never took place. So, in this
sample, only 8% of allegations were ever subject to a "finding of fact". Anecdotal
evidence, (Barnett, 2014), is that "finding of fact" hearings may have increased in
frequency recently, though opinions are mixed. In some quarters, the guilt of the
accused is assumed, but this presumption has no legal basis in the overwhelming
majority of cases. The tactical benefits of the allegation to the accuser are obtained
without its truth ever being formally examined, even on a "balance of probability"
basis, in the great majority of cases.
10.4 Lobbying and Serious Case Reviews
The family courts do not operate in a vacuum. They are subject to lobbying by
interest groups, both directly and indirectly via the political process. This lobbying
has been going on for decades and would form a study in its own right - see, for
example, the book 'An Exercise in Absolute Futility: How falsehood and myth
changed the landscape of family law', (Langford, 2015). I shall give just one recent
example. In January 2016, the charity Women's Aid launched a campaign called
'Child First'. This campaign was underpinned by a report produced by Women's
Aid entitled 'Nineteen Child Homicides', (Women's Aid, 2016). The organisation
wrote,
'We have launched the Child First campaign to stop avoidable child deaths as a
result of unsafe child contact with dangerous perpetrators of domestic violence.'
(Women's Aid, 2015),
Women's Aid claim that their campaign report, 'Nineteen Child Homicides'…
'…highlights the tragic stories of 19 children and 2 women in 12 families that were
killed by perpetrators of domestic abuse in circumstances related to unsafe child
contact within a ten year period. It's possible that these deaths could have been
prevented if the domestic abuse had been considered as an ongoing risk factor.'
The cases in question are valid and terrible. However, what Women's Aid have
done is to select 12 cases from 10 years of data to present a particular point of
view. This is lobbying for a predetermined objective, based on extreme "cherry
picking", not research. The campaign had no interest in presenting a balanced
picture. The objective of the campaign was to put pressure on the courts to tighten
their approach to ordering contact with fathers. Ostensibly this was in order to
end, as the Foreword of 'Nineteen Child Homicides' put it, 'a deeply embedded
culture that pushes for contact with fathers at all costs'. They succeeded. The
relevant court procedure, so-called Practice Direction 12J, was revised, (Ministry
of Justice, 2017b).
The source of information used to compile the report 'Nineteen Child Homicides'
was the Serious Case Reviews (SCRs). These are reports produced by the child
safeguarding authorities when children are killed or seriously harmed. The
extreme degree of careful selection of cases reported in 'Nineteen Child
Homicides' begs an obvious question: what would be the outcome of an unbiased
review of all the Serious Case Reviews? This was reported by Bradford, (332 Child
Homicides, 2018a). In the 7 years 2009 to 2015 there were 332 children culpably
killed in the UK whose deaths have been subject to Serious Case Reviews by the
child protection authorities (excluding suicides). The review attempted to establish
the perpetrator or perpetrators, using a balance of probability judgment where
there was no conviction. The conclusion was that mothers were responsible for at
least as many child deaths as fathers and male partners combined, in fact, rather
more (see also section 9.2.7).
Polly Neate, then the CEO of Women's Aid, wrote in the Foreword to 'Nineteen
Child Homicides'
,
'While it is impossible to prevent every killing of a child, when the risks are known
no other consideration should be more important – yet there is evidence here that
other considerations were rated more highly.'
This admirable sentiment can take on a very different interpretation from that
intended by Polly Neate, who assumes that only men can be a risk to children. The
irony is that the Women's Aid mindset itself represents "other considerations"
which are rated more highly than child safety, even when the "risks are known".
By relentlessly pursuing the narrow interests of mothers, and wilfully ignoring the
possibility that mothers can also pose a risk, the best interests of the child are
made subsidiary, not paramount. The more complete examination of the same
evidence base as used by Women's Aid shows that mothers can pose at least as
much risk to their children as men. The Women's Aid campaign's conclusion is
therefore in conflict with the paramountcy principle.
It is not only the review by Bradford (2018a) which has highlighted the potential
risk that mothers may pose to their children. American data has long shown that
mothers are responsible for more child fatalities by abuse or neglect than fathers
or other men combined (see section 9.2.7). In addition, CAFCASS have published
research which concurs with this conclusion. The report 'Learning from CAFCASS
submissions to Serious Case Reviews' was made available publicly in November
2017, Green and Halliday (2017). The report derives lessons to be learnt from the
97 SCRs to which CAFCASS contributed from 2009 to 2016. These SCRs involve
known or suspected abuse or neglect of a child where the child has died or the child
has been seriously harmed. The key findings were,
Mothers and fathers were suspected perpetrators of a similar number of incidents
of child homicide;
Allegations of domestic abuse had been made in 71% of cases, and almost all
allegations of domestic abuse were against men, or included men, usually fathers;
Of those cases where domestic abuse allegations had been made, only in about half
of the cases was the person thought to have killed or harmed the child the alleged
domestic abuse perpetrator;
In some cases, the authorities' concentration on the alleged risk posed by the
father or male partner may have masked a greater risk posed by the mother.
Quote, 'In some cases where index incidents were perpetrated by the mother,
SCRs found that the mother's history had not been sufficiently analysed, concerns
about her being overshadowed by concerns about the father or other male. It is
interesting to note that such SCRs do not show a simple relationship between male
domestic abuse and the fatal/serious maltreatment of children.'
In summary, the dominant narrative, buoyed by powerful lobbying, that it is men in
particular who pose a risk to children, is not borne out by the evidence. Allegations
of domestic violence have a significant bearing on the outcomes of child contact
applications (see chapter 11), but the relationship of such allegations to actual risk
is in doubt, partly because of the prevalence of false allegations and partly because
other people, including the mother, may pose a greater risk. The most
disconcerting aspect of this is that the child safeguarding authorities display the
same mindset, namely that domestic abuse is only ever a threat posed by a man to
the mother and child. The result is that safeguarding guidance completely ignores
the threat to the children which may be posed by the mother, see for example
(London Safeguarding Children Board, 2017b). The evidence suggests that this
ignores an equal or greater risk to the child in many cases.
10.5 The Empathy Gap Against Fathers in the Family Courts
Even today most people will refuse to believe that one of feminism's main aims is,
and always was, to give women the power to rid their families of men. There is a
terrible arrogance here that sees only the female parent as significant. In the
family courts we see this played out explicitly. Allegations of domestic abuse
provide a convenient mechanism. Protestations that only abusive men are treated
in this way are untrue, as the bald statistics illustrate. Unfortunately, the
denigration of men over the last 50 years has been so successful that the public no
longer balk at the preposterous notion that half of all fathers are abusers.
In the matter of child arrangements after parental separation we see most clearly
how far culturally intensified gynocentrism has departed from evolved
matricentrism. The child's best interests are elided with the mother's wishes, and
the latter are truly made paramount. The invalidity of Family Courts' supposed
protecting of the child's best interests has been expressed by Karen Woodall thus,
'In the UK there is a distinct lack of interest in family separation in social services,
those with statutory responsibility for the wellbeing of children. This lack of
interest in family separation stems largely from the feminist project to promote the
rights of women and the manner in which the needs of children in society are seen
as indivisible from the rights and wellbeing of their mother. Additionally, the
promotion of single parenthood and the belief that families come in all shapes and
sizes, means that the experiences of children through divorce and separation are
seen as somewhat insignificant. Children are expected to 'get over it' and so long
as their physical needs are met, there is not much concern about their emotional
and psychological wellbeing.' (Woodall, 2019)
The powerful feminist lobby can mount campaigns such as 'Child First' and win
debates in parliament which are not debates but monocultures of opinion, the
feminist establishment being passed ammunition by the external lobbying to
promulgate a gross distortion of reality, (Hansard, 2016). On another day, in
another context, the same feminists will be arguing that men should do more
childcare, so that women can pursue their fulfilling middle class careers. If this
seems inconsistent – no, it is perfectly consistent with the feminist objective of
increasing women's power in every circumstance. Only the arguments are
inconsistent. Gynocentrism ensures that even a male dominated legislature and
judiciary will acquiesce to the demands of the feminist lobby, because lack of ingroup preference means the empathy gap operates between man and man as much
as between woman and man. These combined psychosocial forces mean that the
extent to which a man is permitted to be a father is defined by the mother, as we
shall see next.
11. Are the Family Courts Biased Against
Fathers?
The elimination of the father has always been an essential purpose of the
sisterhood. The assaults they have mounted upon marriage and the 'bourgeois'
family may be seen as strategic ploys, clothed in ideological humbug and mumbojumbo, which were intended to vitiate men's rights of paternity and to transfer all
parental rights to women.
Neil Lyndon, 'No More Sex War' (1992)
Most societies have arranged matters so that a family surrounds and protects
mother and child; our families having withered away so that only a male "partner"
remains, we find ourselves in a situation where the mother and children need often
to be protected from him rather than by him. Our consensual liaisons grow less
durable every year and, if the evidence of wife-battery, rape-within-marriage and
child sexual abuse is to be credited, it is to be hoped that they will soon wither
away altogether. The State having taken over the duties of children towards their
parents (and allowed the childless among us to face the future without dread) it
had better finish the job and take over the duties of the father towards the child.
Germaine Greer, Independent Magazine (25 May 1991)
11.1. Introduction
It is not only fathers' groups, but also many in the general public who will readily
agree that fathers get a rough deal from the family courts. And yet, in 2015, a
report funded by the Nuffield Foundation was published, authored by academics
from the Universities of Warwick and Reading, for which the associated press
release was titled, 'study finds English family courts not discriminating against
fathers', (Harding and Newnham, 2015). The press picked up the story and
headlines followed such as 'Anti-father court bias is a myth', (Gibb, 2015), 'Men
are treated fairly when trying to get access to their children in courts, study says'
,
(Dutta, 2015), and, 'No anti-father bias in family courts, research finds', (Smith,
2015). These headlines were motivated by the report's findings, such as,
'…the County courts showed no indication of gender bias in contested cases about
where the child should live. Contact applications by fathers were overwhelmingly
successful.'
'The County Courts actively promoted as much contact as possible even in cases of
proven domestic violence, often combined with welfare concerns or strong
opposition from older children.'
Dr Harding is quoted in the publicity release as saying,
'Whilst it's true that mothers were usually the primary care giver in contact
applications, this was simply a reflection of the social reality that women are more
likely to take on the role after a relationship breakdown. But there was actually no
indication of any bias towards mothers over fathers by the courts; in fact we
established there was a similar success rate for mothers and fathers applying for
orders to have their children live with them.'
Are we to conclude that all those fathers who, over the last 40 years, have
complained of being unfairly estranged from their children, are just making it up? I
review the Harding-Newnham report below, after also reviewing an earlier study
by Joan Hunt and Alison Macleod (2008). Before proceeding, there is a key factor
to bear in mind. The issuing of a court order does not guarantee that it is obeyed.
The studies reviewed here were able only to count the orders, of various types,
produced by the courts. Whether the contact, or the extent of contact, ordered was
actually forthcoming is another matter entirely. It may be that the chief criticism
one could bring against the family courts is not so much their bias, but their
inability to influence people's behaviour – and their toothlessness in enforcing their
own orders. These issues are explored in this chapter. Before we blithely conclude
there is no bias against fathers on the basis of counting court orders, there are a
number of factors to which we should be alert and which may be obscured in some
studies,
Does a bias in outcome originate from societal norms, and the initial status quo,
rather than from the courts?
What is the extent of contact ordered? Is it what was requested, and, if so, was a
modest request conditioned by societal norms and expectations?
Is the court order obeyed, or does the resident parent frustrate contact? Does the
court enforce its own orders?
How long does it take for a court ruling to be made, from the time of separation? If
this is several years, as is common, has the non-resident parent's relationship with
his/her child been disrupted beyond repair?
In addition, note that the studies reviewed here did not interview the parents
affected. Turning firstly to the earlier of the two studies I wish to review.
11.2 The 2008 Study of Hunt & MacLeod
In 2008, a report was published by the Ministry of Justice Family Law Division,
'Outcomes of applications to court for contact orders after parental separation or
divorce', authored by Joan Hunt and Alison Macleod (2008) of the Oxford Centre
for Family Law and Policy, University of Oxford. The study was based on a sample
of 308 files covering cases heard in all three tiers of family court which then
existed: the family proceedings courts, the county courts and the high court. The
criteria for selection were a) that there was an application for a contact order, b)
that the applicant was a parent and the child was living with the other parent, c)
that the application was made in 2004 (the latter requirement giving sufficient time
for most cases to have ended in time for publication in 2008). Where more than one
child was involved in a case, one child was selected (randomly) as the index child on
whom the data to be collected would focus. Interviews were conducted with
magistrates, solicitors and other legal advisors, and officers of CAFCASS
(Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service). Interviews did not
address the specific cases studied. No interviews with parents were carried out.
Of the 308 sample cases, 60% involved a single child, mean age 4.5 years (mean
age of all children 5.5 years). The vast majority of children (279; 91%) lived for
most or all of the time with their mothers; with 23 (7%) living with their fathers.
Four children had recently temporarily changed residence (three from their mother
and one from their father) and two appeared to be in a de facto shared living
arrangement.
That 91% of children were living with their mother at the start of the proceedings
is of central importance. It will be seen that the operation of the family courts is
such that the initial status quo is the dominant factor in influencing the final
outcome. To pre-empt our conclusion, the bias in the outcomes for fathers may not
be so much a bias in the operation of the family courts as it is the intrinsic bias in
society, and hence a bias in the status quo at the start of proceedings.
The average age of the fathers in the sample was 34, but the range was enormous,
from 17 to 58. Nine were under 21 at the point they brought the application. The
mothers were on average slightly younger (mean 31) but again there was a wide
age range (18-50), with 14 being under 21.
In over half the sample cases (162 of 308; 53%) the parents were not married to
each other, with 116 (38% of 308) having cohabited. In almost half of cases where
information was available, the interval between parental separation and the court
proceedings exceeded two years (46% 116 of 255); just over a fifth (56; 22%) had
separated within the previous six months. Bear in mind the significance of a delay
of the order of years in the life of a child under 5.
Applications were almost all (289; 94%) brought by the non-resident parent,
typically the father (265 of 289; 92%) although there were also 24 cases brought
by non-resident mothers (24 of 289, 8%). More than half the non-resident parent
applicants (156 of 289; 54%) were also seeking other orders, typically a parental
responsibility order (107 of 156; 69%), with 49 seeking sole or shared residence
(31%). It is worth emphasizing at this point the bias that already exists before the
courts begin to operate. The de facto position is that about 92% of non-resident
parents before proceedings commence are fathers. Fathers are on their back foot
from the start, a position of disadvantage from which they will (statistically
speaking) never recover.
Another disadvantage, and a most egregious one, lies behind the large number of
'people' applying for parental responsibility orders. None of the 107 applicants for
parental responsibility orders will have been mothers, because mothers
automatically have parental responsibility: but unmarried fathers do not. Entering
the court proceedings without the initial benefit of having legally recognised
parental responsibility can only put the father at a significant disadvantage, and
this is a disadvantage encoded in law. But perhaps this is less significant than one
might imagine, the report noting that,
'Somewhat surprisingly, there was no association between whether the nonresident parent got face-to-face contact and whether the parents had previously
been married, nor even between whether they had ever lived together. Those who
had been previously married, however, were more likely than those who had not to
get staying rather than visiting contact (57% compared to 47%)'
One could turn this around, though, and conclude that being married, or having
parental responsibility, does not mean much in practice. Where information was
available (in 286 cases), 38% of resident parents (109 of 286) were known to have
been opposed to any face-to-face contact, with a further 15% (44) wanting
supervised contact only, i.e., a total of 53% of resident parents were opposed to
anything beyond supervised contact. An additional 11% of resident parents were
resistant to 'staying contact', i.e., overnight stays with the non-resident parent.
These statistics are very important because, as we shall see, the initial position of
the resident parent is the most significant factor in the contact outcome for the
non-resident parent.
Consistent with other evidence (see chapter 10 and section 11.4), Hunt and
MacLeod observed that, 'in exactly half the sample cases (154 cases of 308)
allegations of domestic violence perpetrated by the non-resident parent had been
made at some point'. Note the distinction between allegation and established fact,
and recall that very few of these allegations will ever be subjected to meaningful
investigation.
The outcomes in terms of court orders (as opposed to what may actually have
transpired) were given by Hunt and MacLeod as follows. Where outcomes were
known (286 cases), 49% resulted in "staying" orders, i.e., staying overnight at the
non-resident parent's home; 20% resulted in orders for unsupervised visiting; and,
31% resulted in orders for supervised or conditional contact, indirect contact, or no
contact at all. Indirect contact refers to contact by 'phone, letter, email, etc., but
not face-to-face. No contact at all was ordered in 14% of cases. 95 resident
parents initially opposed any form of contact at all (36% of those where this was
known, 266). This was virtually equal to the number that did not oppose any form
of contact (103, 36% of 286).
The number of cases in each outcome category are displayed in Figure 11.1, which
distinguishes according to the resident parents' initial position on contact. Where
the court order was for no contact at all, or for indirect contact only, this resulted
overwhelmingly from the resident parent being opposed to any form of contact.
Applicants for a staying order by both sexes were comparably successful: 100
being granted out of 124 fathers applying, and 10 being granted out of 12 mothers
applying. Hence, 91% of staying order applications were granted to fathers.
Figure 11.1: Court Ordered Contact Outcomes by Resident Parents' Initial Position
The ordered frequency of overnight staying was: at least weekly 30%; fortnightly
59%; monthly 11%. The number of overnight stays per instance was one (45% of
cases) or two (43% of cases) or three (11% of cases). In these cases where staying
contact was ordered, non-staying visits may also have been ordered, though in 79%
of cases this was only one or two days per fortnight. In terms of total hours contact,
staying plus non-staying, this amounts to between 25 hours and 72 hours (i.e.,
between 7% and 21% of the time) in 76% of cases. Recall that this is the time
awarded by the courts, not necessarily what transpires.
Where the court order was for unsupervised visits, the number of hours contact per
fortnight was far smaller than when staying contact was ordered, on average just
10.3 hours per fortnight. The range is broad, with any number of hours from just 3
hours per fortnight to 20 hours per fortnight being almost equally likely (see Figure
11.2). Again recall, this is the time awarded by the courts, not necessarily what
transpires. These are the so-called McDads, whose contact with their children is
barely sufficient for a visit to the park and a meal in McDonald's once per fortnight.
In terms of having a fighting chance of maintaining a meaningful long-term
involvement in your child's life a staying contact order must be the objective.
Figure 11.2: Contact Hours Awarded Per Fortnight in Cases Where Unsupervised
Visitation Has Been Ordered (not overnight staying)
In almost half of cases in which the non-resident parent had come to court to
achieve some form of face-to-face contact (128 of 269; 48%) the outcome fell
short in some respect of what the applicant had originally sought. 85 (32%) did not
achieve the type of contact they had initially sought (56 failed to achieve face-toface contact; 25 got visiting contact rather than the staying contact they had
sought; 4 got only supervised contact). 43 (16%) achieved the type of contact
sought but not the quantum desired, i.e., less frequent overnights or less frequent
or shorter duration visits.
Two factors most influence the outcome for the non-resident parent. The first is
the initial attitude of the resident parent, the second is whether there is a claim of
a "serious welfare issue" against the non-resident parent. These "serious welfare
issues" include allegations of domestic violence, child abuse, neglect, drug or
alcohol abuse or mental illness. More than four in five cases which ended with no
face-to-face contact involved such issues.
In contrast, where serious welfare concerns were not raised, 90% of cases (112 of
125) ended with either staying (65%) or unsupervised visiting contact (25%).
Hence, whilst allegations of domestic abuse do not necessarily prevent staying or
unsupervised contact, these results do indicate a strong correlation between failing
to gain such contact and a suspicion of 'welfare issues' against the non-resident
parent, especially allegations of domestic abuse. What the data do not reveal is
whether the refusal by the courts to order face-to-face contact aligns with a
genuine risk, or only a concern created by allegation. It is worth noting in that
context that "findings of fact" in regard to allegations of domestic violence are
relatively rare, as noted in chapter 10. To quote Hunt & MacLeod,
'Asked why finding of fact hearings are not listed more often both CAFCASS
officers and solicitors largely attributed this to the courts' reluctance.
(Quote from Judge): We do our best to avoid them (findings of fact) if at all
possible because they are totally unproductive and unhelpful, on the whole. It just
raises the temperature. And how do you decide whether he hit her or not when it's
her saying one thing and him saying the other?'
As regards the significance of the initial position adopted by the resident parent,
this is illustrated by Figure 11.1. On the issue of the time it takes the courts to
make an order, we read the following in Hunt & MacLeod,
'…few of our sample cases were resolved quickly. The average duration was
almost 11 months. Over a third of completed cases (35%) took more than a year
and 6% more than two, the longest case having been continuously before the
courts for four years…..the average duration of cases which had not completed
was 35 months, the shortest having started 29 months previously, the longest 43.'
'Some of the longest cases in the study were those where the resident parent had
been initially opposed to any contact but the outcome of the proceedings was that
this was expected to take place. Over half these cases (54%) took more than 12
months….Where the resident parent raises concerns about the safety of the child
with the non-resident parent then those concerns have to be investigated. Fiftyeight per cent of such cases took more than 12 months.'
Perhaps there has been an improvement on these times in the last ten years. The
Family Court Statistics Quarterly, January to March 2018, indicate in the first
quarter of 2018 a mean time from start to completion in Private Family Law of 26
weeks (median 20 weeks), (Ministry of Justice, 2018f).
However, it must be borne in mind that these times are only the time taken from
the point of application to a first order. It is common for parental separation to
have occurred several years prior to the application being made, as illustrated by
Figure 11.3 (from Hunt & MacLeod's Appendix Table 6). In addition, in some
cases, there may be later enforcement applications (see section 11.3 and Figure
11.4).
Figure 11.3: Interval between Parental Separation and Application to the Court
11.3 Lawyers', Judges' and Court Officers' Opinions
I cannot do justice to the full set of quotes reported by Hunt & MacLeod.
However, here are a selection relating to the influence of the resident parent on
the proceedings.
'Where we are highly ineffective are cases where the resident mothers take the
view that they don't want contact to happen. And in those cases it is very, very
difficult.' (Judge)
'There are certain resident parents and they're quite a big group I guess, who have
the attitude that they're looking after the child and their relationship with the child
is considerably more important than the relationship with the other parent. And
therefore contact has a small part to play in the child's life, it's of relatively little
importance and more of a nuisance than a benefit. That's a fairly common
attitude.' (CAFCASS officer)
'I do think that most parents want what is best for their child but they just don't
recognise that it is helpful to a child to grow up knowing both parents.' (Judge)
'Quite often we find that in contact cases the parents are just using the child as a
pawn, and especially the resident mother because it's just a way of getting back at
a partner she no longer has a relationship with other than through the child and it's
the only way they can do that.' (Magistrate)
'They've got a new man and they want their happy family and father interferes
with that. That's relatively common.' (Magistrate)
Figure 11.4: Interval between Order being Flouted and Application for Enforcement
11.4 The 2015 Study of Harding and Newnham
I turn now to the study by Maebh Harding and Annika Newnham (2015) funded by
the Nuffield Foundation. This is the study which provoked the press headlines
quoted at the start of this chapter. The study was based on a sample of cases which
they describe as follows,
'The research is based on document analysis of a retrospective sample of 197 case
files from the County Courts. We examined case files from five different County
Courts in England and Wales…..The sample was limited to Section 8 application
cases which were disposed of by final order in a six month period between
February and August in 2011.'
Here "Section 8" refers to the Children Act, (UK Government, 1989), and is the
section which relates to child arrangement orders, parental responsibility orders,
and associated orders. The authors selected just under half the relevant "Section
8" cases from the chosen courts over the six month period. They do not state how
that selection was done, or claim that the sample is either representative or
random. Instead they write, rather disconcertingly,
'At the time of selection there were 210 County Courts in the UK. It should be
noted that our findings about the use of different Section 8 orders and the typical
time patterns orders are not statistically representative of the general practice in
2011 but instead give us an idea of the different types of solutions being used in
these five courts in 2011 in a range of circumstances.'
It is difficult to be certain what this ungrammatical sentence means, but it appears
to admit that their sample is not representative. More disconcertingly, the authors
appear to have selected cases on some undeclared basis. There are other reasons
to suspect that this is the case, as we shall see.
Of the 197 cases selected by Harding & Newnham only 174 related to parents, and
the rest of the report focuses on those. In common with other sources, Harding &
Newnham note that 50% of cases involved allegations of domestic violence (40%
against father, 2% against mother, 8% against both). They further note that, of the
86 cases in which allegations of domestic violence were made, the new LASPO
evidential requirements (see Table 10.1) were satisfied in 45 cases (52%). Noting
that the LASPO requirements are minimal, this may have a bearing on the likely
validity of the remaining allegations.
The sample of cases addressed by Harding & Newnham include at least 30
applications by mothers for sole residency, and at least 32 cases by fathers for sole
residency (Harding & Newnham section 2.2). It is striking, and unexpected, that
these two figures should be almost equal. Father's applications for sole residency
were 18% of the total cases considered (32 out of 174), and mother's applications
for sole residency were 17% of the total. One would expect a substantially greater
number of sole residency applications from mothers, an expectation confirmed by
Hunt & MacLeod's sample which included just 9 cases of fathers seeking sole
residency (3% of 308), compared to 44 mothers seeking sole residency (15%). This
suggests that Harding & Newnham's sample has an uncharacteristically large
proportion of cases in which fathers were seeking sole residency.
Another indication that Harding & Newnham's sample may be unrepresentative
relates to where the child was living at the time of the court application. Their
table in section 2.6.1 indicates the child was with the mother in 126 cases (76%)
and with the father in 39 cases (24%), ignoring the few indeterminate cases. This
contrasts with only 9% of cases involving residency with the father at the start of
proceedings in Hunt & MacLeod's sample.
This concern that the child's residence at the time of application may indicate the
unrepresentative nature of Harding & Newnham's sample relates particularly to
fathers' applications for sole residency. Of the 32 such applications, to quote
section 2.8.5 of Harding & Newnham, 'Dad was the pre-application status quo
primary caregiver in only 7 of the 32 applications by fathers for
residence….However, in 20 applications the child was in the care of the father at
the time of the application'. This is an extraordinarily high proportion of residence
with the father at the time of application (63%), compared with all cases (typically
8% or 9%). Clearly, these 32 are mostly self-selected cases in which the father has
deemed he has an unusually great chance, or need, of winning sole residency.
It is worth clarifying how Harding & Newnham can claim that fathers were the
"status quo primary caregiver in only 7 of the 32 applications by fathers for
residence" when in 20 of those 32 applications the child was living with the father
at the time of the application. This is explained simply by Harding & Newnham
defining the "status quo primary caregiver" as 'the main carer of the child for over
one year'. The peculiar circumstance that only 7 of the 32 fathers are labelled as
"status quo primary carers", and yet 20 of the 32 cases involved children living
with their fathers at the time of application, results from many children having
very recently moved residence. Specifically we read,
'In 16 cases the child had been living with the mother and was now with the father.
In 2 cases the child had previously lived with the father and was now with the
mother. In 10 of these transfer cases the transfer had occurred because the child
had been placed with the other parent following social services or police
involvement. In 8 cases the change was because one of the parents had retained
the child following contact. Most of these cases also cited child safety concerns as
the reason for retaining the child.'
Consequently, the claim made by Harding & Newnham that, "fathers' applications
for residence were mainly to change, rather than protect, the status quo or to
reflect a recent change in care" could easily be misunderstood – largely as a result
of the particular usage of the term "status quo". In fact, 20 of these 32
applications by fathers for sole residency were in order to consolidate the
arrangements which prevailed at the time of application, and so were not 'mainly
to change' existing arrangements at all.
A further concern that Harding & Newnham's sample may not be representative
relates to the proportion of their sample which involved 'serious welfare issues'
excluding domestic violence. More of these issues were raised against mothers
than against fathers. Such issues were raised in 79 out of the 174 cases (45%), of
which 30 were against fathers (17%), 34 against mothers (19%), and 12 against
both (9%). Harding & Newnham themselves note that, as regards the 32
applications by fathers for sole residency,
'What stood out from these cases was how many of the fathers' residence
applications featured quite serious fears about the children's safety (i.e., from the
mother), which were usually shared by social workers or healthcare professionals.
If we look at the reasons given by the fathers in the 32 applications for sole
residence, 8 mentioned local authority involvement, 7 claimed that Mum was
incapable and 3 were made to protect the child from the mother.'
This appears to be an abnormally large proportion of mothers deemed to be a risk
to their children in this particular set of 32 cases. Recall the press headlines
following publication of Harding & Newnham's study in 2015, quoted above. The
publicity release by the (Nuffield Foundation, 2015) gives a key conclusion as,
'There was actually no indication of any bias towards mothers over fathers by the
courts; in fact we established there was a similar success rate for mothers and
fathers applying for orders to have their children live with them.'
This claim is based on the number of orders made for sole residency, namely 40 for
mothers and 24 for fathers (Harding & Newnham section 4.2). One could
reasonably argue that these figures do not support the claim (40 is significantly
larger than 24), especially in view of the number of applications for residency by
fathers in their sample exceeding the number by mothers.
But the more serious objection is the apparently unrepresentative nature of their
sample cases. The preceding observations have indicated that Harding &
Newnham's sample, (i) included an abnormally large proportion of applications for
sole residency by fathers, (ii) that these applications involved an abnormally large
proportion of children who were already resident with their fathers at the time of
the application, and, (iii) that there were an abnormally large number of mothers in
these 32 cases against whom there were serious child welfare concerns.
Consequently, Harding & Newnham's highly publicized claim that, 'we established
there was a similar success rate for mothers and fathers applying for orders to
have their children live with them' must be ruled as lacking valid substantiation.
The cases chosen appear to be highly uncharacteristic.
11.5 Enforcement
The principal failing of the family courts is an almost total lack of enforcement of
their own orders. I emphasised earlier the important distinction between what the
court orders, and what happens in reality. It is common for the resident parent to
frustrate, or deliberately obstruct, fulfilment of orders for contact by the nonresident parent. If the non-resident parent has spent years getting to the point of
having an order for contact, having this flouted by the resident parent will
understandably cause great irritation. But loss of temper will avail the non-resident
parent nothing. Unfortunately, little else will either. At the start of the process the
resident parent holds all the cards. At the end of the process the resident parent
still holds all the cards – largely due to lack of enforcement of court orders.
The Family Court Statistics Quarterly, January to March 2018, (Ministry of
Justice, 2018f), provides data for the number of children involved in applications
for private law enforcement orders, and the number of children for whom such
orders are made. The ratio of the latter to the former is plotted against year in
Figure 11.5. In 2011 only 2% of enforcement applications actually resulted in an
enforcement order; by 2018 this had decreased further to just 0.2%. In the first
quarter of 2018, 1813 applications for enforcement were made, just 3 were
ordered. Between 2011 and 2017 the number of applications for enforcement more
than tripled, from 2078 to 6832 annually. But an enforcement order almost never
emerges from the application, and this is now almost literally 'never'.
In 2011, the number of enforcement applications was 5% (2%) of the number of
contact applications (orders); by the first quarter of 2018 this had increased to
17% (10%). This provides an indication of the minimum extent to which court
orders for contact are being flouted. (I have made the assumption that
enforcement orders relate overwhelmingly to contact orders).
Figure 11.5: Enforcement Orders Granted as a Percentage of Enforcement
Applications
Of the sample cases studied by (Hunt and MacLeod, 2008) we read,
'Thirty applications by non-resident parents (10%), were brought, at least in part,
because of the resident parent's alleged non-compliance with an order…..Most of
the applicants in these cases (and all those seeking penal notices) were non-resident
fathers.'
It is not clear what we can conclude from this regarding the percentage of cases for
which court orders are obeyed, because it is likely that many disappointed nonresident parents simply do not raise an enforcement application. Similarly, it is not
clear if the frequency of disobeying court orders is increasing, or whether nonresident parents are becoming more inclined to make enforcement applications. If
the latter, one wonders why because, as we shall see, there appears to be no benefit
– quite the opposite.
If an enforcement order does not result, what does happen after an enforcement
application is made? In other words, what happens when a non-resident parent
complains to the court that their own order is being disrespected? The answer is
quite shocking if (Hunt and MacLeod, 2008) is any guide. The best you can
realistically hope for is that your original order is reinstated. In only 2 of the 30
cases of enforcement applications in Hunt & MacLeod's sample was a penal notice
issued. But in 4 cases the request for a penal notice was declined. But worse: in 14
of the 30 cases, even the original order was not reinstated. Instead a new order was
issued for reduced contact. So, in about half of cases where a resident parent has
refused to abide by the terms of a court order, and the non-resident parent has
brought the matter formally to the attention of the court, the court responds by
"rewarding" the resident parent with reduced contact by the non-resident parent.
In Hunt & MacLeod's sample there were 19 initial orders for staying contact which
were later subject to enforcement applications. The result was eight of these
fathers had their initial staying order reduced to a non-staying order. To quote Hunt
& MacLeod,
'In all, we calculate that 18 parents (62%) might consider themselves disappointed
with the outcome of their application for 'enforcement', including 14 who failed
entirely.'
These disappointed "parents" are all non-resident fathers. Hunt & MacLeod
conclude, 'The court is ultimately impotent in the face of implacable hostility on the
part of either resident parents or children and non-compliance with court orders'.
The de facto position is that resident parents are a law unto themselves. The
greatest problem with the family courts is their impotence in dealing with
belligerent resident parents.
Hunt & MacLeod include many quotes from involved professionals. I include a few
relating to the issue of enforcement below (there are other comments which may
express differing opinions, see the report itself for the full set of quotations). One of
the interesting things about these quotes is that, rather than use the cautious
terminology "resident parent", as I have done, they generally simply refer to the
mother.
'I suspect that your data will suggest that there is a reasonable amount of contact
for fathers; that's what I would suspect. But what we get back in court is the reality
that mothers don't cooperate and that's the biggest area where you get the
argument that you don't get enough contact.' (Magistrate)
'The main problem is not getting a contact order but enforcing it if it is breached.'
(Solicitor)
'I think the system is quite good at effecting an order and pushing people together
and trying to get them to agree to try to compromise, the system is quite good at
that. But the number of occasions when you come out of court with an order and six
months later the client is back saying well I've got the order but it doesn't happen.
In common with all other aspects of British law I think the enforcement side of all
civil justice is very poor. In the bad cases you go round the loop again and again.'
(Solicitor)
'It was really sad. An old client came a couple of weeks ago for another reason.
We'd fought tooth and nail for four years, everything was thrown at us, sexual
abuse allegations, neglect, you're not committed. And we got contact. Mother then
moved away, never turned up and by then he'd lost the will and never came back to
enforce the order. I said to him it doesn't have to be that way, come back and I'll
take it forward. But he hasn't come back.' (Solicitor)
'There was one particular case where we did take enforcement proceedings and
mother started playing ball. But the client has got back in touch with me about
another matter and I know contact isn't happening, so although mother started to
comply when we took the proceedings she's not now. But I think he's just given up
and thought 'it's such a battle'.' (Solicitor)
'The enforcement side is dreadful. There is a general perception among nonresident
parents that 'this isn't worth the paper it's written on'.' (Solicitor)
'We are supposed to have a system where ultimately a parent who has physical
possession of the child can be sent to prison but of course it very rarely happens and
my experience is that a lot of non-resident parents go to court, get themselves an
order, mum doesn't comply with the order, they come back to court to try and
enforce it, and eventually they give up.' (Solicitor)
'You do feel that in certain circumstances the courts are timorous. I don't think the
courts feel that they have the power to do anything about a mother (who fails to
comply). There are a lot of fathers being advised just to give up if the mother has
remained completely and implacably hostile.' (Solicitor)
'I have one case at the moment where the court needs to bite the bullet and put a
penal notice on – 'thou shalt do this Mrs X'. But the court doesn't like doing it. The
trouble is the court doesn't like saying you're out of order and you need to face up
to reality and have a more reasonable approach. In the years we were before the
court it didn't matter what they said to this mother it never happened. I think they
could probably have taken a stronger stance with mother. There was no prison
mentioned, no fine mentioned, they said it wouldn't be realistic to change residence.
There was nothing really said to mother that was strong enough for her to do
anything.' (Solicitor)
'Penal notices. I think sometimes they are not robust enough on that. They could be
imposed more, they are a threat. And it may be sufficient for a parent to realise
that they've got to take it in hand and they've got to encourage their child to have
contact and they've got to also comply with the court orders. I had this case where I
asked for a penal notice; it's been going on for 10 years- and still the court wouldn't
do it.' (Solicitor)
'I've never seen any court fine anybody. There was a phase a few years ago where
(X) court sent the odd mother to prison but I think the general accepted position at
the moment is that they won't do it.' (Solicitor)
'The best way I've ever seen a contact order enforced was where the magistrates
fined the mum by mistake, because they thought that they could. And I was acting
for the mum and we appealed it, and we were successful on appeal, but that's the
only time I saw that mum, I know it's my client, discuss contact sensibly, because
she'd lost money.' (Solicitor)
'I'm not the sort of person who would be saying mum should be sent to prison, but
on the one occasion that a mum did she purged her contempt and within a couple of
days she was out of prison and contact worked from then on.' (Solicitor)
'She hasn't got two beans to rub together so a fine's impractical. Of course, he
doesn't want to send her to prison, it's the last thing he wants.' (Solicitor)
'A financial penalty affects the child. Committal affects the child. I do wonder
whether the suggestion that they might transfer residence might help, but having
said that I'm not sure that would help either, because if that destabilises the child,
their home life, what they're used to, their schooling, their friends...?' (Solicitor)
'A lot of fathers don't actually want the day to day care of the children so if your
only sanction is you lose the children, how many fathers actually want it? There are
some out there, my client today would gladly take the children. A lot of them I don't
think would cope, so you have a toothless regime out there.' (Solicitor)
11.6 What Proportion of Separating Couples Apply to Court?
What proportion of divorcing or separating couples go to court for child
arrangement orders? There is a mythology that the figure is 10%, i.e., that 90% of
couples make private arrangements without involving the courts, for example see
(Harding and Newnham, 2015). But it appears from MOJ data that the proportion
of couples having recourse to the courts is far higher. The Family Court Statistics
Quarterly, January to March 2018, (Ministry of Justice, 2018f), gives the following
data for 2017. These relate to England and Wales,
Private Law Children Act cases 50,651
Children involved 76,780 (hence 1.52 children per case)
Divorce, annulment, judicial separation cases 110,010
Number of children involved in contact applications 44,267
Dividing the above number by the average number of children per case gives
29,123 cases involving at least one contact application.
The number of divorces, annulments and separations indicated above is reasonably
close to the number of divorces in 2017 given by (Office for National Statistics,
2017q), namely, 101,669. However, not all these involve dependent children. In
2013 only 48% of divorces involved children under 16, namely 55,323 cases out of
114,720, (Office for National Statistics, 2015c).
However, court orders for contact do not only relate to divorcing couples but also
to previously cohabiting couples, or perhaps to a couple who were not even
cohabiting. Despite cohabiting couples accounting for only around 20% of the total
number of children, the Marriage Foundation (2017) estimates that cohabiting
couples account for half of all family breakdown. (This is broadly consistent with
Hunt and MacLeod's sample of Children Act cases, of which 53% were
unmarried). This suggests that there were around 203,000 family breakdowns in
2017, but that only about 100,000 involved dependent children (under 16).
Hence, the proportion of all family breakdowns involving dependent children where
recourse to the courts is made for child contact arrangements appears to be
roughly 29,123/100,000 or about 29%.
This may be an under-estimate as regards all child arrangement applications. The
number of children involved in residence applications in 2017 was 29,149. One
cannot simply add this to the number of children involved in contact applications
because this will involve considerable double accounting. However, in England
alone, in year 2017/18 CAFCASS received 41,844 new cases, (CAFCASS,
2017/18). Not all of these will relate to contact or residence applications, though
around three-quarters probably will. Allowing also for Wales, the number of cases
in England and Wales in which contact or residence applications were made in 2017
is perhaps closer to 33,000, or 33% of all family breakdowns involving dependent
children. The "mythology" that the proportion is 10% therefore appears grossly
inaccurate.
After I had made the above estimate (33%), and as stop press information in the
final revision of this book, I became aware of information from CAFCASS. Teresa
Williams, the Director of Strategy at CAFCASS, has drawn together data 'which
indicate that around 38% of couples need to go to court to resolve disagreements
over how they should care for their child post-separation'. This was reported by Sir
Andrew MacFarlane, President of the Family Division, as part of his keynote
address to the Resolution Conference in April 2019, (MacFarlane, 2019). It seems
that even my 33% might be a slight under-estimate, though it is clear now that the
figure is in this ball-park.
It is worth noting in passing that the number of child arrangements cases being
received by CAFCASS is increasing. Over the five years 2014/15 to 2018/19 the
numbers were 34,119; 37,415; 40,536; 41,844; and 44,141 respectively,
(CAFCASS, 2017/18).
11.7 Actual Contact Outcomes
In reviewing the operation of the courts, I have emphasised the crucial distinction
between what contact is ordered and what contact actually transpires. Moreover,
we have seen in section 11.6 that around two-thirds of child contact arrangements
occur without court involvement. For these reasons the statistics relating to court
orders tell us very little about the reality of ongoing involvement of non-resident
parents in their children's lives.
Quality data on the extent of contact by non-resident parents in the UK does not
currently exist. This woeful lack of quality data is the main message in the review
'Shared Care After Separation in the United Kingdom: Limited Data, Limited
Practice?', (Haux, McKay, and Cain, 2017), published in the Family Court Review.
Despite lamenting this lack, the report does pull together what information is
available, namely that derived from the UK Household Longitudinal Surveys
(UKHLS, also widely known as the "Understanding Society" surveys) and its
predecessor, the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS). Haux et al emphasise the
manifold limitations of these sources, but they appear to be the best available guide
at present. I reproduce their findings in Figures 11.6, 11.7 and 11.8. A few salient
points from Figures 11.6-8 are,
Almost equal shared care applies in at most 3% of cases, and less than this
according to the nominally resident parents. Equal shared care has not increased
since 2002;
There are two sources of serious sample bias. The first is that resident parents are
substantially more numerous in the surveys than non-resident parents, simply
because the location of non-resident parents is harder to track;
The other sample bias is that non-resident parents who have no contact at all with
their children will be less likely to respond to surveys. This is probably why the
estimate by the resident parent of the proportion of non-resident parents with no
contact at all (27% to 33%) is substantially larger than the estimate based on the
non-resident parents' responses (12% to 19%). This suggests the larger estimate is
likely to be more accurate.
Only 46% of non-resident parents have staying contact on a regular basis, but this
may be an overestimate for the reasons discussed above. Note that this is similar to
the proportion of court orders for regular staying contact identified by Hunt &
MacLeod, i.e., 49%. It is not clear, therefore, that recourse to the courts
significantly improves a non-resident parent's likelihood of achieving regular
staying contact.
40% of non-resident parents have no staying contact, even on an irregular basis,
and this is likely to be an underestimate for the reasons discussed above.
The non-resident parent has contact once per week or more frequently in 57% to
61% of cases (non-resident parents' data), or 38% to 47% of cases (resident
parents' data).
The non-resident parent has contact more than once per month, but less often than
once per week, in about 13% of cases.
Figure 11.6: UKHLS 2013/14 (reproduced from Haux et al Table 3)
Figure 11.7: UKHLS 2009/10 (reproduced from Haux et al Table 4)
Figure 11.8: BHPS and UKHLS (reproduced from Haux et al Table 5). I suspect the
column headed UKHLS 2009-10 contains typographical errors. It's heading should
read NRP not RP, and the first row should be 3 not 37 (the percentages then add to
100%).
Does a father who was particularly involved with his child prior to separation,
perhaps even the primary carer, benefit by obtaining a greater level of contact after
separation? Some people express that opinion, if only indirectly, with such
disparaging remarks as "perhaps he could have taken more interest in childcare
prior to the divorce". But that view is ignorant. For one thing, direct childcare is not
the only possible contribution to family welfare. In any case, there is no shortage of
anecdotal evidence that fathers who shared care equally with their partner, or
perhaps were the primary carer, can find ongoing contact after divorce just as
difficult to obtain.
On the matter of highly involved fathers, (Haux, McKay, and Cain, 2017) write,
'In sum, fathers who were more involved in their children's care (in terms of active
fathering or sole fathering) and who felt closer to them tended to engage in more
frequent contact with their child post-separation and to have them for more
overnight stays. Despite this, frequency of contact declines with time for both moreand less-involved fathers. We found somewhat less evidence that perceived
parenting competence was linked to subsequent contact patterns, though this might
be in part a consequence of the smaller sample size. Finally and importantly, none of
the measures of pre-separation fathering were associated with lower chances of
breakdown in contact.'
I interpret this to mean that a more involved father prior to separation tends to
remain more involved after separation if contact takes place, but a father's prior
involvement in caring does not lead to a greater likelihood of contact after
separation, nor does it mitigate against loss of contact. However, there is evidence
from an older study of Canadian and Scottish cases that the most involved fathers
prior to separation have a greater tendency to end with no ongoing contact. The
reasons would appear to be their greater difficulty in adapting to the reduced, and
highly controlled, degree of contact after separation, since this cuts across their
already-established, highly involved, mode of fathering, (Kruk, 1992), (Kruk, 1993).
11.8 Financial Issues
Financial matters are beyond the scope of this brief review, but a few of the more
obvious inequalities need be mentioned. There is a glaring inequality in child
maintenance payments. It is surely beyond dispute that if childcare were divided
equally, 50/50, in all respects, then no party should be required to pay child
maintenance to the other. But this is not the requirement of the UK's Child
Maintenance Service, as their on-line child maintenance calculator confirms, (UK
Government, 2018j). Instead the required payment from the non-resident to the
resident parent reduces pro-rata with contact time to 50% at a 50/50 time division,
rather than zero. The notionally "non-resident" parent must still pay 43% of the
maximum pay to the notionally "resident" parent even if (s)he is actually caring
for the child most of the time.
Whilst a reducing child maintenance payment in line with increasing contact time is
only reasonable, it has the pernicious effect of acting as a disincentive to the
resident parent in agreeing to greater amounts of contact.
On the other hand, any child maintenance received by the resident parent does not
affect the resident parent's entitlements to benefits (welfare) in any way. There is
therefore no direct public financial interest in ensuring child maintenance is paid.
A particular difficulty faces the non-resident parent after separation: the need to
find, and pay for, additional accommodation now that (s)he no longer lives with the
resident parent. For most people this will necessarily be very modest
accommodation due simply to financial constraints (and might mean moving in with
friends or the grandparents temporarily). But in order for overnight staying
contact to be ordered, the court must be satisfied that the non-resident parent can
offer the child appropriate accommodation. This may mean a separate bedroom.
But a spare bedroom may be beyond the displaced parent's means under these
circumstances. This is a particularly unfair constraint on separated fathers (as 92%
of non-resident parents) and may prove an insurmountable problem. Moreover, if
he can afford a place with a spare bedroom, and is receiving housing benefit (or the
equivalent under universal credit) he may then face reduced benefit payments as a
result (the so-called "bedroom tax"). Non-resident parents on social assistance
under the age of 35 are only eligible for a "bedsit" (living with other adults) rather
than a flat with a separate bedroom, which may prohibit stayovers entirely. All
these constraints hit low-earners especially, and, of course, men especially as the
mother usually retains the former joint accommodation.
11.9 The Empathy Gap Against Non-Resident Fathers
About 62% of child contact arrangements are made informally without involving
the courts. About 92% of non-resident patents are fathers in the UK. Almost equal
caring occurs in at most 3% of cases, probably rather fewer, and has not increased
since 2002.
The courts order staying contact in less than half of cases on which they rule. The
totality of cases, and by implication therefore also arrangements agreed privately
without court involvement, have the same outcome: less than half involve staying
contact. Typical staying orders are for one or two overnights per fortnight with one
additional visiting day per fortnight. This is the extent of contact which the luckier
40%-50% of non-resident parents may hope to achieve.
The courts order no contact of any sort in 14% of cases. The courts order either no
contact or only indirect or supervised contact in 31% of cases. These figures
compare with surveyed outcomes which suggest that no contact at all results in
about one in three cases. One could add to this a further 9% where contact occurs
only a few times per year.
In Hunt & Macleod's analysis, more than four in five cases which ended with the
court ordering no face-to-face contact involved "serious welfare issues", of which
an allegation of domestic abuse is the most common. Hence, whilst such allegations
do not prevent contact, they do make face-to-face contact significantly less likely.
And this is despite very few such allegations being subject to any meaningful
investigation.
Courts order unsupervised visits, but without overnight stays, in about 20% of
cases. The average ordered contact time under these conditions is 10 hours per
fortnight. Surveys of outcomes suggest that contact less than weekly but at least
monthly occurs in about 20% of cases.
The uncertainties in all these figures are huge. The outcomes from the courts in
terms of the content of orders is not dramatically different from the actual
(surveyed) outcomes. Assuming cases going to court are the more problematic
cases, this suggests that the courts' ordered outcomes encourage alignment with
societal norms (no better, no worse). The numerical extent to which court orders
are flouted is unknown. By early 2018 applications for enforcement were running
at 17% of applications for contact orders. But since virtually no orders are ever
enforced, regardless of applications to do so, it is likely that flouting of orders is far
more common than 17%. Consequently, it is not known whether the actual
outcomes for cases which go through the courts fall short even of the general
societal norms arising from informal arrangements. Informally, court orders are
routinely flouted so that the outcomes for non-resident parents having recourse to
the courts may be significantly worse than for those who agree privately.
It appears that the actual outcome is "no contact" in a greater percentage of cases
than the courts order, but this may be because orders for indirect or supervised
contact ultimately lead to no contact longer term. The actual prevalence of no
contact, or contact only a few times per year, may be as high as about 40%. A
similar conclusion applies in the USA. Data reported in the 'Fragile Families and
Child Wellbeing Study' indicates that, one year after separation, 37% of nonresident fathers had not seen their child in the last month, and after five years this
had risen to 49%, and 28% had not seen their child in the last year, (Princeton,
2018).
The outcomes for non-resident parents – which term I will now replace with
"fathers" - are clearly hugely inequitable. Fewer than half will achieve the
arrangements which are (arguably) required for a meaningful ongoing relationship
between father and child, namely staying contact. The de facto standard has
become just three days per fortnight, which will include one or two overnight stays.
So even the sought-for standard is inequitable; cases which are close to equitable
(near 50/50) are rare (less than 3%). The majority of the other half of cases
ultimately result in no contact, or very infrequent contact, as striving Dads morph
into McDads and then into so-called deadbeat Dads under the action of societal
forces largely beyond their control. The longer term outcomes for the intermediate
20% of cases with their 10 hours of non-staying contact per fortnight is in need of a
study in its own right.
Economic strangulation is a major exacerbating factor in constraining separated
fathers' options, particularly as regards preventing staying contact in practice, but
the financial details of separation are beyond the scope of this book.
So, are the family courts biased against fathers? It may be that this is a
misattribution of where the problem lies, though the reality is worse. The courts'
chief failing is their impotence. At the start of the process the resident parent holds
all the cards. At the end of the process the resident parent still holds all the cards.
The anecdotes from legal professionals demonstrate that the courts are powerless
to control the behaviour of a belligerent mother. It is not clear that the involvement
of the courts makes a substantial difference, one way or the other, although the
data are so uncertain that confidence in any conclusion is lacking. What is clear is
that non-resident parents – about 92% of whom are fathers – are treated
inequitably in almost all (97%) of cases.
Claims are sometimes made that fathers seeking contact via the family courts are
overwhelmingly successful. However such claims are disingenuous: any contact at
all, even if indirect or supervised, is counted as a "success" in such claims. The
reality is that, despite the often modest applications by fathers who accept that
equal shared care is unlikely, about half of fathers fail to achieve what they
request. Either they fail to achieve the type of contact sought or they fail to
achieve the quantum of time sought.
The data is consistent with a contention that the courts merely reflect societal bias,
rather than introducing bias of their own. However, one might also argue that
society operates "in the shadow of the law", with informal arrangements merely
anticipating what would result from recourse to the courts. Which of these
perspectives is more true is less important than the fact of fathers' evident
disadvantage. It is not only the agreed or ordered extent of contact, in terms of
time, but the financial and practical difficulties which non-resident fathers face
which degrades the outcome and puts enormous strain on the father-child
relationship, and sometimes destroys it.
That "male disposability" is an apposite term can hardly be disputed when around
40% of fathers are indeed disposed of virtually completely, and many of the rest
partially. We see the operation of the empathy gap yet again in the equanimity of
society with these conditions, a situation brought about by deliberate feminist
policy.
In many cases the fathers may, in fact, be content with the extent of their contact.
But in a large percentage of cases, not only are fathers far from content, the
outcomes have the long term effect of severing the father-child relationship. This
can no longer be presented as merely a fathers' rights issue (and hence
unimportant due to the empathy gap). The influence of the breakdown of the
paternal relationship upon the next generation is no longer contentious. The impact
of the loss of a parent is emerging as a dominant issue of social disadvantage to the
child. In this we see how culturally intensified gynocentric feminism has left familypositive evolutionary matricentrism a long way behind: child arrangements are too
often the result of making the mothers' wishes paramount, not the best interests of
the child. The issue of the impact of fatherlessness on outcomes for the children is
addressed in the following chapters, 12, 13 and 14.
12. Parental Alienation, ACEs and the Woozling
of Shared Parenting
If you want to wind up a feminist, talk about children's rights.
Geoff Dench (1940-2018), Transforming Men
The phenomenon of parental alienation is explained in this chapter. It is a form of
child abuse and a form of partner abuse. The alienated parent is the target, but the
child features as the more significant, though collateral, damage. Whilst alienation
generally occurs within the context of parental conflict during separation,
alienation should be viewed primarily in terms of its adverse impact on the child
rather than only a feature of a child contact dispute. In chapter 13 I shall review
the evidence supporting the contention that fatherlessness is detrimental to child
development. In this chapter I shall claim that continued involvement of both
parents in the life of their child after separation is generally beneficial even when
there is ongoing parental conflict. What the general public does not appreciate is
that there is a powerful lobby seeking to empower mothers to be able to
marginalise, or eliminate entirely, a father's ongoing involvement in his children's
lives. A case history study is provided as an illustration of the power politics
involved. The concept of an Adverse Childhood Experience, or ACE, is also
explained here. Both parental alienation and ACEs are damaging to children, and
both are related to parental separation, a sociological epidemic whose adverse
impacts on children society is tolerating.
12.1 What is Parental Alienation?
Parental Alienation (PA) is a phenomenon in which one parent turns a child against
the other parent by negative portrayal. PA is primarily a form of child abuse. It is
an induced mental health issue. The phenomenon was virtually unknown before the
dramatic increase in the prevalence of parental separation. Dr Sue Whitcombe is a
chartered psychologist and an expert in alienation. In a presentation to the Male
Psychology Conference at UCL, (Whitcombe, 2017), she gave a simple definition
of alienation for the lay person as follows,
Unjustified or unwarranted rejection of a parent where there was previously a
normal range, loving, "good enough" relationship;
Intentional or unintentional actions by a parent (usually the parent with custody) to
turn their child against the other parent (usually the non-resident parent).
Extensive research literature is now available, e.g., (Parental Alienation Research
Institute, 2019). PA is sometimes described as a form of "programming" of the
child: an unjustified campaign of denigration against the target parent aimed at
causing the child to reject that parent utterly. Alienation is effectively a campaign
of black propaganda, or psychological aggression, perpetrated by the alienating
parent against the target parent in which the chid is used as a weapon without
regard for the child's mental wellbeing. Not all attempts to alienate a child will
succeed, but when it does the result is that the child becomes hostile, vitriolic and
abusive towards the alienated parent without valid justification. The alienated
child refuses contact with the alienated parent, but this attitude originates from an
abnormal state of mind imposed upon the child by the alienating parent and this has
a range of psychological harms to the child. The alienated child will then
automatically side with the alienating parent in any conflict or dispute. The
alienated child's view of the targeted parent is exclusively negative, without
nuance, to the point that the parent is demonized and seen as entirely evil.
When an alienated child rejects a parent they do so with complete lack of
ambivalence, showing no sign of guilt or remorse for their rejection. It is important
to appreciate how unnatural this is. Children are wired to attach to their parents
and caregivers, even if they are neglectful or abusive. There is a large body of
research into child abuse which demonstrates that even the most physically abused
children rarely reject an abusive parent with the vehemence that alienated
children display. The alienated child's mind is an induced pathology. It involves a
form of psychological splitting, which is traumatic and causes long term harm.
Because alienation arises in the context of parental separation, and because of the
role of feminist lobbies in that context, the acceptance of alienation as a valid
phenomenon has had a difficult history. However, that is rapidly changing as the
psychological community begin to recognise that the evidence cannot be ignored.
Quoting (Kruk, 2018),
'Research evidence of the many facets of parental alienation is much more robust
than is often assumed. The most recent quantitative research raises some serious
alarms. Harman (2017) found a staggering 13.4% of US parents reporting they had
been victimized by parental alienation at some point in their lives. The large body
of research by Baker and colleagues which focused on perspectives of now-young
adult child victims of alienation and of targeted parents, details strategies of
alienating parents and short- and long-term consequences of alienation. There is
also concordance in the clinical and research literature in regard to core
components of alienation. Slowly but surely, the misunderstanding and denial
surrounding parental alienation is being washed away. A survey conducted at the
Association of Family and Conciliation Courts 2014 Conference reported 98%
agreement in support of the basic tenet of parental alienation: children can be
manipulated by one parent to reject the other parent, who does not deserve to be
rejected.'
The alienating parent may be of either sex, the alienated parent may be of either
sex, and the child in question may be of either sex. Mothers are not intrinsically
more likely to alienate than fathers. However, the resident parent has the greater
opportunity to alienate after separation, and mothers are overwhelmingly more
often the resident parent (92% in the UK). In principle, non-resident parents may
also alienate. However, once they have become non-resident, they simply have far
less opportunity to do the alienating than the resident parent. But parents will
often have a long period of discontent or dispute before finally separating. The
process of alienation may therefore start well before separation, in which case
either parent may be the alienator. For these reasons it should not be assumed that
the sex ratio of alienators is necessarily the same as that of resident parents, i.e.,
92% alienating mothers and alienated fathers.
One of the mechanisms of enacting alienation is to frustrate contact with the child
by the non-resident parent, for example by cancelling contact arrangements at the
last moment, by blocking messages and gifts, by preventing communication, and by
making the child feel bad about spending time with the other parent or his family.
Because of this, alienation is sometimes presented as a child contact issue –
because that is how it manifests to the non-resident parent. But it is primarily a
child abuse issue. The child is being used as a weapon by the alienating parent
against the target parent. The behaviours of the alienating parent cause the
targeted child to become distant, and ultimately extremely hostile, towards the
alienated parent, and this distortion of the child's perception is carried out careless
of the impact on the child's psychological wellbeing.
The actions of the alienating parent may be described as situational aggression,
and this will be facilitated by a lack of empathy for the former partner,
exacerbated by anger. The more serious empathy gap is, disturbingly, that
displayed towards the child by the alienating parent. The alienating parent's
actions are likely to be accompanied by a conviction that the other parent is
unnecessary to the child's wellbeing. The extent to which their alienating
behaviours are excused by ignorance is debatable, but the motivation most often
appears reprehensible: more arising from self-interest than concern for the child.
The psychological types most susceptible to becoming alienators, and whether
there are familial connections, are beyond the scope of this brief account.
It has become the practice in the family courts to take into account the wishes of
the child ("the voice of the child"). The wisdom of this is questionable in any case –
children are not the best judge of their own interests. But where a child has been
alienated, the "voice of the child" is really the voice of the alienating parent, and
the process is a subterfuge.
PA is not only child abuse; it is also abuse of the targeted parent. To quote
(Harman, Kruk and Hines, 2018), 'Parental alienating behaviours do not just
contribute to child abuse; they are direct and indirect attacks that an alienating
parent makes on the target parent'. These authors itemise the reasons for
regarding alienating behaviours as a form of intimate partner violence (IPV),
perpetrated mostly through psychological aggression. This form of IPV includes
attempts to control the partner or the relationship, damage the victim's sense of
self, intimidate, emotionally wound, express anger, restrict or coerce a partner, and
otherwise abuse their position of power. Sub-components of this type of aggression
are described at length by the authors. A few examples are,
"Expressive aggression"entails the use of name-calling, misrepresenting,
degrading and humiliating the target parent;
"Coercive control"refers to a wide range of tactics designed to disempower the
target by controlling their behaviours. Having the loyalty of the children, and
typically residency and legal control over the children, affords the alienating
parent a considerable amount of power to wield over the target parent;
"Invoking a threat of violence"by "exploiting perceived vulnerability" is also a
form of psychological aggression. This can take the form of false allegations of
domestic abuse, as we have seen already in chapters 10 and 11. More subtle
stratagems are manifold. For example, an alienating mother may arrange to have
an intimidating adult present at parenting time exchanges, as a "bodyguard"
,
deliberately to create the impression that there is a threat of violence
necessitating such protection;
"Gaslighting" is a strategy aimed at destabilising the target's belief in themselves
and their own memory by falsely portraying past events.
Harman, Kruk and Hines (2018) note that,
'Alienating parents often use the time period between the temporary and final
orders (which can be months or years) as "proof" that they should be the primary
custodial parent. This strategy is even encouraged by lawyers to obtain full custody
for their clients, because many American and Canadian judges base final parenting
orders on what the "normal" distribution of parenting time was prior to the final
hearing. Creating an extended temporary order period with imbalanced parenting
responsibility provides the alienating parent with power to exploit the targeted
parent's limited parenting time in their favour.'
12.1.1 Prevalence of Alienation
By 2016, parental alienation and alienating behaviours in separated or divorced
families had been well documented in over 500 references drawn from the
professional literature across 30 countries, (Harman, Leder-Elder and Biringen,
2016). By 2018, more than 1,000 books, book chapters, and articles had been
published in mental health or legal professional journals on the subject of parental
alienation, (Kruk, 2018). Despite this rapid increase in research attention, the
prevalence of PA remains uncertain. The reason for this is principally because
there is no unique, universally accepted diagnostic criterion for the presence of PA.
Its chief qualitative characteristics are widely accepted, but that does not
constitute a definitive diagnostic criterion. However, there is consensus that the
prevalence is alarmingly high.
A telephone survey of randomly sampled adults in North Carolina (USA) has been
reported, (Harman, Leder-Elder and Biringen, 2016). Of those who were parents,
13.4% stated that they had been alienated from one or more of their children.
Nearly three-quarters of respondents stated that they knew someone who had
been alienated. The survey indicated that 30 fathers had been alienated out of 178
who answered the question (17%), compared with 25 mothers who had been
alienated out of 226 who answered the question (11%). Thus, whilst more fathers
than mothers reported alienation, the gender difference is nowhere near as
marked as the gender difference that might have been expected based on resident
versus non-resident parent status. However, there are known gender differences in
the perception and reporting of abuses which are some years in the past, as can be
seen in domestic abuse statistics, and half the sample were over 45 years old.
Consequently, the gender ratio from this study may be misleading. Further studies
are needed.
The incidence of PA will be greater where divorce has occurred. Harman, Kruk
and Hines (2018) note, 'The prevalence of children who have been alienated from a
parent has been challenging to calculate due to the need to accurately diagnose
this outcome, but some estimates point to around 29% of children from divorced
homes as being alienated from a parent to some extent'. According to Whitcombe
(2017) the prevalence of alienation within the general community of separating
parents has been estimated from random sampling to be up to about 15%, but in
samples of the most intractable cases the prevalence can be up to 40%.
In July 2016, Sarah Parsons, Principal Social Worker and Assistant Director of
CAFCASS, stated that 'parental alienation is responsible for around 80% of the
most intransigent cases that come before the family courts', (Whitcombe, 2017).
Whitcombe has estimated that this implies that parental alienation is likely to be a
feature in a minimum of 9,000 family proceedings applications per annum involving
more than 18,000 children (England & Wales).
In respect of the issue of who is alienated most, mothers or fathers, (Kruk, 2018)
observes,
'There are no gender differences in regard to who is the perpetrator and who is
the target of parental alienation. Custodial status, however, is a strong predictor of
who is likely to alienate a child from a parent.'
This perspective is emphasised in (Harman, Kruk and Hines, 2018), for example,
'Experts have found that custodial status, rather than gender, is a more important
predictor of who is likely to alienate….'
'Although some non-residential parents can alienate a child, the custodial parent is
most often the alienating parent because they have a monopoly on the child's
physical, mental, and emotional attention, regardless of gender. Non-residential
targeted parents often have limited or no contact with their children (sometimes
for years at a time), making it almost impossible to reciprocate many of the
behaviors outlined above (i.e., alienating behaviours). The targeted parents we
have studied have observed the negative outcomes of alienation in their children
and report not wanting to make the situation worse. Despite being the target of
severe IPV, none of the targeted parents in studies by the first authors reported
wanting to take their children away from the alienating parent or reverse roles
entirely; indeed nearly all of the targeted parents that we have interviewed and
studied want the children to have a healthy relationship with both parents. These
parents make the conscious decision not to reciprocate the aggressive behaviors of
the alienating parent. These parents also know that if the targeted parent
reciprocates the behavior of the alienating parent, it only serves to justify the
child's negative feelings toward the targeted parent due to their enmeshment or
alignment with the alienating parent.'
False allegations play a major role in the operation of the family courts (see
section 10.3), and false allegations also play a major role in the operation of
alienation, the two things being inextricably linked. Whitcombe (2017) reported the
following data from her clinical practice, based on a sample of 47 men and 7
women, in which 70% of former partners had repeatedly broken court orders, 78%
currently had no direct contact, and 56% had not seen their child in the last year. In
answer to the question 'have you been subject to false allegations of domestic
violence against your partner?', 67% of clients said yes, 33% said no. In answer to
the question 'have you been subject to false allegations of child abuse?', 81% of
clients said yes, 19% said no.
One must be cautious about assuming such very high incidence of claimed false
accusations apply across all family court cases. Dr Whitcombe's clients are selfselected as having been subject to parental alienation, for whom false allegation
rates will be higher. However, it appears that the "most intransigent" cases
overwhelmingly involve alienation, so these levels of (claimed) false accusation are
pertinent in those cases.
In October 2018, CAFCASS issued their 'CAFCASS Child Impact Assessment
Framework', also known in the development stage as the 'High Conflict Practice
Pathway', (CAFCASS, 2018). Amongst other things it presents their recommended
approach to addressing alienation. It has not met with universal approbation. The
guidance has been accused of attempting to entrench the status quo and avoid the
issue by leaving the child with the alienating parent. For example, this extract,
'Despite these risks to the emotional wellbeing of the child, the risk of forcing them
into time with the other parent may be higher……It can, very understandably, feel
wholly unjust to a rejected parent. However, regardless of how they were formed,
a child's wishes and feelings may be so entrenched against time spent with the
other parent (and a change of where they live is also not viable), that time with
that parent is not possible.'
Alienation expert Karen Woodall has responded to that with unambiguous
condemnation, 'Is there any evidence in the world in 2018 that moving an abused
child from the abuser to the healthy parent is more harmful to them than leaving
them with the abuser? No there is not.' (Woodall, 2018). It is not helpful to a child
being abused by alienation to confuse the issue of alienation with high conflict
between the parents. They are separate issues. And where high parental conflict
exists in the absence of alienation, shared parenting is still generally beneficial to
the child, as we shall see in section 12.4.
12.2 Adverse Childhood Experiences
The 11 recognised Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs), and their prevalence in
Wales in 2017, has been reported by (Public Health Wales, 2017). The survey
results are summarised below, in order of the most common ACEs first,
Parental separation (25%);
Verbal abuse (20%);
Mental illness - living with a sufferer (18%);
Domestic violence (17%);
Physical abuse (16%);
Alcohol abuse - living with a substance abuser (13%);
Emotional neglect (7%);
Sexual abuse (7%);
Drug abuse - living with a substance abuser (6%);
Physical neglect (4%);
Imprisonment of a parent (4%).
Figures in brackets are the prevalence in Wales of these ACEs in the childhood
experiences of 2,500 surveyed adults in 2017. The most common ACE is parental
separation. Parental separation is correlated with domestic abuse (see section
9.2.4) and this will further raise the ACE-count for those affected by parental
separation.
The Welsh survey showed that 19% of the population surveyed had experienced
one ACE; 17% two or three ACEs; and 14% four or more ACEs, (Public Health
Wales, 2017).
Consistent with this, other UK data also suggests that around 50% of the
population experience one or more ACEs, while about 12% experience four or
more ACEs, (Bellis et al, 2014). In a small cohort of high risk young people
involved in a project with Gloucestershire police, 69% had experienced 4 or more
ACEs, and 29% had experienced 8 or more ACEs, (Gloucestershire Health and
Wellbeing Board, 2018).
Interestingly, a study based on a British cohort born in 1958, and hence 60 years
old in 2018, showed a substantially smaller prevalence of ACEs, (Kelly et al, 2013).
No ACEs at all in 70% of cases, one ACE in 22% of cases, and two or more ACEs
in only 8% of cases. The latter contrasts with 31% of people experiencing two or
more ACEs from the 2017 Welsh survey. It may be relevant to note that while this
1958 cohort were children, the divorce rate and the prevalence of cohabitation had
not yet undergone the rapid increases that later occurred.
12.2.1 Behaviour and Health Outcomes of ACEs
ACEs are claimed to influence subsequent behaviour and health outcomes which
persist into adulthood. Compared with people who experienced no ACEs, those
with four or more ACEs were found from the survey 'Adverse Childhood
Experiences and their impact on health-harming behaviours in the Welsh adult
population', (Public Health Wales, 2016), to be,
4 times more likely to be a high-risk drinker;
6 times more likely to have had, or to have caused, a teenage pregnancy;
6 times more likely to smoke;
6 times more likely to have had sex before age 16;
14 times more likely to have been a victim of violence in the last 12 months;
15 times more likely to have perpetrated violence in the last 12 months;
11 to 16 times more likely to have used illegal drugs, including Class A;
20 times more likely to have been incarcerated.
The mental health outcomes for people experiencing four or more ACEs, compared
to those experiencing none, taken from (Public Health Wales, 2017) were,
3.7 times more likely to currently be receiving treatment for mental illness;
6.1 times more likely to have ever received treatment for mental illness;
9.5 times more likely to have ever felt suicidal or self-harmed
An ACE score above six is associated with a 30-fold increase in attempted suicide
(Whitcombe, 2017). Michelle Kelly et al have investigated the effect of ACEs on
premature death, before age 50, using the 1958 British birth cohort mentioned
above, (Kelly et al, 2013). In men the risk of premature death was 57% higher
among those who had experienced 2 or more ACEs compared to those with none.
Women's premature death rate (before 50) displayed an even greater sensitivity to
ACEs. Figure 12.1 illustrates the impact of increasing numbers of ACEs on physical
health outcomes for a number of key diseases.
As always with correlations in the social sciences, the question of causality arises.
Do ACEs cause subsequent disadvantages, or are both related to a third factor?
Three mechanisms for how ACEs might cause harm have been suggested: healthharming behaviours, social determinants of health; and neurobiological and genetic
pathways. These have been discussed, for example in (Scottish Public Health
Network, 2016). ACEs are certainly related to deprivation, and deprivation is
related to poorer health outcomes and associated behaviours (see chapter 3).
However, it has been claimed that there is a relationship between ACEs and health
harming behaviours independent of deprivation, (Bellis et al, 2014).
While individuals that suffer ACEs have an increased risk of poor outcomes as
adults, many individuals who experience ACEs do not encounter these effects. An
individual's ability to avoid harmful behavioural and psychological changes in
response to chronic stress is known as resilience. Having a strong relationship with
a trusted adult throughout childhood has been found to increase resilience and to
reduce the long-term negative impacts of childhood adversity, (Bellis et al., 2017).
Figure 12.1: Increased Risk of Disease with History of ACEs, 2013. Reproduced
from (UCL Institute of Health Equity, 2015), Crown copyright 2015.
12.2.2 ACEs and Parental Involvement
Perhaps the most dramatic of the recent Welsh survey findings is the very clear,
negative, correlation between a child receiving constant support from both parents
and the number of ACEs to which the child is likely to be subject. This is shown by
Figure 17 of the report 'Mental Illness – Welsh Adverse Childhood Experience
(ACE) and Resilience Study', (Hughes et al, 2018), reproduced in Figure 12.2
below.
Figure 12.2: Constant Adult Sources of Personal Support during Childhood, by
ACE Count
Finally, I note the inevitable relationship between parental alienation and ACEs.
Alienation virtually always occurs within the context of parental separation, and
hence there is immediately one ACE inflicted on the associated children. However,
other ACEs will generally also occur. In high conflict separations, especially if
parental alienation is occurring, verbal abuse is likely, as are allegations of
domestic violence or sexual abuse, and the issue of mental health arises.
Consequently, high conflict parental separation, and especially cases involving
alienation, may impose a constellation of ACEs upon the affected children, raising
them in one 'fell swoop' from zero ACEs to the dangerous 4+ ACEs category. But
parental alienation is worse still as it also induces direct psychological harms which
are not measured by ACEs.
12.3 Woozling Shared Parenting
Fathers groups have long advocated for shared parenting after parental
separation. There is no strict definition of what this means, but it is usually taken
to mean that the children would spend at least 30% of their time, including
overnight stays, with each parent. Fathers groups have campaigned in the UK and
elsewhere for legislation to oblige the family courts to adopt a rebuttable
presumption of shared parenting, i.e., that shared care would be the default
position unless reasons to oppose it were demonstrated. Despite assistance from
members of the UK Parliament, such initiatives have always been thwarted. In this
section I give a brief account of one such defeated attempt to legislate in favour of
shared parenting. It is a case study in power politics and illustrates where the
power lies. It is not with fathers. It illustrates how the feminist establishment, as it
is manifest in academia, Government and the third sector, acts in concert to ends
which have nothing to do with equality.
The continuing failure to adopt a presumption of shared care is a disadvantage to
fathers because the status quo is that fathers are the non-resident parent in 92%
of cases of separation (UK). They are likely to achieve no overnight stays, and
even those who do almost always have contact at well below the 30% shared-care
standard (see chapter 11). More importantly, however, the continued rarity of
shared care disadvantages the children, for the reasons discussed in this chapter
and the next on fatherlessness.
In section 8.2 I defined the useful term "woozle" - a widely quoted claim which has
gained acceptance through repetition but which is untrue or not properly
substantiated. Results from social science research are especially prone to being
woozled. This is because social science research suffers particularly severely from
reproducibility problems. This is not entirely the fault of the researchers but arises
from the fact that social science is largely observational rather than experimental.
As a result there is invariably a very large number of uncontrollable variables
which confuse interpretation. Quoting results from a single study in social science
may therefore be misleading. Review articles, or meta-analyses, which pull
together many independent studies are to be preferred. Sometimes one is obliged
to rely on single authoritative studies for lack of comparisons. However, there is
less excuse to promulgate a skewed perspective on an issue when there is a
balance of contrary evidence. In this case the woozle consists of ignoring the
balance of evidence and instead promoting an outlier study which suits one's
purpose. Such woozling played a significant role in the example case of thwarting a
shared parenting initiative which I now present.
An Australian study by Jennifer McIntosh et al (2010) considered the outcomes for
infants and other children of various post-separation parenting arrangements. This
study considered separately school age children and pre-school children. For preschool children the study reported finding deleterious effects of shared care on the
children's psychology and behaviour. The negative findings for pre-school children
were summarised on page 9 thus,
'Young infants under two years of age living with a non-resident parent for only
one or more nights a week were more irritable, and were more watchful and wary
of separation from their primary caregiver than young children primarily in the
care of one parent. Children aged 2–3 years in shared care…..showed significantly
lower levels of persistence with routine tasks, learning and play than children in
the other two groups. Of concern, but as predicted by attachment theory, they also
showed severely distressed behaviours in their relationship with the primary parent
(often very upset, crying or hanging on to the parent, and hitting, biting, or
kicking), feeding related problems (gagging on food or refusing to eat) and not
reacting when hurt. Such behaviours are consistent with high levels of attachment
distress…. Thus, regardless of socio-economic background, parenting or interparental cooperation, shared overnight care of children under four years of age
had an independent and deleterious impact on several emotional and behavioral
regulation outcomes.'
But they then added, 'by kindergarten or school entry at around age 4-5 years of
age, these effects were no longer evident'.
The McIntosh et al study subsequently became the basis of a woozle, as will be
described below. I emphasise that the McIntosh paper itself is not the woozle. It is
the use of the paper by others which constitutes the woozle.
The key issue is whether the McIntosh pre-schooler results are consistent with
other published studies. They are not.
A review of all relevant studies on shared care of young children, available at the
time in question, has been presented by Linda Nielsen (2014). Up to 2014 there had
been 31 studies which compared the outcomes for children who lived in shared
parenting families (30% or more of the time) to children who lived with their
mother and spent varying amounts of overnight time with their father. However,
only eight of these 31 studies included infants and children under the age of 6
years. One of those was the 2010 McIntosh study. The remaining seven studies are
those of interest here, since they are independent studies comparable to the
McIntosh study. In the brief summary of these seven studies, below, I borrow
liberally from Linda Nielsen's review paper. Three of the seven studies only
included parents who had formerly been married. These data are the most
applicable to divorced parents more generally.
The first study compared 58 children who lived with their mother and 35 who lived
at least 35% of their time with their father, with half of them being 4-years-old or
younger. One to two years after their parents' separation, there were no
differences in social or behaviour adjustment between the two groups. The
frequent overnighters, however, had better relationships with their fathers and
were better adjusted emotionally.
The second study followed children from 1,100 divorced families over a period of 4
years. What made this study unique for its time was that the children in 150 of
these families were overnighting 30% to 50% time with their fathers. In these
families, 125 of the children were infants or pre-schoolers younger than 5 years. At
the end of 4 years, the frequently overnighting children were better off than the
others on all of the standardized measures of their academic, emotional, physical,
and behavioural well-being. Three years after the parents' divorce, only 1.6% of
the frequent overnighters' fathers were seeing less of their children compared to
56% of the other fathers.
The third study assessed children from nearly 600 shared parenting and 600
primary care families. Roughly 40% of the children were under the age of five
years. Three years after their parents' divorce, children who were frequently
overnighting (35%–50% of the time) had better relationships with their fathers,
were happier and less depressed, and had fewer health problems than the less
frequently overnighting children. There were no differences on measures of
emotional health.
In the next group of three studies (which I shall call studies 4 to 6) the majority, but
not all, of the parents had been married before separating. A sizable minority had
separated before the child was born; and others had never lived together at all.
Study 4: The researchers compared infants 12- to 20-months-old in three types of
families: 52 in intact families, 49 who never overnighted, and 44 who occasionally
overnighted. Compared to non-overnighters, the overnighters were no less
securely attached to their mothers. In the second part of the study one year later,
the overnighters did as well as the non-overnighters on a challenging task to gauge
attachment with their mothers.
Study 5: The researchers assessed 132 children between the ages of two and six
years on several standardized measures of well-being. For the two- and threeyear-olds, the overnighters were no different from non-overnighters in regard to:
sleep problems, depression, anxiety, aggression, or social withdrawal. For the fourto six-year-olds, especially for the girls, the overnighters were better off in regard
to attention problems and social withdrawal and were no different from the nonovernighters on the other measures.
Study 6: This study involved 7,118 separated parents, of which only 50% had
formerly been married and 12% had never lived together, suggesting caution
should be exercised in assuming these findings are applicable to divorced parents.
The children were divided into those with frequent overnighting (35% to 50%) and
those with less, or no, overnighting. The mothers reported no differences between
the two groups of children on measures of physical health or socioemotional wellbeing. In contrast, the fathers of the frequent overnighters rated their children
higher on health, learning skills, and overall progress than the other fathers.
Overall the frequent overnighters had marginally better outcomes, even after
accounting for parents' levels of violence, conflict, and education.
The seventh, and final, study can be discounted as inapplicable to the general run
of divorced or separated parents. The cases were derived from severely
disadvantaged families, 85% were African or Hispanic American, and 50% of the
fathers and 10% of the mothers had served time in jail.
In summary, the conclusions of the 2010 McIntosh pre-schoolers' study conflict
with all six of the comparable and relevant independent studies, none of which
indicate a deleterious impact of shared parenting on pre-schoolers. In fact, they
indicate the opposite: shared care has some beneficial outcomes for the child.
Moreover, Nielsen (2014) discusses several substantial limitations of the McIntosh
study, including the fact that most of the parents in the McIntosh study had never
been married to one another (90% of them in the case of infants, and 60% for
toddlers). Moreover, 30% of the infants' parents had never even lived together.
Such studies often vary in their findings, all studies have limitations, and there is no
imputation regarding the competence or honesty of those involved in the McIntosh
study. So none of this would matter much if it were not for the use to which the
McIntosh study would be put.
In November 2011, the Ministry of Justice published a long awaited review of
family justice, known as the Norgrove report, (Ministry of Justice, 2011). There
had been hope amongst fathers' groups that this might pave the way for the
adoption of a rebuttable presumption of shared parenting in some meaningful way.
But hopes were dashed when the final report was issued. Key extracts are,
'We remain firm in our view that any legislation that might risk creating an
impression of a parental "right" to any particular amount of time with a child
would undermine the central principle of the Children Act 1989 that the welfare of
the child is paramount.'
'Drawing on international and other evidence we opposed legislation to encourage
"shared parenting"…..The thorough and detailed evidence from Australia showed
the damaging consequences for many children. So we recommended that: no
legislation should be introduced that creates or risks creating the perception that
there is a parental right to substantially shared or equal time for both parents.'
The 'thorough and detailed evidence from Australia' refers, of course, to the
McIntosh study. The reported deleterious effects of shared care, based on
McIntosh, are used here to claim conflict with the principle which guides the family
courts, namely that the best interests of the children are paramount. But the
Norgrove report cited only three of the available studies, and placed particular
emphasis on McIntosh (2010). Despite the balance of evidence to the contrary, the
Norgrove report is predicated on shared parenting being harmful to the child. This
perspective was reinforced by those who responded to consultation. On page 138
the Norgrove report notes that,
'Our opposition to legislation that might give rise to a shared parenting
presumption attracted a large response in consultation. Charities, legal and judicial
organisations and academics (including Professors Helen Rhoades, Liz Trinder,
Rosemary Hunter and Judith Masson and the Network on Family Regulation)
supported the panel's stance.'
Professor Helen Rhoades contributed Annex G to the Norgrove report, in which
she writes, 'this submission argues that there should not be any formal legislative
recognition of the importance of children having a meaningful relationship with
both parents post-separation', basing her argument mostly on the potential of
fathers to be abusive.
Professor Liz Trinder provided the following consultation response, quoted in the
Norgrove report (page 138), 'I am encouraged that the Review has opted against a
shared care presumption. That is entirely consistent with the research evidence on
what works for children'. Except that it isn't, and wasn't at the time either, as I
have outlined above. But at this point the research has been successfully woozled:
McIntosh is now taken to be "the research", and the Norgrove report has
laundered the woozle.
However, Norgrove was only a report; what matters is legislation. The legislation
which followed was the Children and Families Act (UK Government, 2014). There
were (and are) some Members of Parliament who are supportive of shared
parenting, and this showed in the initial drafting of the Children and Families Bill.
There was initial optimism that progress on shared parenting would at last be
made. Specifically, this was to be addressed by Clause 11 of the Bill which
originally read as follows,
'A court… is… to presume, unless the contrary is shown, that involvement of that
parent in the life of the child concerned will further the child's welfare.'
The children's charities, Coram Children's Legal Centre and the NSPCC, formed
the Shared Parenting Consortium. Despite the name, the Shared Parenting
Consortium was firmly opposed to any presumption of shared care. They argued
that a presumption of shared parenting would endanger children, (Family Law
Week, 2014). Their lobbying particularly targeted Baroness Butler-Sloss. As a
former President of the Family Division within the House of Lords, she was the
perfect person to table a devastating amendment to the Bill. She duly did so. And
who was going to gainsay her, given her authority in the area, and given the
compelling direction from the children's charities, from the academics, and from
the Ministry of Justice's own Norgrove report? By successfully woozling the
research, a biased lobby is able to build up a seeming consensus of authoritative
opinion supporting their desired outcome. The result was emasculation of Clause
11's attempt to open the door to shared parenting. The final Clause 11 of the
Children and Families Act 2014 includes the clarification,
'"involvement" means involvement of some kind, either direct or indirect, but not
any particular division of a child's time.' (UK Government, 2014)
The final wording was a victory for the anti-shared parenting lobby – in this case
misleadingly called the Shared Parenting Consortium. The above amendment
makes clear that "involvement" may mean indirect contact – perhaps permission
to write letters or to email the child. And even direct contact may mean only
supervised contact once a fortnight in a contact centre for a couple of hours. The
amendment killed completely the initiative for a presumption of shared parenting.
It ensured continuance of the status quo.
It is worth considering briefly the words used by Lady Butler-Sloss in proposing the
key amendment, referring to (Hansard, House of Lords, 2013a). She starts as
follows,
'My Lords, it is with some regret that I have not sought to remove the presumption
from the wording of Clause 11, although I still think it is unfortunate.'
She refers here to the initial part of clause 11, which was retained, namely the
presumption that involvement of a parent in the life of the child will further the
child's welfare, unless the contrary is shown. It is difficult to read into the
Baroness's position on this anything other than a preference for the burden of
proof to lie with the father to prove his benefit to the child. This is horribly
reminiscent of the reversal of the principle of "innocent until proven guilty". She
continued,
'I am, however, concerned about the message that separating parents may receive
from the current wording of Clause 11. Originally the heading for this clause was
"Shared parenting". That heading, thank goodness, was removed, but it had been
picked up by the press, and this clause may be seen by some as containing the right
to equal access to children. There is concern, not just on my part but on that of
many of the agencies, including the NSPCC, Barnardo's and Coram.'
The Baroness's position is clear. She is implacably opposed to equality in parenting,
whatever term is used to describe it. And yet still the public fail to grasp that
feminism has always had, as one of its principal aims, granting mothers the right to
get rid of the fathers of their children if that should be their wish. Do remember
that when feminists call for fathers to "lean out" and do more childcare. And do
remember that "equality does not mean treating everyone the same". Finally,
there is this revealing paragraph from Butler-Sloss,
'The groups of parents whom I worry about in relation to Clause 11 are those who
try to settle the arrangements for the children without going to court. In the
absence of lawyers to advise either side, the stronger, more dominant parent may
insist on an arrangement based on equality, or at least on disproportion which is not
appropriate for the welfare of the children. We know from the Norgrove report of
the fine line between children at risk in the private law sector and those seriously
at risk in public law. The parents of some of those children at risk may well make
their decisions outside court. I want the weaker parent to have something in
statute to hold on to if browbeaten.'
Please do decode this judicial verbiage. The father is "stronger and dominant", the
mother is "weaker and browbeaten". Is this the reality? Really? The Baroness
appears to see the court process as a mechanism for mothers to attain ascendency
over fathers. Recall that the noble Baroness was once the Head of the Family
Division. She explicitly declares "an arrangement based on equality" as an adverse
outcome: so much for the insistence that feminism is all about equality. And she
uses Norgrove, that woozled misrepresentation of the research, as a means of
raising a spectre of male violence ("seriously at risk in public law"). Is there any
mystery as to why the outcomes for fathers are as they are? This is how the power
politics of prejudice are played out.
Note this: at the start of the Bill's Report Stage, Butler-Sloss declared an interest
– that she was, at the time, a Governor of Coram, (Hansard, House of Lords,
2013b).
To bring the story up to date, by 2018 there were 60 relevant studies on the impact
on children of shared care. The Journal of Divorce & Remarriage published a
special issue, under the editorship of Linda Nielsen, 'Shared Physical Custody:
Recent Research, Advances, and Applications', (Nielsen, 2018). Key extracts from
the Preface are,
'This Special Issue opens with my article summarizing the results of the 60 existing
studies that compared the outcomes of children in joint physical custody (JPC) and
sole physical custody (SPC) families. As these studies document, JPC children fare
better than SPC children on a wide range of measures of well-being—above all,
the quality of their relationships with both parents. More notably, independent of
family income, the level of conflict between the parents, the quality of their
relationships with each parent, and quality of the parenting skills, JPC children are
still generally more advantaged. Still, as this article explains, there are situations
where JPC is not more beneficial than SPC.'
'The 20 authors of the articles in this two-part special issue and the 12 experts at
the international conference in 2017 reached the same conclusion—and reached it
independently of one another without being commissioned by any organization to
try to achieve a consensus. This body of scholars concludes that JPC is generally in
the best interests of children, with some exceptions, including, but not limited to,
children who need protection from a parent whose care is abusive, neglectful, or
grossly inadequate. These conclusions are in accord with those reached by the 110
international experts who endorsed Warshak's 2014 consensus paper, (Richard
Warshak, 2014), on shared parenting for children under the age of 4.' (Nielsen,
2018).
In the context of the USA, Nielsen also notes, encouragingly, that,
'Changes in custody laws are sweeping the country, too slowly and insufficient for
some people and too quickly and ill-considered for others….. 20 states are in the
process of revising custody statutes to be more favorable toward joint physical
custody (JPC).'
Unfortunately, the recent history in the UK, as outlined above, has set us back
rather badly.
12.4 Parental Conflict and the Benefit of Contact
There has been an unspoken presumption in the family courts that where there is a
high level of conflict between the parents, the children's best interests are served
by restricting, or eliminating entirely, contact with one parent. The empirical
evidence, however, is not in favour of this presumption, except in the most extreme
and persistent cases of conflict. In 2017 the ubiquitous Linda Nielsen published a
review article, 'Re-examining the Research on Parental Conflict, Coparenting, and
Custody Arrangements'. An extract from the Abstract reads,
'Recent research does not support the idea that conflict - including high legal
conflict - should rule out joint physical custody as the arrangement that best serves
children's interests. Parents with joint physical custody do not generally have
significantly less conflict or more cooperative relationships than parents with sole
physical custody. Conflict and poor coparenting are not linked to worse outcomes
for children in joint physical custody than in sole physical custody. The quality of
the parent–child relationship is a better predictor than conflict of children's
outcomes, with the exception of the most extreme forms of conflict to which some
children are exposed.' (Nielsen, 2017)
Nielsen rightly cautions against making exaggerated claims about all conflict being
irrelevant to outcomes for children. Quote, 'these studies did not conclude that
frequently being exposed to, or dragged into the middle of, intense, ongoing,
frightening, or physically aggressive conflict will have little to no impact on
children'. Nevertheless, she concludes that,
'Joint physical custody is associated with better outcomes for children than sole
physical custody even when their parents do not initially both agree to the
parenting plan and even when the conflict at the time of separation or in
subsequent years is not low.'
'Limiting the time that children spend with one of their parents through sole
physical custody is not correlated with better outcomes for children, even when
there is considerable conflict and a poor coparenting relationship.'
These conclusions are broadly supported by Nicole Mahrer et al in 'Does Shared
Parenting Help or Hurt Children in High-Conflict Divorced Families?', although
these authors also stress the limitations where conflict is both high and persistent
over many years. Extracts from the Abstract are,
'We review 11 studies of relations between parenting time and parenting quality
with children's adjustment in high-conflict divorced families. Despite heterogeneity
of methods used across the studies, some tentative conclusions can be made based
on findings of multiple studies. Higher levels of shared parenting were related to
poorer child adjustment in samples with high conflict many years following the
divorce, but typically not in samples that assessed conflict during the divorcing
process or in the 2 or 3 years following the divorce.' (Mahrer et al, 2018)
12.5 Empathy Gap in Alienation and Shared Care
The phenomena underlying the imposition of ACEs take us beyond the empathy
gap and into a broader range of sociological childcare issues. Similarly, alienation
takes us beyond an empathy gap for the alienated parent because, whilst the
alienated parent is the target and is harmed thereby, the greater damage is to the
child. For the same reason, the issue of shared parenting is not only a fathers'
rights issue because the absence of one parent has adverse effects on the child,
including reduced resilience. All these things are primarily childcare and child
welfare issues. Nevertheless, the empathy gap for the alienated or non-resident
parent facilitates this abuse. The alienated or non-resident parent may be the
father or the mother. But the alienated parent is more often the father, and the
non-resident parent is far more often the father.
13. The Drivers of Fatherlessness
Women's Liberation, if it abolishes the patriarchal family, will abolish a necessary
substructure of the authoritarian state; … so let's get on with it.
Germaine Greer, The Female Eunuch (1970)
To understand what has happened to marriage and the family and the political
implications of this we need to recognise that we have been in hock to an ideology
which has actively sought to undermine the male breadwinner role within the
family and the family within it for nigh on 70 years. And it is this male breadwinner
role which middle class women, often feminists themselves, benefit from, both
through marriage and then when they get divorced. Working class women, on the
other hand do not get married as the forces ranged against their men mean they
are unable to provide support. Feminists have always made it clear that they
regard men providing financial support for women as the root of all evil.
Belinda Brown, Feminism set out to destroy the family (2019a)
Fathers experience a state funded system that sees mothers as important while
men are often an irrelevance or a problem.
Welsh Dad's Survey, 2017
Chapters 10, 11 and 12 have presented some of the mechanisms which lead to
fathers becoming estranged from their children after parental separation. In this
chapter I summarise the key statistics on marriage, divorce, cohabitation,
partnership dissolution and living arrangements, with and without children. These
provide an insight into the numbers of children growing up without their father. In
particular they show that, whilst divorce is a significant contributor to
fatherlessness, it is the decline of marriage which is the dominant cause of
fatherlessness. This is not only because of the increased prevalence of lone
mothers but even more due to the increased prevalence of cohabiting couples and
the fact that cohabiting couples are far more likely to split than married couples.
I review the correlation between the decline of marriage and socioeconomic class.
It is amongst the poorest people that marriage has become least common, whilst
the well-off still marry almost as often as ever. This is the marriage gap. And the
marriage gap in turn becomes a fatherhood gap. It is therefore amongst the less
well-off that fatherlessness is most prevalent. All data in this chapter on marriage,
divorce, cohabitation, households, etc., relates to England and Wales.
13.1 Marriage, Divorce, Cohabitation and Single Living: the Data
Since the late 1960s there has been a long-term trend of decreasing marriage rates
and initially steeply rising divorce rates, Figure 13.1, (Office for National
Statistics, 2015d). However, the divorce rate has been falling over the last 15 years
as an inevitable response to the declining marriage rates. Part of the reduction in
marriage rates so apparent in Figure 13.1 could be a transient effect of the trend
towards later marriage (Figures 13.2a,b). But if this were the case, the marriage
rate would eventually show an upturn and a return to earlier rates. This is not
apparent, though the downward trend has (arguably) ceased since about 2005. In
2015 there were 239,000 marriages and 101,000 divorces, (Office for National
Statistics, 2018p).
Figure 13.1: Long Term Trend of Marriage and Divorce, England and Wales
Figures 13.2a,b illustrate the trend towards marrying later, (Office for National
Statistics, 2014). In 1981 the median age at first marriage was 22.0 for women and
24.1 for men. By 2015 these had increased to 29.7 and 31.5 respectively. Including
re-marriages, the mean age at marriage in 2015 was 35.1 (women) and 37.5 (men),
(Office for National Statistics, 2018r). In 2017, of all people aged 16 and over,
There were about one million more women than men in the population;
11.6 million couples were married and living together;
11.1 million men and 12.1 million women were not currently married (noting that
this includes young adults who are less likely to be married, and also
widows/widowers);
3.0 million couples were cohabiting;
8.6 million men and 9.7 million women were not living as a couple;
8.8 million men and 7.6 million women had never been married;
1.5 million men and 2.2 million women were divorced and not then re-married;
0.8 million men and 2.3 million women were widowed.
(Office for National Statistics, 2018q)
Figure 13.2a: Age of Men at First Marriage, 1981 to 2012
Figure 13.2b: Age of Women at First Marriage, 1981 to 2012
Note that whilst there are a million fewer men than women who are not currently
married (because there are a million fewer men in the population), there are over a
million more men than women who have never married. This implies that more men
than women marry more than once, i.e., that a divorced man is more likely to
remarry than a divorced woman. Hence, there are more unmarried women
divorcees than unmarried men divorcees. This is consistent with the historic (and
pre-historic) tendency for fewer men than women to leave progeny, (Wilder,
Mobasher and Hammer, 2004), (Karmin et al, 2015). The greatest sex imbalance,
however, is in the widowed category, due to men's shorter lifespan.
Figure 13.3 indicates the proportion of people of the same sex by marital status,
versus age. The proportion of women who are married declines sharply in later life
as the proportion who are widowed increases. In 2017, of people between their late
30s and retirement age, roughly two-thirds were married. This Figure, being a
snapshot in time, underrepresents the proportion of people who have ever been
divorced or widowed, since many of these have remarried and are thus counted as
married. In 2017 more than 90% of people of retirement age had been married at
some time in their lives. But this will change dramatically in future, as we shall see.
Figure 13.3: Marital Status as a Percentage of Total Adult Population of the Same
Sex, Versus Age, (Office for National Statistics, 2018q)
Figure 13.4 indicates the proportion of people who are living together, married or
not, versus age. Young people, unsurprisingly, are most often not living as couples.
20% to 30% of people over 30 do not live as a couple, and this rises after
retirement age as widowhood intervenes. The median duration of marriages which
end in divorce was 12 years in 2017, an increase from 10 years in 1997, (Office for
National Statistics, 2018p).
Figure 13.4: Living Arrangements as a Percentage of Total Adult Population of the
Same Sex Versus Age, (Office for National Statistics, 2018q)
Figure 13.3 may mislead. It is easy to make the false assumption that as the current
population ages, this age dependence of marital status will remain unchanged. For
example, the Figure may be interpreted as implying that as people get older the
percentage ever married will approach that of people currently over 70, and hence
that more than 90% of young adults today will eventually marry. This, however, is
false. It fails to account for a genuine decline in the popularity of marriage.
Figures 13.5 and 13.6 are the best indication of the long-term decline of marriage.
Figure 13.5 plots the percentage of men who have ever married against age but
does so separately for different birth cohorts. Thus, for men born in 1940, over 90%
eventually married. Even for the 1950 birth cohort this was noticeably falling. For
the 1960 birth cohort, about 80% eventually married, even though some may later
have divorced. For the 1970 birth cohort this dropped to only around 70%. It is too
early to say what the outcome will be for the 1980 birth cohort, but Figure 13.5
unambiguously indicates the proportion of men who ever marry is continuing to
decline, and perhaps will be about 60% for this cohort. The downward trend
continues for the 1990 birth cohort. These data are from (Office for National
Statistics, 2018r).
Figure 13.5: Percentage of Men Ever Married Versus Age: Different Birth
Cohorts Compared, (Office for National Statistics, 2018r)
Figure 13.6: Percentage of Women Ever Married Versus Age: Different Birth
Cohorts Compared, (Office for National Statistics, 2018r)
Figure 13.6 shows the same reducing popularity of marriage amongst women. 95%
of the 1950 birth cohort were married at some time, whereas the 1980 birth cohort
appears to be trending towards about 65%.
According to The Marriage Foundation (2014), when the current trends are
extrapolated, it is predicted that only 52% of today's 20-year-old men and 53% of
today's 20-year-old women are expected to ever marry. This is the truest measure
of the decline of marriage.
13.2 Statistics on Children's Living Arrangements
Data in this section are taken from (Office for National Statistics, 2017r) and
(Office for National Statistics, 2015e) except where otherwise noted. A family is
defined as two married or cohabiting adults, with or without children, or a lone
parent with at least one child who lives at the same address. Figure 13.7 shows the
numbers of married, cohabiting and lone parent families. In this Figure "with or
without children" refers to dependent age children. People who do not currently
have dependent children, whether married, cohabiting or single-living, may have
children in the future – or may have grown-up children. This should be borne in
mind when interpreting Figure 13.7. Thus, the categories "married, cohabiting or
lone parents without children" includes those living with adult children past the age
of dependency. Hence the category "lone parent without children" is not really an
oxymoron but denotes a parent living without a partner but with adult offspring.
Figure 13.7 excludes adults living without a partner or children of any age (so nonresident parents not living with a new partner do not feature at all in these data).
Such lone-living people are not classed as a "family".
Whilst the number of married couples without dependent children exceeds the
number with dependent children at any one time, this does not imply that most
married people do not have children. In fact, a very clear majority of married
couples have at least one child at some time (in excess of 80% at the present time,
though this is falling).
Of women born in 1971, 18% were childless in 2016, when they turned 45 and
hence likely to remain childless. Almost half of women (48%) who turned 30 in
2016 did not have any children, (Office for National Statistics, 2017s). In contrast,
for women born in 1945 only 10% of women remained permanently childless, and
only 18% had no children by the age of 30.
Young males are more likely to be living with their parents than young females;
around 32% of males aged 20 to 34 years were living with their parents compared
with 20% of females aged 20 to 34 years in 2017.
There were 14.0 million dependent children living in 7.98 million families in the UK
in 2017, an average of 1.75 children per family with dependent children. This figure
is not the same as women's average fertility because, (a) some of these mothers
will go on to have more children, (b) it does not count adult progeny, and, (c) it does
not account for childless women. The average fertility of women in England and
Wales is currently 1.90, based on the 1971 birth cohort, (Office for National
Statistics, 2017s). Average fertility is currently falling at a rate of 0.1 per 13 years,
though we have yet to see what the average fertility will be for today's young
women. Fertility is strongly demographic-cultural dependent. In 2014 the average
total fertility rate for women born in the UK was only 1.76, compared with a total
fertility rate of UK resident women not born in the UK of 2.09, the proportion of
live births to the latter mothers being 27% (Office for National Statistics, 2015f).
Note that the UK-born fertility rate of 1.76 does not refer to indigenous whites
only, but includes people of all ethnicities and parental country of origin.
Figure 13.7: Number of Families by Family Type, 1996 – 2017 ("children" denotes
those of dependent age only; "without children" may mean with children of adult
age)
In order to reveal the statistics on adults living alone it is better to consider
"households" rather than "families", from which latter category lone adults are
excluded. Thus, in 2017, there were,
7.7 million single-person households;
15.7 million households with one family including two parents;
2.7 million households with a lone parent family;
1.1 million households with two or more families or two or more unrelated adults.
Figure 13.8 brings out most starkly the prevalence of lone living; 28% of all
households consist of a single person living alone. The commonest arrangement is a
household of just two people, which might be either a couple with no children living
with them, or a lone parent with one child, or two unrelated adults. Households of
just one or two people comprise nearly two-thirds (63%) of all households. The
origin of the pressure on housing is clear.
Figure 13.8: Proportion of Households by Household Size
Of the 7.7 million one-person households in the UK, 53.8% of them in 2017
contained one woman and 46.2% of them contained one man. However, this is
slightly misleading as half of these lone-living people are over 65, and the excess of
women over men in this age range is primarily due to men's shorter longevity.
Confining attention to those of working age, i.e., 16 to 64 years old, a larger
proportion of people living alone are men, the number of lone-living men exceeding
the number of lone-living women by 41%. This is because a larger proportion of
men than women never marry, because men tend to marry when older, and because
partnership dissolution most often involves a mother continuing to live with the
children whilst the father starts a new living arrangement on his own (at least
initially).
13.3 The Decline of Marriage Drives Fatherlessness
Historically, the overwhelming majority of children were born to married women.
But now only about half of children are, at birth, born to a married woman, having
reached 53% by 2012, see Figure 13.9, (Benson, 2015). Moreover, the prevalence
of parental separation is strongly correlated with marital status at the birth of the
child. For parents who were married when the child was born, 24% will split by the
time the child reaches 15. In contrast, 69% of couples who never married will split
by the time the child is 15. Perhaps most strikingly, even where the parents were
unmarried at the birth of the child but subsequently married, 56% split by the time
the child is 15.
Figure 13.9: Marital Status of Couple at the Birth of the Child, and Birth
Certification. Dual certification means the father is named; in sole registration no
father is named. Reproduced from (Benson, 2015).
Significant though divorce is as a cause of family breakdown, the divorce statistics
omit a crucial issue which is approaching dominance: the break-up of cohabiting
couples with children. Whilst cohabiting couples account for only about 15% of
dependent children, cohabiting couples are far more likely to split than married
couples. In fact about half of family breakdowns relate to cohabiting couples. In
addition, there are the lone parent families, overwhelmingly single mothers (noting
that these may relate to sole or dual registration). Far more children fail to live with
both parents as a result of the combined effects of lone parenting and cohabitation
break-up than the result of divorce.
Only 55% of children live with both parents to age 15. If current trends continue,
any child born today in the UK has only a 50/50 chance of being with both their birth
parents by the age of 15. Nearly all parents (93%) who stay together until their
children reach 15 are married. Hence, only 7% of children living with both parents
at 15 will have unmarried parents. This statistic should be compared with the 20%
of children initially living with both parents in a cohabiting family, (The Marriage
Foundation, 2017), (The Marriage Foundation, 2016).
Of teenagers not living with both parents, just 32% of cases involved divorce – the
rest were never married. Hence, twice as much fatherlessness is caused by the
decline of marriage than is caused by divorce.
Recalling that barely half of today's teenagers will marry, (The Marriage
Foundation, 2014), the ongoing decline in marriage is therefore of considerable
concern as it implies increasing fatherlessness. As we shall see, this also implies
increasing disadvantage to children and a downward spiral of social decohesion.
Marriage per se is not a magic bullet. We have seen, above, that couples who marry
only after the birth of a child are twice as likely to split as couples who marry first.
What protects against parental separation is the care, deliberation, planning and
commitment to family stability which couples who marry before having children
display.
13.4 The Socioeconomics of Marriage: The Marriage Gap
In this section I lean heavily on the report by Harry Benson and Stephen McKay
(2015) from which the Figures are taken. Figures 13.10 and 13.11 show the huge
dependency of the marital status of new mothers, and mothers of children under
five, on household income. Figure 13.10 shows that only 24% of new mothers in the
lowest family income range are married. In contrast, 87% of new mothers in the
highest family income range are married. This is the marriage gap: the wealthy get
married, the poor do not. Figure 13.11 shows that it is families in the middle income
range whose likelihood of being married has reduced most markedly over the last
twenty years. Marriage has become the wealthy persons' privilege. The reason for
this relates to hypergamy, the Welfare State and feminist ideology, as explained by
Belinda Brown, (2019a). Well educated professional women will generally only
marry men who match, or over-match, them in earning power. Women in the lower
socioeconomic strata also want a man who earns more than they can acquire on
their own, with State assistance. The former define those who marry, the wealthy,
whilst the latter define those who do not: the poor and increasingly the average
earners. Feminist ideology and associated social changes have made it increasingly
difficult for men to out-earn women, especially if women are State assisted. The
irony here is that the men that women want to marry are those men who
approximate best to what the feminists disparage as "patriarchs". I say "irony",
but actually this is precisely the mechanism by which "patriarchy" came about in
the first place: through women's own wishes.
But the outcome for children is that children of poor families may thus be doubly
disadvantaged: by poverty and by potential father deprivation.
Figure 13.10: Likelihood of New Mothers being Married by Household Income.
Reproduced from (Benson and McKay, 2015)
Figure 13.11: Likelihood of Mothers of Young Children being Married by
Household Income. Reproduced from (Benson and McKay, 2015)
Figure 13.12: Percentage of Mothers with Children under Five by Housing Status.
Reproduced from (Benson and McKay, 2015)
Figure 13.13: Percentage of New Mothers who are Married by a Range of
Socioeconomic Markers. Reproduced from (Benson and McKay, 2015)
Housing status acts as a socioeconomic marker. Hence Figure 13.12 shows that
whilst 70% of couples with a mortgage are married, only 25% of those in social
housing are married. The Figure shows how marriage has collapsed in the latter
group since the 1970s. Some 60% of lone parent families receive housing benefit
(or the equivalent under universal credit) compared to 10% of couple families.
Figure 13.13 shows the relationship between marriage and a range of
socioeconomic markers. It is clear that marriage itself is effectively a
socioeconomic marker. The pattern of low income being associated with single
parent families is universal. Figure 13.14 shows data from the US Department of
Health & Human Services (2012) indicating a child poverty rate in single mother
families which is more than four times that in married parent families.
Figure 13.14: Percentage of Children in Poverty by Family Structure, USA (US
Department of Health & Human Services, 2012)
13.5 Summary of the Drivers of Fatherlessness
Fatherlessness results from two things: divorce and the decline of marriage. For
teenagers not living with both their parents, divorce is responsible in only one-third
of cases. In two-thirds of cases the parents were never married (to each other).
About half of children born now are born outside marriage. At any time, about 15%
of dependent children live in cohabiting families and about 23% in single parent
families. However, cohabitees are far more likely to split than married couples.
The result is that barely more than half (55%) of children aged 15 are still living
with both their parents. The decline of marriage is the greater cause, rather than
divorce, though both are substantial.
The genuine decline of marriage is best illustrated by Figures 13.5 and 13.6.
Today's retirees were 90% to 95% likely to have been married at some time.
These elderly people may not fully appreciate that, on current trends, only about
50% of today's 20-year-olds will ever marry. Today's parents of 30-year-olds may
be wondering when their offspring will ever marry. The answer for nearly half of
them will be "never".
Many children will retain meaningful contact with their fathers post-separation.
But, as we saw in chapter 11, nearly 40% of fathers have no, or negligible,
involvement with their children after separation. Many paternal grandparents
discover only too late the disadvantage of being the parents of a son when they are
estranged from their grandchildren's lives for the error of having a child of the
incorrect sex.
The decline of marriage, and hence fatherlessness, is strongly related to
demographic. Only 24% of new mothers in the lowest family income range are
married. In contrast, 87% of new mothers in the highest family income range are
married. This is the marriage gap: the wealthy get married, the poor do not. The
children of unmarried parents are thus at greater risk of disadvantage by a double
whammy of poverty and fatherlessness.
Does being poor reduce the likelihood of marriage, or does being an unmarried
parent make you poorer? Both, to a degree. Being a poor man can be expected to
make your matrimonial chances slim. There are, of course, a host of covariates,
including educational attainment, IQ and personality traits. The welfare state is
certainly implicated. For example, it may be disadvantageous to cohabit or marry
due to loss of housing benefit (or the equivalent under universal benefit). And
whilst no one could pretend that getting married will automatically make you
wealthy, there may be some truth to the old adage that "two can live as cheaply as
one", a domestic economy of scale which appears to be less appealing today than it
was. The result is a lose-lose scenario consisting of an epidemic of poor lonemothers and socially isolated fathers. Cui bono? Well educated, middle class
feminists with professional jobs, and probably with husbands, whose policies of
family-destruction have brought about this disadvantage to the less well off.
14. The Effect of Fatherlessness on Outcomes for
Children
Unless we reverse the trend of fatherlessness, no other set of accomplishments -
not economic growth or prison construction or welfare reform or better schools -
will succeed in arresting the decline of child wellbeing and the spread of male
violence. To tolerate the trend of fatherlessness is to accept the inevitability of
continued social recession.
David Blankenhorn, Fatherless America (1996)
A community that allows a large number of young men to grow up in broken homes,
dominated by women, never acquiring any stable relationship to male authority,
never acquiring any rational expectations about the future — that community asks
for and gets chaos. Crime, violence, unrest, unrestrained lashing out at the whole
social structure — that is not only to be expected, it is very near to inevitable.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, (1927 – 2003)
Chapters 10 to 13 have reviewed the prevalence of fatherlessness and its causes.
This might be of little importance if fatherlessness had no great impact on children.
The distress of the fathers themselves, of course, is of little consequence, thanks to
the empathy gap. But if fatherlessness has a significant disbeneficial effect on
children, the enormous scale of fatherlessness revealed in the preceding sections
implies a similarly enormous scale of disadvantage to children. This chapter
reviews the evidence for the impact of fatherlessness on children and their adult
outcomes. As was the case for ACEs and alienation in chapter 12, it is too narrow
to focus only on the implied empathy gap for men, as fathers. The more concerning
impact is upon the children. But I shall argue that the empathy gap for fathers
results in collateral damage to children which, as a society, we are tolerating.
What is not explored here, for lack of information, is the extent to which fathers'
fecklessness contributes to the overall prevalence of fatherlessness. Undoubtedly,
a society which minimises the importance of fathers can only encourage some dads
to become genuinely deadbeat. Equally certain, though, is that this denigration is
inapplicable to the many tens of thousands of fathers who exhaust themselves,
emotionally and financially, every year in the UK in fighting for greater
involvement with their children, or any involvement at all.
After the introductory section, I start with a renowned, but now historical study
from 1992, which sets the scene. The long section which follows provides a
selection of references to studies indicating the disbenefits of father absence,
though it is emphasised that this is a tiny fraction of the literature. The final two
sections review specific studies notable for being very extensive and claiming a
causal connection between fatherlessness and adverse outcomes for the children.
14.1 The Differing Perspectives on Fatherhood
There is no shortage of empirical studies which show the relationship between
fatherlessness and adverse outcomes for children. Fathers' advocates will eagerly
quote such sources and attribute the blame for fatherlessness to the exclusion of
fathers from their children's lives after parental separation. The scale at which
society has been disenfranchising fathers from their children's lives over the last
half century, as outlined in chapters 10 to 13, lends credibility to that perspective.
Those wishing to promote more childcare by fathers, perhaps as part of a strategy
to enhance women's standing in the workplace, will also eagerly quote such
sources, though they will attribute blame differently. It is men who must change,
they will opine, to take some of the childcare burden from mothers. That being
more involved in childcare, perhaps even the primary carer, may avail fathers little
when it comes to continuing involvement with their children after separation is a
fact which such advocates find convenient to ignore.
And where fathers are no longer involved in their children's lives, the "deadbeat
dad" mantra is deployed to place the blame squarely upon the fathers. For
example, in the USA the Marriage & Religion Research Institute (2014) concludes,
'society will continue to remain in a crisis until fathers accept the responsibility of
caring for and protecting their children'. Certainly, there will be feckless fathers
who deserve such admonition. But perfectly good fathers who have been forcibly
removed from their children's lives by injunctions and court orders may justly
react to such statements with less than complete placidity. And those who are
genuinely feckless, what if they are the second or third generation of
fatherlessness? Where then does the blame lie?
Some people reject completely the claims that fathers bring any benefit to children
at all, for example (The Liz Library, 2018). The attempt on this site to refute the
relationship between fatherlessness and adverse childhood outcomes starts with a
list of famous men who did well in life but, it is claimed, were fatherless. Any such
selection of individual cases is fraudulent, of course. No one is claiming that the
effects are deterministic and inescapable. Such spurious arguments are essentially
straw men. It did amuse me, though, that the first mentioned man was George
Washington. This is odd in view of the famous, if apocryphal, story concerning
Washington being unable to lie to his father about the cherry tree incident. His
father died when Washington was 10. Second on the list was Thomas Jefferson. In
fact, he lived with his father too, until the latter died when Jefferson was 14. We
shall see below that much, perhaps most, of the benefit of father involvement
relates to younger children. I confess that surprised me, but it's what the empirical
evidence suggests. So Washington and Jefferson are no refutations at all.
The weight of evidence is that fatherlessness is correlated with adverse outcomes
for children, and that father involvement is correlated with improved outcomes.
That is not to say that all studies report such an association: they do not. Some
studies report no statistically significant effect. What does seem significant,
though, is the absence of studies indicating that father absence is beneficial, which
discounts any suggestion that the studies indicating the benefits of father
involvement are mere statistical noise.
One must always be careful in social science research not to confuse correlation
with causality. The correlation of fatherlessness with a whole range of serious
adverse outcomes for children is clear, as we will see. But is this a causal
relationship? The most obvious concern is that fatherlessness is correlated also
with lower socioeconomic status, and poverty is correlated with poorer child
outcomes. This is just one pathway by which a relationship between fatherlessness
and adverse child outcomes might arise without direct causality. Of importance,
therefore, are studies which control for relevant socioeconomic variables, or other
significant variables such as parental educational attainment, before drawing
conclusions about the father effect. There is no shortage of these either. Of
greatest interest is the thorough review by Sara McLanahan et al, who are so bold
as to claim causal connection explicitly. This paper is reviewed in detail in section
14.5.
Whilst this chapter concentrates upon harm to children, it is important to recall
throughout that this arises as a collateral consequence of the empathy gap against
men which facilitates the societal equanimity at endemic fatherlessness.
14.2 Families Without Fatherhood, Dennis & Erdos, 1992
I start with the classic work 'Families Without Fatherhood' by Norman Dennis and
George Erdos (1992, 3rd ed 2000) for two reasons. It shows how long the
deleterious effects of father absence have been known and also because it
overturns expectations based on the authors' affiliations. Norman Dennis was a
sociologist, lifelong Labour supporter and Labour councillor in Sunderland (he died
in 2010). George Erdos, a psychologist at the University of Newcastle and
elsewhere, styles himself an 'ethical socialist'. Raised in Hungary, he experienced
both communism and fascism at first hand before moving to the UK. Dennis and
Erdos's polemic is a long work. I will restrict myself to a few extracts because, as
far as data analysis is concerned, there is an embarrassment of riches in more
recent studies. They set the scene with this observation,
'One of the authors was invited to prepare a paper for a seminar based upon a
very extensive study of the literature on the lone-parent family. Contrary to the
near-consensus among his social policy colleagues that, in its strongest version, it
was reactionary nonsense to allege that the lone-parent family was inferior to the
two-parent family, he could find no study which did not show clearly that, over a
whole range of outcomes, children in lone-parent families suffered disabilities as
compared with the average child in the stable two-parent family. In a weaker
version of the consensus it was assumed that, in so far as there were differences,
these were not due to lone-parenthood as such, but merely to low income.
Alternatively or additionally, they were due to the fact that the non-academic
public erroneously believed that lone-parenthood was to the disadvantage of
children, and this erroneous belief itself, this stigma, had the effect of creating
disadvantage. There was nothing a dollar and a dose of enlightenment would not
fix.
Colleagues holding this view were asked for bibliographical details of the studies
that supported either the stronger version or the weaker version - at that stage
fully expecting that such studies were available. On one occasion this bona fide
request was met, surprisingly, with a hostile, 'You know quite well that there are no
such studies!'
The success of the attack on the family was even more astonishing when the
experience of children is considered; but it was even more vulnerable when the
anti-family consensus began to be challenged. For the case that the family was not
deteriorating only changing, so far as children were concerned not only flew full in
the face of common experience. It also flew in the face of every empirical study
that had ever been published on the subject that had yielded definite results on the
benefits and drawbacks for children of families with fathers as compared with
those households without them.'
Dismissing the above as the rantings of an antediluvian conservative is hardly
possible in view of the authors' actual political leanings and academic subjects.
Dennis & Erdos proceed to summarise a mass of data analyses (by other authors).
I will confine myself to one example,
'All the 17,000 children born in England, Scotland and Wales in the week 3-9
March 1958 were (and are) the subject of periodic follow-up investigations by the
National Child Development Study. Of these children, 600 were born outside of
marriage. A principal author of the Crellin study of these (as they were called)
'illegitimate' children was Dr M.L. Kellmer Pringle, well-known for her
publications on child development. What were the statistical associations between,
on the one hand, birth taking place without the mother being married to the father
(a central prohibition of the pre-1960s system) and, on the other, various aspects of
the circumstances and personal characteristics of the mother and child?
In Crellin's population, the proportions of the children of married and uncommitted
fathers were spread evenly through the social classes. Whereas uncommitted
fatherhood had in the past been associated with low social class, by the later-1960s
this was no longer the case. Her findings confirmed that the rapid acceleration in
the rise in the frequency of uncommitted fatherhood was not the result of the
emergence of an 'underclass' which was repudiating the values of respectable
society. Attitudes, law and conduct had been transformed within a decade. No
underclass has at its disposal the means of moulding public opinion to achieve such
a thing. It was a change throughout society of the evaluation of what respectable
behaviour was. Those changes were being effected by members of society who had
access to the means for communicating what is going to be accepted as true and
virtuous - the effective intelligentsia.
In remoulding attitudes and assumptions about what was factually true and
ethically valid, at least as important was a part of the intelligentsia which was
largely based in higher education and which made its influence felt most widely
through serious newspapers and discussion programmes. Its prime commitment was
to draw attention to, and remedy, the evils associated with the system of life-long
monogamy. These evils included the subordinated and narrowly domestic life of the
woman, the stereotyping of the roles of the son and the daughter at the cost of the
latter, and of course in some cases sheer brutality and sexual abuse. Only people
who were heartless, who were uncaring, would say anything that could be
interpreted in any way as weakening the case for the removal of these evils.
Factual surveys like Crellin's had shown (and continued to show for as long as they
were considered worthy to be financed) that on average the life-long sociallycertified monogamous family on the pre-1960s pattern was better for children than
any one of a variety of alternatives practically applicable to large urban
populations. These surveys undermined aspects of the arguments put by the
defenders of the interests of the various problem groups. Certain of the
righteousness of their respective causes, there must have been at least a few who
consciously attacked what they suspected might well be true, but inconveniently
and irrelevantly true.'
Allow me to paraphrase: the determination to undermine the nuclear family, based
on a particular socio-political opinion, and which no one dared contradict, was
effectively propagandised by the media and the empirically clear evidence of its
detrimental effects ignored. There were left-leaning academics who were well
aware of this 27 years ago.
14.3 The Big Picture - A Selection of Studies
The validity of the claim that there are a great many studies which show a
significant deleterious effect on children of father absence or disengagement, or a
beneficial effect of father involvement, is easily demonstrated with a few hours of
Googling or reference chasing. In fact there are thousands of professional articles
on the effect of fathers on child development. Not all studies identify a statistically
significant disbeneficial effect of father absence. The review paper by McLanahan
et al, summarised in section 14.5, selected a number of studies of particular quality.
About half of the studies found a significant disbeneficial effect of father absence
on education, whilst three-quarters of studies found a significant disbeneficial
effect on mental health, externalizing behaviours, delinquency, substance abuse
and early childbearing. The studies which did not do so merely found no statistically
significant effect either way. This is significant in itself.
As far as I am aware, no studies appeared to find a beneficial effect of father
absence. This is worth noting. There are many reasons why a father-effect might
be hard to discern in data. For example, if the father absence occurred after a
substantial period of co-residence and father involvement, does this count as
fatherlessness or not? Similarly, if a study merely records divorce as the indicator,
there may be no measure of the continuing involvement of a father via contact
arrangements thereafter. Some studies may consider only biological father
absence, without allowance for the involvement of other father figures. And even
where a father is co-resident, his mere presence may not confer benefit if he is
disengaged from the child. Consequently, the fact that many studies report a null
result is not surprising. There will also be considerable 'noise' in the data.
However, if those studies which report a significant disbenefit of fatherlessness
were merely the result of random statistical noise, one might expect a similar
number of studies spuriously reporting a beneficial effect of fatherlessness. The
absence of such reverse results supports the reality of the disbeneficial effects
reported.
In this section I give a rather random selection of a few published works as an
indication of what the literature demonstrates. I emphasise that I have merely
scratched the surface of the available literature. If you can afford academic book
prices, probably the best summary of the overall scene in this area is "The Role of
the Father in Child Development", 5th edition, (Lamb (editor), 2010). In sections
14.4 and 14.5 I shall review two studies in greater detail.
The UK Fatherhood Institute (2013) summarised the position in respect of the
effect of fathers on children's educational outcomes thus,
'Major studies across the world which follow families over time have found
fathers' involvement with their children linked with their higher educational
achievement and higher educational /occupational mobility relative to their
parents. For example, in the UK, fathers' involvement with their 7- and 11-year-old
children is linked with their better national examination performance at age 16 and
their educational attainment at age 20. This is as true for daughters as for sons,
across all social classes – and whether the mother is highly involved too, or not.'
In a Finnish study, Lyytinen et al (1998) found that the frequency of fathers'
reading to children aged 14 to 24 months was linked with children's greater
interest in books later. It is remarkable that an effect occurs at such a young age.
In a low income American sample, and controlling for parent demographics and
income, Ryan et al (2006) found that the cognitive development of two- and threeyear-olds was significantly improved when either parent was supportive, and to the
same extent by mothers and fathers, and that cognitive development was highest
when both parents were supportive.
Flouri and Buchanan (2004) used longitudinal data from the National Child
Development Study which tracks people born in Britain in 1958. 7,259 cohort
members with valid data on both mother and father involvement at age 7 were
used in the analysis. Father involvement and mother involvement at age 7
independently predicted educational attainment by age 20. The benefit was the
same for sons and daughters. The benefit of father involvement was additive to the
benefit of mother involvement. The authors concluded that early father
involvement is another protective factor in counteracting risk conditions that might
lead to later low educational attainment levels.
Studies have found that a father's interest in his child's education has more
influence on educational success than family background, the child's personality or
poverty. The next two studies summarised found low fatherly interest similarly
predictive, in the other direction: a father's low interest in his son's education, for
instance, reduces his boy's chances of escaping poverty by up to 34%. In 2007,
Darcy Hango (2007) published 'Parental investment in childhood and educational
qualifications: Can greater parental involvement mediate the effects of
socioeconomic disadvantage?'. An extract from the Abstract is,
'Data are from the National Child Development Study; a longitudinal study of
children born in Britain in 1958. Results suggest that parental involvement does
matter, but it depends on when involvement and economic hardship are measured,
as well as type of involvement and parent gender. Father interest in education
reduces the impact of economic hardship on education the most, especially at age
11. Both father and mother interest in school at age 16 have the largest direct
impact on education. The frequency of outings with mother at age 11 also has a
larger direct impact on education than outings with father, however, neither
compare with the reduction in the effect of economic hardship as a result of father
interest in school.' (Hango, 2007)
Under the auspices of the Department for Work and Pensions, during the Blair
Labour Government, Jo Blanden (2006) published a report 'Bucking the trend:
What enables those who are disadvantaged in childhood to succeed later in life?'
The analysis was carried out by using data from the British Cohort Study (BCS) of
children born in 1970 and included all babies born in Great Britain between 4th and
11th April 1970. This was an initial sample of 18,000 individuals. One of the
benefits of using the BCS is the richness of the dataset, meaning that not only is
the dataset large, but that it was possible to control for many other variables so
that different influences were not confounded. The results showed that the level of
parental interest is extremely important; with father's interest having a large
influence on their sons, and mother's interest most important for their daughters.
Blanden's analysis was based on multivariate regressions. Her Table 5.1 gives the
regression results where the predicted variable is the outcome for the child in
terms of subsequent adult poverty status. Easily the largest negative beta
coefficient (i.e., the largest cause of an adverse effect) is 'father's little or no
interest in the child's education', indicating up to 34% greater chance of adult
poverty for boys. Surprisingly, this analysis shows little effect of father's lack of
interest in education on the outcomes for girls. Conversely, a mother's lack of
interest in education adversely affects girls more than boys.
Blanden's Table 5.2 gives the regression results where the predicted variable is
children's test scores at age 10. The results are qualitatively similar. In the case of
boys, easily the largest negative beta coefficient is for 'father's little or no interest
in the child's education'. Again this affects girls test scores very little, whilst the
gender effect is reversed for mother's lack of interest in education. The key result
is that it is the father's interest, or lack thereof, which is the largest determinant of
both the educational attainment of the son, and the son's later financial success.
There are a number of further studies which consolidate the conclusion that high
levels of interest by a father in his child's schooling and education, his high
expectations for their achievement and his greater direct involvement in their
learning, education and schools, are associated with the child's better exam results,
greater progress at school, more constructive attitudes towards school, and higher
educational expectations. This is not confined to middle-class families: whatever
the father's educational level his interest and participation pay off for his children.
Fathers' higher levels of commitment to their child's education, and their
involvement with the school, are also associated with children's better behaviour at
school, including reduced risk of suspension or expulsion. Children's school
behaviour is strongly linked with their educational attainment and fathers'
influence on that behaviour is not only significant but may at times be more
significant than mothers' influence, (Lloyd et al, 2003).
Not surprisingly, if fathers' positive involvement can be beneficial, fathers'
negative parenting can be destructive also. For instance, fathers' harsh parenting
is more strongly linked to children's (especially boys') aggression than is mothers'
harsh parenting (Chang et al, 2003).
As regards language acquisition, to quote the UK Fatherhood Institute (2013)
again,
'While within-gender variation is enormous, and parents' vocabulary use is far
more powerfully affected by their education level than their sex, some studies
suggest that fathers' verbal interactions with their children may differ from
mothers'; and that this may sometimes be to their children's advantage. Fathers
have been found to use different and longer words with their children and also
more abstract words. Topics may also vary by gender, with mothers referring more
frequently to emotions (this has been found to predict children's emotional
understanding) and fathers more often using causal explanatory language, which
predict their children's theory of mind.'
References supporting those contentions include 'Mother and father language
input to young children: contributions to later language development', (Panscofar
and Vernon-Feagans, 2006), and, 'Mothers' and fathers' use of internal state talk
with their young children', (LaBounty et al, 2008).
High father involvement in reading, appropriate disciplining, social activities, trips
out, etc., is associated with fewer child behavioural problems, lower criminality and
lower substance misuse. All these behavioural benefits impact on subsequent school
achievement. Children also tend to do better and behave better when they have
high levels of self-respect and self-regulation. The quality and quantity of fathers'
parenting impact strongly on these and other significant measures of adjustment.
Further sources of these conclusions include the Swedish study, 'Fathers'
involvement and children's developmental outcomes: a systematic review of
longitudinal studies', (Sarkadi et al, 2008); the book 'Fathering & Child
Outcomes', (Flouri, 2005); and, of course, 'The Role of the Father in Child
Development', 5th edition, (Lamb (editor), 2010).
The report 'Prisoners' childhood and family backgrounds', based primarily on a
survey of 1,435 prisoners serving sentences between 1 month and 4 years,
indicated that 53% of prisoners had not lived with both natural parents as a child,
(Williams, Papadopoulou and Booth, 2012). Many had changed living arrangements
during their childhood. So, whilst 47% of prisoners reported living with both natural
parents, this may not have been the case for their whole childhood. 24% of
prisoners stated that they lived with foster parents or in an institution, or had been
taken into care, at some point when they were a child, and hence did not enjoy the
benefit of the involvement of either parent full-time. To put this in context, about
2% of the general population have spent time in care as children, (Full Fact, 2012).
The 2013 report 'Fractured Families', (Centre for Social Justice, 2013), stated that
their extensive research 'showed that 76% of children and young people in custody
had an absent father and 33% an absent mother'. The Prison Reform Trust (2013)
quotes the same figures.
The Abstract of the 2003 study by Ellis et al (2003) into the impact of
fatherlessness on early sexual activity is as follows,
'The impact of father absence on early sexual activity and teenage pregnancy was
investigated in longitudinal studies in the United States (N = 242) and New Zealand
(N = 520), in which community samples of girls were followed prospectively from
early in life (5 years) to approximately age 18. Greater exposure to father absence
was strongly associated with elevated risk for early sexual activity and adolescent
pregnancy. This elevated risk was either not explained (in the US. study) or only
partly explained (in the New Zealand study) by familial, ecological, and personal
disadvantages associated with father absence. After controlling for covariates,
there was stronger and more consistent evidence of effects of father absence on
early sexual activity and teenage pregnancy than on other behavioral or mental
health problems or academic achievement.'
The 2001 study by Kaye Wellings et al 'Sexual behaviour in Britain: early
heterosexual experience' was based on a survey of 4762 men and 6399 women.
They found that the odds of having first intercourse before age 16 was roughly
doubled for children raised with only one, or neither, parent compared with children
raised with both parents (x2.29 for boys, x1.65 for girls). A similar increase in odds
applied to the likelihood of pregnancy before age 18, (Wellings et al, 2001).
A Swedish study reported in The Lancet in 2003, (Weitoft et al, 2003), used
medical and mortality data from 65,085 children with single parents and 921,257
children with two parents. Analysis of risk was conducted using Poisson regression,
adjusted for factors that might be presumed to select people into single
parenthood, and for other factors, mainly resulting from single parenthood, that
might have affected the relation between type of parenting and risk. Children with
single parents showed increased risks of psychiatric disease, suicide or suicide
attempt, injury, and addiction. After adjustment for confounding factors, such as
socioeconomic status and parents' own addiction or mental illness, children in
single-parent households had increased risks compared with those in two-parent
households as follows,
For psychiatric disease in childhood, relative risk for girls 2.1, and for boys 2.5;
For suicide attempt, relative risk for girls 2.0, and for boys 2.3;
For alcohol-related disease, relative risk for girls 2.4, and for boys 2.2;
For narcotics-related disease, relative risk for girls 3.2, and for boys 4·0;
Boys in single-parent families also had a raised risk of all-cause mortality.
14.4 The Study of Radl, Salazar and Cebolla-Boado, 2017
I have selected the study 'Does Living in a Fatherless Household Compromise
Educational Success? A Comparative Study of Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills'
by Jonas Radl, Leire Salazar and Hector Cebolla-Boado (2017) for special
attention because of its size, involving over a quarter of a million subjects across
33 different OECD countries. The study addresses the relationship between
various family forms and the level of cognitive and non-cognitive skills among
school students aged 15 to 16. The cognitive skills were measured using
standardised numeracy test scores. These data were obtained from the Programme
for International Student Assessment (PISA) release for 2012 which provides data
consistently across nations. Non-cognitive abilities were captured by a measure of
"internal locus of control".
"Internal locus of control" is a term describing the belief that life events are
causally attributable to one's own actions. A high degree of internal locus of
control is thus the belief that the driving force of success is one's own ability and
effort. In contrast, a high degree of external locus of control is the belief that fate
or luck or some external "other" is the responsible factor for one's good or bad
fortune. Whether locus of control is predominantly perceived as internal or
external has been used extensively to explain differences in peoples' effort,
especially among children. Lack of internal locus of control is believed to be
related to several psychological problems including depression.
The authors of the study note that there is ample evidence that the absence of one
of the parents, usually the father, is negatively correlated with educational success
of students. Scholars have analysed the detrimental impact on a variety of
outcomes such as test scores, grades, and attitudes about school and educational
aspirations. When focusing on the final level of educational achievement and/or
years of schooling attained, the negative influence exerted by father absence
seems to be especially pronounced.
Radl et al's study considered only the presence or absence of the father in the
household, but not the reason for his absence. Moreover, they were not able to
distinguish between biological- and stepfathers. Their analysis controlled for basic
socio-demographics (students' sex, age, and social background as measured by the
mother's level of education and migrant status). The presence or otherwise of
siblings and grandparents in the same household were also controlled via
independent variables.
The study found that the absence of fathers from the household is associated with
adverse outcomes for children in virtually all developed countries. This was
generally true for both cognitive and non-cognitive skills, although the
disadvantage was notably stronger in cognitive skills.
Figure 14.1 shows the numerical results for the regression beta coefficient
associated with father absence, the two graphs showing the effect on cognitive and
non-cognitive skills. The dependent variables were normalised to unit standard
deviation, so the plotted beta coefficients can be regarded as fractions of a
standard deviation. The central estimate for all 33 countries is negative, for both
outcomes, i.e., that father absence is detrimental. However, the effect on cognitive
skills is substantially larger in magnitude. For almost all countries the error band is
fully within the negative range for cognitive skills. In contrast, for about two-thirds
of countries, the error band for non-cognitive skills is consistent with zero effect.
To put the magnitudes in Figure 14.1 in context, note that the beta coefficient for
the dependence of numeracy on age was 0.166, on average over the 33 countries.
The average beta coefficient for the dependence of numeracy on the mother's
years of education (a surrogate for socioeconomics) was 0.07. For most countries
the effect of fatherlessness was greater than these effects, sometimes far greater.
Figure 14.1: Effect of Father Absence on Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Outcomes
from Radl et al, 2017
I note in passing that the finding by Radl et al that father absence appears to affect
cognitive skill outcomes more than non-cognitive skills is opposite to that found by
other studies. Unfortunately many such results in the social sciences suffer from
reproducibility problems.
It is also worth noting that Radl et al find the presence of other family members,
especially grandparents and to a lesser extent siblings, to be deleterious to the
subject child, especially in cognitive skills. However this is likely to be masking a
socioeconomic effect.
As a by-product, the analysis also isolates the effect of being female on these
outcomes. For the cognitive skill the beta coefficient was negative (an average of
-0.136), but this will be because numeracy was chosen as the measure. A verbal
cognitive measure could be anticipated to result in a positive beta coefficient. Of
greater interest is that the beta coefficient for the dependence on being female of
the non-cognitive skill (i.e., internal locus of control) was also significant and
negative (-0.152). This suggests that girls have a greater tendency than boys to
believe their fortunes are under the control of an external "other", making them
more vulnerable to mental illness. It also suggests, speculatively, that feminists'
insistence on men's controlling behaviour towards women might arise more from
female psychology than from objective reality.
14.5 The Study of McLanahan, Tach and Schneider, 2013
I have selected the study 'The Causal Effects of Father Absence', (McLanahan,
Tach and Schneider, 2013), for particular attention because it is a rare example in
social science of explicitly claiming a causal connection. High quality regression
analyses, which control for other implicated variables, are often suggestive of
causality, though not conclusive, and hence authors rarely make an explicit claim
for causality. McLanahan et al are a rare exception, and it is surely a measure of
their confidence that they claim causality in the title.
McLanahan et al recognise that the literature on father absence is frequently
criticised for its use of cross-sectional data and the application of methods that fail
to take account of possible omitted variable bias. They give a careful account of
the strengths and weaknesses of a range of techniques which attempt to address
causal connections. The techniques they identified were,
Various forms of regression analysis, which means fitting the dependence of
outcome variables to a set of independent variables in an attempt to isolate the
dependence on different factors;
"Lagged Dependent Variable" models, which also deploy regression, but which use
longitudinal data at two time points, before and after father absence, in an attempt
to cancel-out unmeasured factors;
"Growth Curve" models which use longitudinal data at more than two points in
time in order to fit both before and after effects and also the rate-of-change of
outcome data;
"Individual Fixed Effects" models which concentrate on changes apparent over
time in individual children;
Three other models of increasing sophistication, making 7 model types in all.
McLanahan et al identified 47 articles of suitable quality that make use of one or
more of these methods of causal inference to examine the effects of father
absence on a range of outcomes for children, including educational attainment,
mental health, and relationship formation and stability.
Studies of father absence effects on education were broken down into three
categories. As regards effects on test scores, of 31 analyses 14 found statistically
significant disbeneficial effects of father absence on test scores, whilst 17 found no
significant effect. The father absence effect on general educational attainment was
more emphatic. Of nine studies examining high school graduation using multiple
methodologies, only one found null effects, and this study compared siblings in
blended families. The rest provided strong evidence of a negative effect of father
absence. In the broader category of attitudes, aspirations, engagement,
coursework and courses failed the evidence was more mixed. Of 18 analyses, about
half showed a significant disbenefit of father absence, and half did not.
Studies of father absence effects on children's mental health and behaviours were
also broken down into three categories. As regards the effect on the mental health
of children when adult, five studies out of six showed a significant negative effect
of parental divorce. For the impact of father absence on children's social-emotional
problems in childhood, McLanahan et al identified 27 separate analyses that
examined the association between parental divorce and some type of externalizing
behaviour or delinquency. Of these, 19 analyses found a significant disbeneficial
effect of divorce or father absence on problem behaviour for at least one
comparison group, whereas 8 found no significant association. McLanahan et al
also identified six analyses that examined children's smoking, drug and alcohol use.
The evidence for this set of outcomes was very robust, with only one analysis
reporting a null effect of father absence, the rest indicating clear negative effects.
The effect of father absence on their offsprings' subsequent likelihood to marry,
divorce or separate was mixed and limited to a very few studies. In respect of early
childbearing, McLanahan et al identified only two analyses that examined the
effect of father absence. Both analyses found an association between parental
absence and a tendency for early childbearing, with divorce in early childhood
having a stronger effect than divorce in middle childhood.
McLanahan et al's key conclusions were,
Father absence negatively affects children's social-emotional development,
particularly by increasing externalising behaviour. These effects may be more
pronounced if father absence occurs during early childhood, and they may be more
pronounced for boys than for girls.
Effects on social-emotional development persist into adolescence, for which they
found strong evidence that father absence increases adolescents' risky behaviours.
They found strong and consistent negative effects of father absence on high school
graduation, the effects on educational attainment appearing to operate by
increasing problem behaviours rather than by impairing cognitive ability.
The longer-term effects of father absence included the strongest evidence for a
causal effect on adult mental health, suggesting that the psychological harms of
father absence experienced during childhood persist throughout the life course.
14.6 The Indirect Empathy Gap for Fatherless Children
There are thousands of professional articles on the effect of fathers on child
development. Studies of the effect of father absence do not all identify a
statistically significant disbeneficial effect. However, the majority of studies
(perhaps between half and three-quarters) find statistically significant disbeneficial
effects of father absence on education, mental health, externalizing behaviours,
delinquency, substance abuse and early childbearing. Many studies, using a variety
of methodologies and longitudinal data, contribute to an increasingly clear picture
of a causal connection between father absences and these adverse effects. Nor is
this a new finding. It has been known for over a quarter of a century, though
further evidence has continued to accumulate.
In chapters 10 to 13 I outlined the mechanisms which drive father absence. Simply
blaming men for being deadbeats will not do. A particular concern is the danger
that a positive feedback mechanism will propagate the adverse effects of
fatherlessness to the following generation, thus driving an increasing gradient in
social capital which may operate differentially on males. Measures of this are the
strong demographic dependence of the collapse of marriage (section 13.4), the
strong demographic dependence of Adverse Childhood Experiences (chapter 12),
and the prevailing post-separation arrangements which result in fatherlessness in
far too large a percentage of cases (chapters 10 and 11).
Tens of thousands of fathers annually in the UK attempt, but often fail, to remain
involved with their children. Blaming men is an inappropriate reaction because it
must be acknowledged that external social factors largely determine the outcome.
The individual working class man did not create the socio-political conditions which
have led to the collapse of marriage. The individual working class man did not
create the misandric culture which brands men as violent and predisposes judicial
forces to separate him from his children. The individual working class man did not
create the empathy gap which underlies the different perception of parents
according to sex, and which drives much of fatherlessness after parental
separation.
Whilst this chapter, like chapter 12, has concentrated upon harm to children, it is
important to recall that this harm arises, at least in part, as a collateral
consequence of the empathy gap towards men which facilitates the societal
equanimity at endemic fatherlessness. In all these issues where there is collateral
harm to children we see the crucial distinction between evolved matricentrism,
whose function was to protect children, and feminist gynocentrism in which the
woman, not the child, has been made the primary recipient of concern.
15. Paternity and Its Enemies
It is a piece of idle sentimentality that truth, merely as truth, has any inherent
power denied to error, of prevailing against the dungeon and the stake. Men are
not more zealous for truth than they often are for error, and a sufficient
application of legal or even of social penalties will generally succeed in stopping the
propagation of either. The real advantage which truth has, consists in this, that
when an opinion is true, it may be extinguished once, twice, or many times, but in
the course of ages there will generally be found persons to rediscover it, until some
one of its reappearances falls on a time when from favourable circumstances it
escapes persecution until it has made such head as to withstand all subsequent
attempts to suppress it.
John Stuart Mill (1806 – 1873), On Liberty
In this chapter I consider men's fertility, what challenges it and what control men
themselves exercise over it. I start with the absence of a convenient, reversible
and "persistent" male contraceptive, comparable to the female pill. This leads to a
discussion about the degree of influence men exercise over conception: just how
accidental are those "accidental" pregnancies, and how common are they? Once
conception has taken place, it is the woman's right to choose. But if men, in
practice, have little influence over whether conception takes place, what control do
men have over their own fertility at all? Only to be celibate, it seems – or, to
express it as some do, "he should have kept his dick in his pants". The same people
would hardly condone telling women to refrain from sex as their only available
contraceptive. Equality? It would be a great thing.
Next the issue of declining male fertility, as measured by sperm counts, is
discussed, both as regards the effects of ageing and also the controversial, but
alarming, reports of steep declines in average sperm counts. I contrast the
apocalyptic nature of some predictions (albeit uncertain) with the complete lack of
interest at the level of the political medical establishment.
The largest part of this chapter addresses misattributed paternity, or paternity
fraud, which refers to the situation in which a man who has assumed social
fatherhood, or who has been asserted to be the biological father, is not in fact the
biological father. The rate of mispaternity is one of the more controversial subjects
in gender politics. Here I make an attempt to clarify the matter. There is a
dominant narrative which seeks to minimise biological paternity in favour of social
paternity alone. I examine critically the ethics of this position.
It is indisputable that men have historically been disadvantaged compared to
women in respect of their lack of certainty that a given child is indeed theirs. The
advent of cheap, convenient and highly reliable DNA testing has provided a
technological means to eradicate this disadvantage. But legal, medical and societal
norms are maintaining the previous status quo. It will be shown that a man in the
UK has no legal right to know whether or not a given child is biologically his. The
inequality between the sexes in the context of fertility is stark.
15.1 Men's Control Over Their Own Fertility
15.1.1 Male Contraception
The advent of the oral contraceptive pill for women was of such overwhelming
significance that a large part of the social changes of the last half century can be
attributed to its consequential effects. For men, there is no equivalent. Men have
only the condom, which is not widely liked, though its use does confer significant
benefit in terms of protection against infection. As well as being inconvenient,
unpopularity arises from the fact that the condom decreases sensitivity. In
circumcised men this can involve a double loss of sensitivity, and hence a further
disincentive. Moreover, in long term relationships, the condom is generally forgone
in favour of 'the pill', thus throwing all the burden for contraception upon the
woman.
It is therefore a moot point whether the absence of a convenient "persistent" male
contraceptive is more of a disadvantage for men or for women. What is clear is
that the absence of a convenient, reversible, "persistent" male contraceptive is a
gender inequality. For women the inequality lies in the unfair placing of the burden
of responsibility. The pill is by no means free of side effects or medical
disadvantages. It is becoming increasingly clear that many women would welcome
the burden of contraception being shared by men.
For men the inequality lies in having little or no control over their own fertility.
Should their partner become pregnant, the woman has the option of the morningafter pill or an abortion. The man has no recourse to such after-the-event
preventatives: it is a woman's right to choose. That being the case, it is even more
important that a man should be able to prevent an unwanted pregnancy in the first
place.
The empathy gap is evident. Many people will have scant sympathy for a man who
has contributed to a pregnancy he does not want. They will express the view that,
in that case, he should not have had sex in the first place. But they will not apply
the same harsh logic to women.
It is important to recognise that an effective "persistent" male contraceptive need
not mean an hormonally based male pill, or, indeed, any sort of pill. For men, unlike
women, the gonads are conveniently placed outside the body. Access is easy. This
means that "mechanical" interventions which prevent sperm being ejaculated are
relatively easy to engineer. There are many contraceptive options which show
promise, including hormone based pills, non-hormonal or "herbal" pills, and a
variety of vas occlusion methods, (The Male Contraception Initiative, 2018). The
vas occlusive medical devices have the major advantage over a "male pill" that
they avoid interference with the endocrine system, and thus avoid the associated
adverse side-effects.
Arguably the major obstacle to bringing a male contraceptive to market is not
technological but commercial. Getting candidate substances or methodologies
across the so-called "valley of death" – the pre-clinical development stage – is
expensive, (The Male Contraceptive Initiative, 2017). Following that, the legally
obligatory clinical trials are even more expensive, something which only Big
Pharma can finance. Hence Big Pharma needs to be convinced that there is a large
market for the ultimate product.
The key question is therefore how many men would use a male contraceptive if it
were brought to market? An Ipsos survey indicated that two-thirds of men would
use a male contraceptive if in a long-term relationship, and more than half of men
would do so outside such a relationship, (Ipsos, 2014). The same survey indicated
that 80% of women in a long term relationship would trust a man to take the
contraception. That far fewer women would trust a man with contraception in the
case of short-term or casual relationships is not so relevant, because, in such cases,
the man's motivation would be more to protect himself.
Another major driver for effective and persistent male contraception is that its
widespread uptake would markedly reduce the need for abortions. It is one of the
paradoxes of fertility that the abortion rate in the UK increased steadily from the
1960s when the use of the female contraceptive pill became common, (Abortion
Statistics, England and Wales: 2017). In 2017 there were 197,533 abortions
notified as taking place in England and Wales. In the USA there are over a million
abortions annually. Some abortions will be for reasons of protecting the physical
health of the woman, or due to concerns over the physical health of the foetus. But
research published by Finer et al (2005) indicate that these physical health
concerns are the primary motivation for abortion in the USA in only 7% of cases.
The paradoxical increase in the abortion rate since the availability of the pill is
probably related to the delay in marriage and to the decline in marriage, with 81%
of abortions in England and Wales relating to unmarried women. Consequently,
there is no reason to expect another paradoxical outcome if a male contraceptive
were to become widely used. On the contrary, a steep decline in the need for
abortions is inevitable. Consequently, there would be multiple benefits to both
sexes from the availability of an effective, persistent, reversible male
contraceptive. At present society is insensitive to men's lack of control over their
own fertility, an instance of the empathy gap.
15.1.2 Option Denied?
The effective lack of control which men exercise over their partners' pregnancies
leads some people to be suspicious that many "accidental" pregnancies may not be
quite so accidental. This is sometimes called "type two paternity fraud". In the
popular press, and in women's magazines, stories abound which give succour to
such suspicion. An infamous confession by journalist Liz Jones (2011) stoked the
fires of concern,
'Because he wouldn't give me what I wanted, I decided to steal it from him. I
resolved to steal his sperm from him in the middle of the night. I thought it was my
right, given that he was living with me and I had bought him many, many M&S
ready meals. The 'theft' itself was alarmingly easy to carry out. One night, after
sex, I took the used condom and, in the privacy of the bathroom, I did what I had to
do. Bingo. I don't understand why more men aren't wise to this risk - maybe sex
addles their brain. So let me offer a warning to men wishing to avoid any chance of
unwanted fatherhood: if a woman disappears to the loo immediately after sex, I
suggest you find out exactly what she is up to.'
And in a later relationship,
'My husband was 14 years younger than me, and he had told me he was not ready
for children. But I didn't listen……I do believe that any man who moves in with a
woman in her late 30s or early 40s should take it as read that she will want to use
them to procreate, by fair means or foul, no matter how much she protests
otherwise.'
'Many girlfriends have told me how they have tricked their boyfriend or fiancé or
husband. One found herself childless in her 40s, so she lied to a very new boyfriend
that she was on the Pill. He is now in a new relationship having to pay support for a
child he never sees.'
No one knows how common these hole-in-the-condom or turkey baster induced
pregnancies might be, though the rising incidence of the 30-something woman who
wants a child – quickly – but cannot find a man who is willing to commit, can only
put the thought into more heads. However, these extreme measures will be far less
common than the "accidental" pregnancies which follow ceasing to take
contraception. In fact, the majority of "accidental" pregnancies occur, not due to
contraception failure, but because birth control has been stopped, (Abrams, 2012),
(Taft et al, 2018).
The degree of premeditation will be variable. I suspect that in many cases the
woman is almost acting instinctively, though the extent to which that might
mitigate against her culpability in ignoring her partner's wishes is something I will
leave to the reader to decide. It seems in some cases that the woman delegates
responsibility to fate,
'Dr Terri Foran, sexual health physician and lecturer in women's health at the
University of New South Wales, says this version of "accidental pregnancy" is not
uncommon. "Many women I see these days, I ask if they're using contraception
and they'll say no. Then I'll ask if they're intending to fall pregnant and they'll say
no but if it happens it happens."' (Hakim, 2018).
In a Psychology Today article titled 'Not-So-Accidental Pregnancies: Some
accidental pregnancies aren't so accidental, especially if the guy could be a good
provider', Michelle Bryner (2016) wrote,
'Melinda Spohn, a social worker and researcher at Spokane Falls Community
College in Washington, decided to study why so many of her clients told her that
their pregnancies were unplanned, despite the variety of easily available birth
control. Some of the women admitted that they had not used birth control with
guys who had appealing characteristics. To determine whether such behavior is
widespread, Spohn surveyed nearly 400 women at two community colleges. More
than a third of women said they had risked pregnancy in the past with men who had
attractive qualities - such as commitment to the relationship, good financial
prospects or the desire for a family - but hadn't discussed the possibility of
pregnancy with their partner. It was unclear how many women actually became
pregnant.'
Up to 2010 in the USA the proportion of births that were intended at conception
was 63%, (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2012). Unsurprisingly
this varied with marital status. For married women 77% of all births were intended
at conception, for cohabiting women this was 49% and for single women, 33%. A
survey in Australia indicated that 38% of women who had become pregnant in the
survey period had done so unintentionally, but of these unintended pregnancies
68% were reported as wanted, (Taft et al, 2018). There is clearly plenty of scope
between "unintentional" and yet "wanted" to facilitate ignoring the man's wishes
with a clear conscience.
A survey of 5686 women of childbearing age in Britain in the period 2010 – 2012,
reported in The Lancet, indicated that only 55% of pregnancies were planned. A
further 29% were classed as "ambivalent", (Wellings et al, 2013). Quite what
"ambivalent" means is a moot point. A study 'Do Perceptions of Their Partners
Affect Young Women's Pregnancy Risk? Further Study of Ambivalent Desires'
involved collecting data from women, asking them to report on their perceptions of
their partners' childbearing desires, (Miller et al, 2017). The women's perception
of their partner's wishes were found to be statistically related to the outcome, i.e.,
pregnancy, which is reassuring – but this is only a statistical correlation. Again
there is plenty of scope here for "ambivalence" to become "pregnancy", despite
the lack of a partner's "affirmative consent". Yes, I use that phrase deliberately.
15.1.3 Men's Fertility
Male fertility is challenged by two factors: a general decline in average sperm
counts in Western countries, and age. The former is less well established than the
public have been led to believe, whilst the effect of age is more serious than the
public appreciate.
Unlike women, whose fertility comes to a final full-stop at menopause, the saying
goes that "men can have children at any age". Whilst technically true, this
perception disguises the substantial decrease in sperm count which occurs
continuously from age 20 throughout a man's life. Women are acutely aware of
their biological clock. Men and women tend to be unaware that a man also has a
biological fertility clock. The fact that the clock does not actually stop should not
obscure the fact that it slows down a very great deal. It has been estimated that
the average time to pregnancy for a woman under 25 if her partner is also under 25
is just 5 months but increases to two years if a man is over 40, and even longer if
he is over 45, (Your Fertility, 2018). There is general appreciation that a woman
who leaves her attempts at pregnancy too late will face increasing fertility
difficulties. There is less general appreciation that the same is true for the man in
the partnership. Thus, for a couple who marry when both are in their late 30s or
early 40s, there is a double hit on their likelihood of conceiving.
But the fertility even of young men in Western countries may be reducing. There
have been reports of falling sperm counts for decades. The most recent to cause a
stir amongst the public was the 2017 meta-analysis 'Temporal trends in sperm
count: a systematic review and meta-regression analysis' by Hagai Levine et al
(2017). This examined thousands of independent studies and conducted a metaanalysis of 185 of them. The international team of researchers ultimately looked at
semen samples from 42,935 men from 50 countries between 1973 and 2011. They
concluded,
'This comprehensive meta-regression analysis reports a significant decline in
sperm counts (as measured by sperm concentration and total sperm count)
between 1973 and 2011, driven by a 50–60% decline among men unselected by
fertility from North America, Europe, Australia and New Zealand. Because of the
significant public health implications of these results, research on the causes of this
continuing decline is urgently needed.'
This decline in sperm count in Western men was not matched by a significant
decline in non-Western men. The cause is not currently known. The decline in
sperm concentration appears to be worryingly large, a reduction by approximately
50 million/ml since 1973. The likelihood of conception begins to fall steeply below a
sperm concentration of 40 million/ml, and sperm concentrations below 15 million/ml
are regarded as nominally infertile.
The Levine et all meta-analysis also reported that unselected Western men had an
overall drop in sperm concentration from 99 million/ml in 1973 to 47 million/ml in
2011. Taken at face value, these results are extraordinarily concerning. The study
did not report any levelling off of the declining trend. Consequently, if this study is
correct, low male fertility might soon be the norm in Western countries, with
nominal infertility becoming the norm within 25 years at the current rate of
decline. The best of studies can, of course, be wrong.
This is not an area in which a non-expert should be expounding opinions. Even the
experts are ambivalent. An editorial addressing the findings of Levine et al in the
Canadian Journal of Urology focused more on cautious concern than on disbelief,
(Gomella, 2017). However, the briefest of searches reveals controversy in the
informed academic literature. For example, Bonde and te Velde (2017) write,
'A recent systematic review on worldwide declining trends in sperm counts has
fuelled alarming reports in national and international news media. However,
methodological issues exist with data gathering and analysis precluding any
conclusion and no solid data exist to indicate increasing frequency of couple
infertility during past decades.'
Also expressing considerable scepticism were the Greek authors of 'Declining
Sperm Counts… or Rather Not? A Mini Review' (Ravanos et al, 2018) whose view
was,
'Temporal global trends of sperm quality remain a matter of debate. The aim of
this study was to present a comprehensive review of studies reporting on sperm
quality counts, summarize the main end points, and assess the main reasons for
potential discrepancies. An evidence-based review of PubMed and Scopus
databases was performed regarding studies reporting on modification of sperm
quality counts, independently of study character, study language, or date. Since the
meta-analysis of Carlsen et al in 1992 that suggested an annual decline in sperm
count of 1%, several reports confirmed the decline in sperm quality, whereas
others disproved them, suggesting a slight increase or absence of change in sperm
count. Such controversies may be attributed to geographical and time-related
variability in sperm values and also to several confounding factors that influence
the semen parameters. Intrinsic weaknesses of the studies include heterogeneity of
subjects recruited, lack of adjustment for confounding factors, and samples that do
not always represent the general population. No consensus exists on whether
sperm counts actually decrease because studies' results are often controversial or
inconclusive with methodological deficiencies. More prospective, large-scale,
population-based studies are needed in order to provide sound evidence of possible
global trends in sperm count.'
On the other hand, Levine at al are far from being the only authors reporting
dramatic falls in sperm counts and sperm concentrations. They could not be, since
their report was a meta-analysis of other studies. Published the year before Levine
et al, the meta-analysis of Sengupta et al (2016) also reports a similar steep decline
in sperm concentrations, although they identify a different range of affected
countries,
'The current study, following a previous report of massive fall in semen volume
over the past 33 years, attempts to delineate the trend of altering sperm
concentrations and factors responsible for this by reviewing articles published from
1980 to July 2015 with geographic differences. The current study identified an
overall 57% diminution in mean sperm concentration over the past 35 years, which,
when analyzed for each geographical region, identified a significant decline in
North America, Europe, Asia, and Africa.…..It points to the threat of male
infertility in times ahead.'
And as regards European men in particular, Sengupta, Borges and Dutta (2018)
wrote,
'We analysed the data published in English language articles in the past 50 years in
altering sperm concentration in European men. A time-dependent decline of sperm
concentration in the last 50 years and an overall 32.5% decrease in mean sperm
concentration was noted.'
A study on Danish men over a 21 year period (1996 – 2016) was intended to
investigate the effect of in utero exposure to maternal smoking on sperm counts,
(Priskorn et al, 2018). As expected the study confirmed that, 'exposure to maternal
smoking was associated with lower sperm counts'. Surprisingly, then, given that
exposure in utero to maternal smoking declined significantly over the period, no
overall increase in sperm counts was observed despite the decrease in this
exposure. Overall, there were no persistent temporal trends in semen quality,
testicular volume or levels of follicle-stimulating hormone over the 21 years
studied. Of more immediate concern, perhaps, is that they also observed that,
'throughout the study period, 35% of the men had low semen quality'. The authors
conclude that their results suggest that 'other unknown adverse factors may
maintain the low semen quality among Danish men'.
Despite the uncertainty, the credible threat that nominal male infertility could
become the norm within 25 years is, one would expect, sufficient motivation for
urgent attention – including at the political level of the medical establishment, not
merely within the research literature. But in comparison with the similarly
apocalyptic forecasts of climate change, which have spawned global academic,
political, technological and commercial action, for male fertility we find nothing at
all. Searching the annual reports of the Chief Medical Officer for England for
years 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 reveals that neither "sperm" nor male fertility
generally are mentioned in three of them, (Sally Davies, 2018). Only in 2017 does
the word "sperm" appear, firstly in the context of endocrine-disrupting chemicals,
where we read, 'a body of literature now documents an increasing incidence of
breast cancer in women, decreased sperm counts and increasing incidence of
testicular cancer in men', and secondly in the context of smoking, 'epigenetic
changes in human sperm have been shown to be affected by environmental
influences such as smoking behaviour'. The claims of dramatic and ongoing
reductions in sperm counts are not mentioned at all in the Chief Medical Officer's
reports, nor is the possibility of catastrophic effects on male fertility. Perhaps this
is the result of a considered appraisal of the evidence and a decision to avoid an
alarmist position. But one might also suspect that it results from a particular skew
in the established focus of concern.
15.2 Mispaternity and Paternity Fraud
15.2.1 Terminology and Perception
I shall generally use the term "mispaternity", which is a contraction of
"misattributed paternity", as an attempt to avoid the pejorative term "paternity
fraud". However, even the term "mispaternity" may be criticised on the grounds
that, in some cases, there may have been no particular claim of paternity asserted.
However, one may reasonably take the view that either the mother is certain
regarding the paternity of her child, or she is not certain. So if she pretends to be
certain when, in fact, she is not, then this is less than honest – and hence an
assertion of paternity in these circumstances does take on the characteristic of
fraud.
Some opine that the term "paternity fraud" should be used only when the attempt
is being made to gain financially from the false, or uncertain, claim – such as to
obtain child support payments. However, in my view, this puts undue emphasis on
financial issues whereas other harms, emotional, psychological and social, are of
greater importance – both to the faux-father and the child.
Academic publications will refer to "extra-pair paternity", but this is not quite the
same thing. Extra-pair paternity refers to a heterosexual couple in an established
relationship in which the woman has a child by another man. Frequently this will
involve mispaternity if the woman passes off the child as that of her partner, as will
most often be the case. But mispaternity can also arise outwith an established
relationship, and extra-pair paternity need not necessarily lead to mispaternity.
Terms such as "covert paternity" or "uncertain paternity" accurately describe the
situation when the true biological father is not known, except possibly by the
mother. But the mother does not necessarily make any assertion of paternity in
such circumstances, so the term "mispaternity" is not strictly applicable.
In tests for paternity the term used in the scientific community is "paternity
exclusion". This refers to a specific man being shown, generally with high
confidence, not to be the father. The appropriateness of the term "mispaternity"
then depends upon whether he was ever asserted to be the father. However there
is a degree of disingenuousness about those who emphasise this distinction because,
had there been no such suggestion, the man's paternity would not have been tested
at all.
The term "paternity exclusion" has the benefit of clear meaning, though it should
be noted that a failure to exclude paternity does not always mean the man in
question is the father. Older tests, such as those based on blood groups, were
capable of definite exclusion but were not capable of definite proof positive of
paternity. Such tests would provide only a lower bound to the rate of mispaternity.
(This effect has been allowed for and corrected in the database below). However,
recent tests, especially those based on DNA, provide far more accurate data.
Hence, I shall use the term "mispaternity" but numerical estimates of its
prevalence will be based primarily upon (appropriately corrected) paternity
exclusions.
15.2.2 The Prevalence of Mispaternity
The prevalence of mispaternity has been subject to heated controversy. Part of the
reason for this is that, prior to modern biochemical testing techniques becoming
available and widely used in the 1990s and early 2000s, we could all live in the bliss
of ignorance. It came as a shock, then, when large testing programmes began to
report extremely high rates of mispaternity, approaching 30%. It would be foolish,
however, to interpret these high rates as applicable to the whole population (say of
the UK or the USA).
I should stress immediately that mispaternity rates depend extremely sensitively
on two things: firstly on demographic, and secondly on whether there is disputed
paternity or suspicions about paternity before testing. Mispaternity rates differ by
more than an order of magnitude between the highest and lowest socioeconomic
groups. And recall that the highest socioeconomic groups correlate with high rates
of marriage, whereas the lowest socioeconomic groups correlate with high rates of
single parenthood. Combine this with the distinction between the general
population, and that sub-population of disputed paternity, and it becomes less
surprising that reports of mispaternity rates range from fractions of 1% to 30%, or
even 50%, rates. Without specifying the population to which the tests in question
relate, the reported mispaternity rate is meaningless.
On the one hand, then, it is intemperate to suggest that rates like 30% apply
generally to the population at large (in European or Anglophone countries). It is
understandable that some people became irritated by such inflated claims,
exemplified by the article 'Rampant misattributed paternity: the creation of an
urban myth', (Gilding, 2005). On the other hand, commenters along these lines are
perhaps insensitive to the fact that those people who promulgate concern about
these high rates of mispaternity tend to be themselves of precisely that subpopulation to which the high rates might be applicable: namely men after
partnership dissolution and involved in paternity disputes.
Before turning to the evidence on mispaternity rates from paternity tests, it is
worth briefly considering the proportion of women in a heterosexual relationship
who have "extra pair copulations" with one or more other men. Such data are
obtained from surveys. Table 15.1 presents these data for the UK, the USA and
Australia, taken from (Gilding, 2007) and (Simmons et al, 2004), see those
references for sources. Obviously, not all such "cheating" results in pregnancy, and
even if it does a false claim of paternity does not necessarily follow (though that
might be common in the case of married or cohabiting couples). The percentages in
Table 15.1 do, however, put mispaternity rates in context. They are the necessary
but not sufficient conditions for mispaternity, and thus provide upper bounds to
possible mispaternity rates in the general public.
The UK data in Table 15.1 indicate the very strong demographic dependence of the
likelihood of a woman having sex with a man not her usual partner. It is to be
expected that this will be reflected in mispaternity rates. However, the very low
percentage of reported cheating amongst married UK women may be regarded
with some caution as married people might be less likely to admit it, even in
confidential surveys.
Table 15.1: Percentage of women in a heterosexual partnership reporting one or
more extra-pair copulations. (Data relates to "in the last year" except for
Australia which is "lifetime").
Country Demographic Age Range
16 - 24 25 - 34 35 - 44
UK Married 1.5% 2.2% 2.4%
UK Cohabiting 10.3% 6.5% 7.5%
UK Single 29.7% 23.7% 18.8%
USA All 27.2% (1)
13.4%
(2)
Australia All 13.0% (3)
46.0%
(4)
(1)ages 18-29; (2)ages 30-44; (3)ages 18-24; (4)ages 25-50
Mispaternity rates derived from paternity testing have been reported many times.
Two review articles of note which compile a number of sources are (Bellis et al,
2005) and (Anderson, 2006). (Bradford, R, 2018b) has compiled a total of 134
sources of reported mispaternity rates. This latter reference partitions the 134
data according to the presence or absence of prior suspicion or disputed paternity,
as follows,
43 data where testing was not done due to paternity dispute and where there was
no reason prior to testing to expect a particularly high or particularly low
mispaternity rate (35 cases from European or Anglophone countries and 8 cases
from other countries);
72 data where there was disputed paternity or suspicion about paternity prior to
testing (60 cases from European or Anglophone countries and 12 cases from other
countries);
19 data which might have been anticipated to result in particularly low
mispaternity rates, due to their subjects or because especially high paternity
confidence was expressed prior to testing.
The complete set of sources for these 134 data can be found in (Bradford, R,
2018b). Figure 15.1 plots the mispaternity rate against year from the data without
prior bias, i.e., data from [1], above, distinguishing the European and Anglophone
data from other countries. Three data points with particularly high reported
mispaternity rates are also distinguished in Figure 15.1, the refences being given in
(Bradford, R, 2018b). The first of these is a reported mispaternity of 30% due to
Philipp (1972), the provenance of which has been rightly criticised because its basis
was never properly reported. The second is a reported mispaternity of 25% due to
McLaren (1977) and refers to a study undertaken in certain flats in Liverpool.
Again the provenance is lacking, having never been fully reported. The third is that
due to Edwards (1950), a reported mispaternity of 50% which refers to premarital
pregnancies only. It can be seen that these three data lie above the other European
and Anglophone data in Figure 15.1 and are probably best ignored.
Figure 15.1 incudes horizontal dashed lines at the median levels of the European
and Anglophone data alone. Including all 35 data gives a median of 8.0%. However,
excluding the above three questionable data, leaving 32 data points, produces a
median mispaternity of 5.4%. This is my best estimate of the median mispaternity
rate in the general population, without biases due to particularly high or low
expected results. However even this is questionable. The large scatter in the data
may be due to differing demographic compositions of the samples. The
appropriateness of the 5.4% median depends upon an assumption that the 32
sources taken together provide a representative cross-demographic sample of a
population (say, of the UK). But this is unproved.
Figure 15.1: Percentage of identified mispaternity from data with no prior
anticipation of bias
All 134 mispaternity data are plotted against year in Figure 15.2. This compares
data from tests for disputed paternity with general population data and also with
data where there was high prior confidence in paternity. It is obvious from Figure
15.2 that the three sets of data, denoted by [1], [2] and [3], above, are distinct
statistical populations, consistent with expectations. The data from disputed
paternity tests, set [2], lie at substantially higher mispaternity levels than the set [1]
data, which are more representative of the general population. But the data with
high prior paternity confidence, set [3], lie at substantially lower mispaternity
levels. The medians for the three sets of data are given in Table 15.2, based on the
European and Anglophone data only. That disputed paternity cases and the general
public form distinct statistical populations is shown more clearly in histogram form
in Figure 15.3, for European and Anglophone countries only.
Table 15.2: Medians of the European and Anglophone Mispaternity Data Sets
Dataset Median Mispaternity
[1] 5.4%
[2] 25%
[3] 1.6%
The spread of mispaternity rates indicated by Table 15.2 serves to emphasise its
sensitive dependence on the sub-population in question. It's worth noting that tests
are carried out with respect to a given child, so Table 15.2 (and Figures 15.1,2)
relate to the rate per child, not per putative father.
Figure 15.2: All 134 mispaternity data, comparing data from tests with disputed
paternity with general population data and with data where there was high prior
confidence
Figure 15.3: Mispaternity data in histogram form
If the data are indicative, Table 15.2 suggests that, for a child picked at random
from the whole population, paternity would be misattributed in 5.4% of cases. If the
selection is made from a sample where there is reason to have a high prior
confidence in paternity (and this may be on the basis of, say, an affluent married
couple) then only 1.6% of children may have misattributed paternity. But for that
sub-population selected on the basis of having a declared prior suspicion, or where
paternity is being disputed, then we could expect the suspicion to turn out to be well
founded in 25% of children. For a randomly selected man with four children, there is
a 5.4% chance of mispaternity per child, and hence a 20% chance that at least one
of the children is not his.
Much of the controversy over the rate of mispaternity is caused by failing to define
the population to which the question relates. It may be perfectly appropriate for
fathers' groups to place the emphasis on the 25% figure in as far as they represent
fathers who entertain doubts about paternity, since this is precisely the population
which gives rise to this elevated figure. And this is despite the fact that such a very
high level of mispaternity is wildly inapplicable to the whole population.
In passing it is worth noting how extensive are some of the databases relating to
disputed paternity. The largest by far are the annual reports from the American
Association of Blood Banks. Between years 1998 and 2013 this source reported an
average annual mispaternity ("paternal exclusion rate") of 27% and tested an
average of around 360,000 cases annually, see Figure 15.4, (American Association
of Blood Banks, 2010). This is a very large sample and may be compared with the
number of divorces per year in the USA, e.g., 944,000 in year 2000 and 827,261 in
2016, (Centres for Disease Control & Prevention, 2017). Not all disputed paternity
cases will relate to divorce, but the bulk of them will be associated with partnership
dissolution. Bearing in mind also that roughly one-third of marriages will end in
divorce, these figures serve to illustrate that the sub-population of disputed
paternity cases is not a negligible fraction of the wider population, but on the
contrary is a significant proportion of it. Consequently, the very high mispaternity
rate of 27% does apply for a substantial proportion of the population.
The huge increase in the number of paternity tests being carried out in the USA
over the last 30 years (Figure 15.4) indicates that increasing agitation over
paternity fraud has a substantial motivation. With the order of 100,000 men
annually in the USA discovering conclusively that their putative child is not, in fact,
theirs, the determination of public discourse to minimise the issue is yet another
example of the empathy gap – which, once again, also disadvantages the children.
Figure 15.4: The increasing volume of paternity cases analysed annually by the
American Association of Blood Banks, 1988 to 2010
Figure 15.5: Whose consent is required to carry out a DNA test?
15.2.3 Men are Not Legally Entitled to Know if a Child is Theirs (UK)
In the UK, the legal aspects of DNA paternity testing are addressed by the Human
Tissue Act (2004). The issue of consent in DNA paternity testing is addressed in
Section 45 and Schedule 4 of the Act. Some sources give the impression that it is
illegal for a man to carry out a DNA paternity test without the mother's
permission. This is not true.
The Act makes it an offence to have human tissue, with the intention of carrying
out a DNA test, without "qualifying consent". The maximum penalty for this
offence is 3 years in prison. The legality of a DNA paternity test hinges upon
consent. Qualifying consent is defined in a flowchart reproduced in Figure 15.5 and
taken from the Human Tissue Authority (2018) web site. Essentially the man and
the child must both consent. There is no legal requirement for the mother's
consent.
However, a very young child will not be deemed capable of consent. In this case the
man may consent on the child's behalf if he has legal parental responsibility
(defined below). There is no hard and fast rule regarding whether a child is capable
of consent. The Explanatory Notes to Section 2 of the Act state, 'Competence (of
children) is not defined in the Act but will be established according to common law
principles (the 'Gillick test')'.
The Gillick test requires a judgment on the minor's maturity, intelligence,
understanding, experience, and ability to form a meaningful view of the
implications of the decision in question, bearing in mind the potential for peer
pressure, family pressure, fear and other misgivings. Whether a given child is
Gillick competent is necessarily a subjective judgment. Moreover, the child's
competence will depend upon the gravity and complexity of the decision. It is
reasonable to argue that the issues involved in revealing paternity require a
particularly advanced degree of maturity. Having said this, I have seen advice
suggesting that children as young as 12 might be deemed Gillick competent, but
there is no guarantee that third parties would agree, it will vary from case to case.
If the child is capable of consent but refuses consent, then holding material for the
purposes of carrying out a DNA test would be illegal. If the child is not capable of
consent and the putative father does not have Parental Responsibility then a
paternity test cannot legally be carried out unless consent is obtained from
someone who does have Parental Responsibility, usually the mother. Hence, a man
in the UK does not in general have the right to know if a child is biologically his. He
must wait until the child is old enough to give qualifying consent (and does
consent). Otherwise, a man who does not have Parental Responsibility can legally
discover if a child is his only with the mother's permission.
However, the salient feature of the 2004 Act is that the man does not require the
mother's permission to carry out a legal DNA paternity test, provided that either
the child is capable of consenting and consents, or, the child is not capable of
consenting and the putative father has Parental Responsibility and consents on the
child's behalf. A man qualifies as having Parental Responsibility if, (i) he is married
to the child's mother, or, (ii) his name appears on the baby's birth certificate.
But, even a man with Parental Responsibility is at risk of being accused of a
criminal offence if he carries out a DNA test without the child's consent, by
consenting on behalf of the child, and the child is old enough to raise a question that
the child might be deemed Gillick competent and has not explicitly consented.
Note that a mother equally cannot determine whether a given man is the father of
her child without his consent. To obtain his DNA by subterfuge for the purposes of
carrying out such a test would be against the consent requirements of the Act.
Prior to the 2004 Human Tissue Act, the custom and practice in paternity testing
was generally in accord with the Department of Health's 'Code of Practice and
Guidance on Genetic Paternity Testing in the UK (2001)'. One might have
expected that the revision of this Department of Health Guidance following the
2004 Act would bring it into line with the Act, and hence deal with questions
regarding the mother's consent consistent with the above discussion. The Guidance
was indeed revised in 2008, but the relevant extract from the Department of
Health's (Good Practice Guide on Paternity Testing Services, 2008) is,
'3.33 The best interests of the child should be a primary concern when
commissioning genetic paternity tests. This Guide reflects the view of the Human
Genetic Commission that, in the majority of circumstances, motherless testing
could prove harmful to the child, as well as to the family unit as a whole.
3.34 The British Medical Association advises doctors who are consulted by putative
fathers about paternity testing without the mother's knowledge and consent to
encourage those seeking testing to discuss their plans with the child's mother.
Should the putative father reject this advice, the British Medical Association tells
doctors not to become involved in the testing process.
3.35 We are aware too that, in cases where parentage is disputed, the Child
Support Agency may offer genetic testing of all three parties – the child, the
mother and the alleged father. It is unlikely that the Child Support Agency will
accept motherless testing as a method of resolving a paternity dispute for the
foreseeable future.
3.36 We are therefore of the view that motherless testing should not be
undertaken by paternity testing companies, unless such a test has been directed by
a court.'
Hence, despite the legality of a motherless test if qualifying consent prevails, the
Department of Health advises that this is not done. Not only do they recommend
that doctors do not facilitate motherless testing, but they express the view that
independent testing companies should not undertake such tests either – which,
frankly, is none of the DoH's business. The DoH's position is effectively that the
mother should always be given power of veto over a man discovering if he is the
father or not, despite this not being the lawful requirement.
The above extract from the DoH's guidance correctly indicates that the CSA
(Child Support Agency), or the Child Maintenance Service (CMS) as it now is, will
also not sanction testing without the mother, (Child Maintenance Service, 2018).
Thus, even a man with Parental Responsibility cannot, in practice, obtain a test
which will be recognised by legal or Governmental bodies. Proof via a DNA test
that a man is not the biological father can obviate child support payments after
parental separation, (Child Maintenance Service, 2018). But if the mother refuses
permission, no test that the CMS will recognise will be undertaken. If such a man
has PR, he might legally undertake an informal test and discover that he is not, in
fact, the father. But this will not be recognised by the CMS and will not affect
demands for child support payments. If the man does not have PR, but
clandestinely carries out a test anyway and discovers he is not the father, he will
risk a criminal charge by revealing his knowledge. In any case, the CMS will ignore
an informal test not authorised by themselves. And such a man's demands for a
formal test may simply be blocked by the mother. Equality? It would be a fine
thing.
In the seven years from 1998 to 2005, the CSA sanctioned an average of only 2,692
DNA tests per year, (Child Support Agency, 2005), and in 2007/8 some 3,474 tests,
(Wintour, 2008). These numbers compare with around 50,000 to 60,000 Children
Act cases going through the UK family courts annually over this period (Figure
10.1), or around 100,000 family breakdowns involving dependent children annually
(section 11.6). Hence CMS-sanctioned DNA testing occurs in only about 3% of
family breakdowns in the UK. These tests reveal on average around a 16%
mispaternity rate. Data are not currently available on how many men request DNA
tests but are turned down by the CMS, either because the mother refuses consent
or for other reasons. It is therefore unknown how many men are obliged to pay
child maintenance for a child who is not biologically theirs, due to the mother
withholding consent for testing. Whilst it is likely that most men with established
social fatherhood will be willing to pay child maintenance irrespective of biological
paternity, this does not negate concern over the lack of a right in principle to
establish biological paternity. The following section addresses the ethics of this
position, and how it exposes the empathy gap in operation once again.
15.2.4 A "Thin View" of Fatherhood?
In this section I consider the ethical issues around DNA paternity testing. An
enormous amount has been written on the subject, but, oddly, given that ethicists
have done much of the writing, a valid ethical analysis is notable by its absence.
Instead we have seen expositions which list the problems and provide opinions,
often skewed by ideology or by a desire to assert, or refute, "fathers' rights". I
take the view here that these apparent difficulties arise from a prejudice and a
preconception. The former refers to the mother's traditional power to choose
social paternity between credible alternatives. But the traditional circumstance in
which only the mother could know the father has no bearing upon the ethical
question regarding the deployment of DNA testing now that it has become
available. To confuse the two is to cling to a past which no longer applies.
Elementary ethical analysis delivers a devastating critique of this refusal to yield
traditional power.
The preconception which confuses the issue is the common assumption that DNA
testing applies only upon partnership dissolution. That this is the situation in which
the ethical question has most often arisen does not mean that it is valid to restrict
attention to this situation in an ethical analysis. In fact, I shall argue that there is a
simple means of slicing the Gordian knot apparently posed by the conundrums
which arise in this situation. But first let us review a few of the opinions which have
been voiced on the matter.
In 2010 Melanie McDonagh wrote in the Spectator, bemoaning the advent of the
DNA test,
'At a stroke, the one thing that women had going for them has been taken away,
the one respect in which they had the last laugh over their husbands and
lovers……DNA tests are…a change in the balance of power between the sexes….
Many men have, of course, ended up raising children who were not genetically
their own, but really, does it matter? You can feel quite as much tenderness for a
child you mistakenly think to be yours as for one who is.' (McDonagh, 2010)
An hypothesis from evolutionary theory is that women have exploited sexual
crypsis (that oestrus is not apparent) to defeat mate-guarding in favour of superior
genetic material for their offspring, whilst retaining the usual mate as the better
resource provider. Perfectly in tune with that idea, McDonagh wrote,
'Uncertainty allows mothers to select for their children the father who would be
best for them.'
She refers, of course, to selection of a social father independent of the man
involved in conception. In 2011 Marylin Stowe, at the time one of Britain's best
known family lawyers, wrote,
'For all those tens of thousands of fathers who we are led to believe may be
fretting about the paternity of their children, consider this: does it really matter
whether a child is the biological offspring of his or her father? Does it really matter
if a loving father and his child never find out? What harm is being done to the man,
child or woman concerned – that is until they find out and the predictable fallout
occurs?' (Stowe, 2011)
The following is the opinion of Dr Anna Smajdor, a medical ethicist specialising in
ethical issues related to reproduction,
'I think it (DNA testing) is representative of a kind of overvaluing that we tend to
do as a society in placing all this emphasis on the genetic relationships above others
and I think that the reason we are able to think of this as fraud is only because we
place so much value on that…..The issue should not be whose genes are in this
child.' (Smajdor, 2016)
In 2007, medical ethicist Heather Draper published a paper in the Journal of
Medical Ethics where she opined,
'Although children may result from infidelity, and paternity testing may be proof of
infidelity, these issues (and the feelings they engage) need to be disentangled both
from the interests of the children, and from our understanding of what fatherhood
means. Paternity testing might be an effective test of genetic relatedness and
infidelity, but it is an ineffective test of fatherhood.'
'Claims for reimbursement and compensation in cases of misattributed paternity
produce the same distorted and thin view of what it means to be a father that
paternity testing assumes, and underscores a trend that is not in the interests of
children.' (Draper, 2007).
Leslie Cannold is an American-Australian philosopher and ethicist. In 2007, in an
article on The Ethics Centre web site, she wrote,
'At the heart of cuckold paternity fraud discourse is the claim that real fatherhood
is biological fatherhood…..The claim that only biological paternity is real paternity
is asserted rather than argued in father's (sic) rights discourse.' (Cannold, 2008)
Actually, no claims about what constitutes "real fatherhood" are required to
discuss the ethical issues arising from DNA testing. Even whether there is such a
thing as "real fatherhood" is irrelevant to the ethical analysis. The common theme
in the above quotes is clear: these ethicists, and other writers (all women), propose
the view that biological paternity does not matter, only social paternity matters –
including resource provision and the entirety of parental involvement with child
rearing. To think otherwise is, apparently, to have a 'distorted and thin view of
what it means to be a father'. But in so saying, are these women putting
themselves in the position of the man in question or simply expounding what suits
their own interests? I suggest they are failing to put themselves in the man's shoes,
and are failing to feel what he might feel. And what is this but a failure of
empathy?
At this point I introduce the first of two ethical analyses. I wish to address the
ethical nature of the following proposition,
Genetic paternity is relatively unimportant; the paternity on which attention
should be focussed is social paternity, and hence whether a given social father is, or
is not, the biological father is not of great importance.
I believe that is the position put forward in the above quotes.
Before proceeding with the ethical analysis I note that there is a tendency to pay
too little respect to the influence of evolution. The stable pair bond would not exist
if it did not provide evolutionary benefit to the male. Consequently, in an
evolutionary steady state, cuckoldry can exist only to a limited degree. If
cuckoldry became too common, the stable pair bond would cease to provide
evolutionary benefit to the male's gene line, and the pair bond would cease to be an
evolutionary steady state. In game theory terms, infidelity is reneging for
individual advantage, and reneging must be managed to a sufficiently low level if
the societal benefit of cooperation (in this case stable pair bonding) is to be
accrued. It is therefore counter-evolutionary to expect fathers en masse to be
unconcerned about whether the children they contribute to raising are genetically
theirs. Unfortunately, evolution works on rather long timescales (though not
necessarily as long as you might think).
For the ethical analysis I shall deploy Kant's Categorical Imperative. Kant argued
that in order for a dictum to be a valid moral principle it must be adopted as
universally applicable. If the proposition to be tested were a morally valid position,
therefore, it must be universal. Amongst other things, this must mean valid for both
sexes: what's good for the goose is good for the gander. The ethical nature of the
proposition therefore requires that the following statement is also accepted,
Genetic maternity is relatively unimportant; the maternity on which attention
should be focussed is social maternity, and hence whether a given social mother is,
or is not, the biological mother is not of great importance.
In practice, due to the undeniable evidence of giving birth, there is no doubt who is
the biological mother (only since the advent of surrogacy has dispute become
possible). However, it is easy to create a Gedankenexperiment to test the
acceptability of this second proposition. Suppose it was discovered that maternity
wards throughout the country had been sending mothers home with the wrong
baby, say in 5% of cases, and that this had been going on essentially forever. Would
society react to this with an unconcerned shrug? I suggest the reaction would be
more like the detonation of a sociological thermonuclear device. Even if just two
women found they had been given the wrong baby it would make the news and
cause a stir. And if we really believed the above proposition in the context of
mothers, we could dispense with the wrist tags which babies wear in maternity
wards and send the mothers home with any child – they're all the same.
But no one – and especially not those women commentators and ethicists quoted
above – would endorse the proposition in the context of mothers. No one would
accuse a mother who prefers to raise her own child, not someone else's, of having a
"distorted and thin view of motherhood". Consequently, to contend that the
proposition applies for fathers fails the Categorical Imperative. The proposition is
unethical.
By way of an introduction to my second ethical analysis, I note that in the report
'The Health of the 51%: Women', the Chief Medical Officer for England, Sally
Davies, included a chapter 'A human rights approach to women's health', (Davies,
2015). This included a list of 12 reproductive rights which were claimed as human
rights. The context was women, but as men are humans too, the wording suggests
an acknowledgement that these reproductive rights should apply also to men. One
of those 12 rights was 'the right to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress'. The
DNA test, which provides a virtually certain test of paternity, is an example of
scientific progress in the area of reproduction. According the Chief Medical
Officer, men have a right to enjoy the benefits of DNA testing. Currently this is
being denied.
A further overture to my second ethical analysis relates to accidental discovery of
mispaternity as a result of medical procedures, such as transplant operations.
There is quite a sizeable literature in the transplant community about the ethical
dilemma practitioners face when paternity mismatch is accidentally brought to
their attention. One example is, 'The dilemma of unintentional discovery of
misattributed paternity in living kidney donors and recipients', (Schroder, 2009).
The Abstract reads,
'Previous study of professional attitudes in genetic counseling indicated a wide
acceptance of nondisclosure of misattributed paternity. In 1994, the Committee on
Assessing Genetic Risks of the Institute of Medicine recommended that only the
mother be informed of the misattributed paternity information. Results from past
surveys of geneticists and genetic counselors support this position. In an
international survey of over 1000 medical genetic professionals (MDs and PhDs)
conducted in 1985–1986, 96% of respondents indicated the belief that 'the
protection of the mother's confidentiality overrides disclosure of true paternity.'
Eighty-one percent of the 682 survey participants said that they would only
disclose the information to the mother, 13% would lie about the findings, and 2%
would tell the couple that a gene mutation was responsible for the disorder. Results
from a 1989 survey of nondoctoral genetic counselors reflected a perspective
similar to that of the medical geneticists.
Although these previous surveys demonstrated overwhelming support for
nondisclosure, a more recent survey suggests a shift in attitudes. A 2006 survey of
273 genetic counselors from the United States and Canada indicated little
consensus about how the misattributed paternity information should be treated.
Furthermore, 97.2% indicated that their institution did not have a policy to govern
the disclosure of the misattributed paternity.'
Like professionals associated with family law and medical ethics, the more general
medical fraternity has also, in the past, had a consensus around maintaining the
status quo and "managing" information – which most often meant the mother may
be informed, but not the father. Not everyone has been happy with this consensus,
however. The Abstract from an article by Lainie Friedman Ross (1996) writing in
"Bioethics" was,
'In 1994, the Committee on Assessing Genetic Risks of the Institute of Medicine
published their recommendations regarding the ethical issues raised by advances in
genetics. One of the Committee's recommendation was to inform women when test
results revealed misattributed paternity, but not to disclose this information to the
women's partners. The Committee's reason for withholding such information was
that "genetic testing should not be used in ways that disrupt families". In this
paper, I argue that the Committee's conclusion in favour of nondisclosure to the
male partner is unethical. I argue that both parties ought to be informed.'
For my second ethical analysis I shall deploy utilitarian moral philosophy. This
takes a practical stance in which the most preferred moral action is that which
produces the greatest benefit (or avoids the greatest suffering) when integrated
over all affected people: the maximising of utility. The proposition whose ethical
status, as judged by this utilitarian approach, I wish to address is this,
Legal paternity shall require the carrying out of a DNA test on the baby, or child,
in question and the result made known to the putative father (and mother) prior to
legal paternity (Parental Responsibility) being permissible, and hence prior to
inclusion of the man's name on the birth certificate.
This is the sword-stroke which, I claim, severs the Gordian knot posed by the
conflicts of interest which arise without it. There are many issues which would
need to be set out clearly in legislation regarding the rights and obligations of
married men versus biological fathers in order to forge a complete workable
arrangement. However, the details of these arrangements will not undermine the
key advantage of the above proposal, which is that a later revelation of biological
paternity can no longer arise to cause conflict with the status of the man in terms
of social or legal fatherhood. It can no longer arise because full disclosure applies
from the start. By making the DNA test a legal obligation prior to the awarding of
legal paternity, the issue is seen to involve the putative father and the child only.
Some of the problems associated with the existing arrangements are,
Under the current arrangements, whether the percentage is 1% or 5% or 25%, the
child and the father are both misled regarding the truth about paternity in a
proportion of cases. This applies to the whole population, so even 1% is over half a
million people in the UK, and in reality probably several million people have been
thus misled;
The status quo effectively maintains a sex-based power imbalance which is
intrinsically inequitable. Narratives around minimising the significance of genetic
paternity have been shown to be unethical;
Under current arrangements, men have no right to know if a child is biologically
theirs, and obtaining this information, even where legal, is being frustrated by
State actors to bolster the status quo;
Men are prevented from benefiting from DNA technology because a request for a
DNA test on an individual basis is such a vote of no confidence in the partner that it
is unlikely the relationship would survive. A legislative obligation applicable to all
would avoid this problem and is probably the only way of doing so;
Late revelations of mispaternity risk family dissolution, a situation which could be
avoided if the truth were revealed from the start;
Some of the disputes following partnership dissolution would be obviated if
biological paternity had been established before paternity obligations were
accepted (e.g., around 360,000 cases annually in the USA);
The concern that biological paternity may be raised by men on partnership
dissolution in order to gain advantage is obviated;
There is a peculiar double standard: children born of sperm donor sperm have a
legal right to know the identity of their biological father once they turn 18, but
children born from conventional sexual intercourse have no such right;
Sometimes mispaternity is revealed as a by-product of medical treatments, which
currently presents practitioners with a dilemma: to disclose or not to disclose?
Maintenance of patient confidentiality and trust comes into conflict with the duty
to tell the truth and the rights of the child to know their own genetic heritage;
Children may be severely medically disadvantaged their whole lives by being
unaware of their true father's medical history. Whilst the proposed process will not
always reveal the true father, it will reveal if the social father is not the true
father.
In short, the entirety of the controversies around paternity testing could be
avoided if the proposition to require testing prior to assigning Parental
Responsibility were adopted. This could be achieved by adopting radically new
legislative arrangements around paternity rights and obligations, bringing them
into line with the reality of available technology. Once embedded, it is hard to see
where any counterbalancing disbenefit might lie. There would be resistance to
change. Women would no doubt object that "compulsory" testing was presenting
them as liars. But, in reality, the testing is little to do with the mothers: it is about
the putative father and the child. Such attitudes are a hang-over from the days
when the mother established paternity, but this is precisely what would change.
The legislative requirement that testing must apply to all, and not be waived,
prevents a mother being singled out as under suspicion. To be clear, even if a man
turns out not to be the biological father, he may still claim legal paternity if the
mother agrees and no other paternity candidate is forthcoming within some agreed
period.
The utilitarian criterion for moral action requires that utility is increased, and the
best moral action maximises utility. In obviating the whole tranche of current
controversies, the adoption of a legislative requirement for paternity testing prior
to the awarding of paternal rights and responsibilities is strongly motivated by
utilitarian moral considerations.
15.3 The Empathy Gap Against Paternity and Male Fertility
Men have little control over their own fertility, a situation which is accepted by
men with bovine forbearance. A woman's right to choose after conception means
that men have an opportunity to choose only prior to conception. But in the
absence of a convenient, persistent and reversible male contraceptive, men have
little control over conception in practice. The frequency with which women might
secretly plan to conceive expressly against their partners' wishes is unknown. But
those ambivalent cases of not-quite-so-accidental accidental pregnancies are
common, as evidenced by the fact that most unplanned pregnancies occur, not due
to contraception failure, but following deliberately ceasing contraception. There
would be major advantages to both sexes in having a persistent, reversible male
contraceptive available. The barriers to this happening are not primarily
technological.
A dominant narrative attempts to minimise the significance of biological paternity,
a position that would be acceptable to no one if applied to mothers. The empathy
gap facilitates a glaring inequality which I have shown to be unethical, despite
claims to the contrary. Historically men have been disadvantaged compared to
women in respect of their lack of certainty that a given child is indeed theirs. This
situation persists despite cheap, convenient and highly reliable DNA testing
technology having been readily available for over twenty years. Widespread
application of the technology is frustrated partly by legislation and partly by
medical, legal and government agencies protecting existing custom and practice,
and rationalising these policies with terms like "protecting family stability" and
"the interests of the child". But the right to benefit from advances in reproductive
technology has been argued, by the Chief Medical Officer of England, to be a
human right. And I have argued that retaining the ancient status quo in respect of
the traditional uncertainty in paternity is unethical.
Whether reports of steeply declining sperm counts in Western countries are
correct is unclear, though scientifically credible. If they are correct, however,
nominal male infertility could be the norm in a few decades. Whilst alarmism is to
be avoided, and the situation is less certain than the popular press may sometimes
suggest, nevertheless there is a remarkable mismatch between the apocalyptic
nature of this projected possibility and the complete lack of concern at the level of
the political-medical establishment. The empathy gap for men may be facilitating
ignoring a threat to society as a whole.
16. Homelessness and Loneliness
On being persuaded to give up sleeping with his mother at age 3, his sisters claimed
firstly, "You're a big grown man. You'll be sleeping with Harold and Jack". When
that did not work they said instead, "It'll only be for a bit. You can come back to
Mum later on." I was never recalled to my Mother's bed again. It was my first
betrayal, my first dose of ageing hardness, my first lesson in the gentle, merciless
rejection of women".
Laurie Lee (1914 - 1997), Cider With Rosie
Men released from jails in the southwest and Wales have admitted that they would
reoffend to get a roof over their head and regular meals. The Catch 22 charity said
that prisoners being released without accommodation was a significant problem,
with their data showing that 35 per cent of inmates leave with no fixed address.
Richard Ford, in The Times 13/2/19
The term "homeless" is ambiguous. In particular, the term is used in different ways
by local authorities and by the general public. The latter often conflate the
"homeless" with those sleeping rough. But local authorities recognise a much
broader class of homeless people who have not (as yet) ended up on the streets:
the statutory homeless. In reality, rough sleepers are the tip of this homeless
iceberg. The statistics within the UK of both the statutory homeless and rough
sleepers are reviewed here, identifying the differences by gender as appropriate.
This culminates with the most distressing category: the deaths of rough sleepers. A
brief review is then presented of the data on loneliness, an issue closely related to
living arrangements. The chapter closes, as usual, by summarising aspects of these
issues which illuminate the empathy gap.
16.1 Statutory Homelessness and "Single" Homelessness
The term "household" is used in discussions about statutory homelessness. A
household may comprise a single adult. Not everyone who is without a home is
classified as statutorily homeless. If classed as statutorily homeless, the local
authority has a duty to house the household. But this is subject to an assessment of
priority.
A necessary (but not sufficient) criterion for a household to be considered
statutorily homeless is that they do not have a legal right to occupy accommodation
that is accessible, physically available and which would be reasonable for the
household to continue to live in, (Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local
Government, 2018a). Local authorities have a duty to secure accommodation for
unintentionally homeless households who fall into a 'priority need' category, and it
is this additional priority assessment which determines the statutory homeless.
Scotland has recently dropped the prioritisation process.
There is no duty to secure accommodation for all homeless people. For example,
there is no statutory duty to secure housing for homeless single people or for
couples without children who are not deemed to be vulnerable for some reason.
The latter are often loosely termed the "single homeless", though this may be a
misnomer in that the term really refers to any homeless people who are not
deemed statutorily homeless, (UK Parliament, 2018d).
In most cases, households deemed statutorily homeless will currently be in some
form of temporary accommodation or shelter, or be lodging informally with friends
or relations. One of the key determinants of their statutory homelessness is that
their current arrangements are "on sufferance": they have no legal right to
remain, and in most cases will be under some pressure to leave. However, they are
generally not currently living on the streets.
A brief definition of the 'priority need groups' is given by (UK Government,
2018k), namely,
households with dependent children;
pregnant women;
those aged 16 or 17;
those aged 18 to 20 who were previously in care;
people who are vulnerable in some way, e.g., because of mental illness or physical
disability;
those who are vulnerable as a result of time spent in care, in custody, or in HM
Forces;
those who are vulnerable as a result of having to flee their home because of
violence or the threat of violence.
These are the criteria which will lead local authorities to assess the "household"
(or individual) as being in priority need, and hence being classed as the statutory
homeless for which the local authority has an obligation to provide housing. The
remainder are the "single homeless" for which there is no obligation on local
authorities to provide housing. The "single homeless" are the feedstock for the
community of rough sleepers.
There are huge quantities of data available on statutory homelessness in the UK,
but accurately understanding what the data mean can be challenging. One source
of confusion is that the four nations of the UK use different definitions and
processes. The (UK Statistics Authority, 2017) observes,
'Definitions of statutory homelessness across the UK countries differ, as a result of
different policies aimed at reducing homelessness and defining those eligible for
support. The main source for statutory homelessness statistics is administrative
data, and because of differences in the legislative processes and systems, these
statistics aren't directly comparable across the UK. There is limited explanation
within these statistics publications about how these statistics differ across the UK,
and they vary in their usefulness. Furthermore, while each of the statistics present
contextual information about the specific policies within each of the UK countries,
there is limited advice about the comparability of statutory homelessness across
the UK, and existing advice is perceived as confusing and incoherent.'
The second potential source of confusion for the neophyte is the terminology
associated with what might be dubbed a "triage system", as described by the
(Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, 2018a). The Housing
Act 1996, the Homelessness Act 2002, the Localism Act 2011 and the
Homelessness Reduction Act 2017 determine the legal duties on local authorities
towards homeless households and households threatened with homelessness.
Households which are statutorily homeless are owed legal duties that fall into three
main categories,
Prevention duty;
Relief duty;
Main Homelessness duty.
Prevention duties become relevant for qualifying households if they are within 56
days of being made homeless. If prevention measures fail, the household may fall
into the "Relief duty" category. Relief duties are owed to households that are
already homeless and require help to secure settled accommodation. The duty lasts
56 days. Main Homelessness duty describes the duty a local authority has towards
an applicant who is unintentionally homeless, eligible for assistance and has priority
need.
Hence, those owed a relief duty who are not successfully assisted within 56 days
will only be promoted to the Main Homelessness category if they meet the above
priority criteria. The rest may be on their own after expiry of the 56 days. Where
households are found to be intentionally homeless, or not in priority need, the
authority may provide advice and assistance, but the household must find
accommodation for themselves.
A third potential confusion is that the Homelessness Reduction Act 2017 made a
wider class of people eligible for housing, so that data thereafter is not comparable
with that before.
I now turn to the data. Only people who notify their local authority through the
appropriate channels will appear in the homeless data. The rest are the "invisible
homeless" who are not represented in the data. The picture is highly complex. In
reading the following account with a focus on gender, the principal feature is that,
whilst there are comparable numbers, or greater numbers, of male than female
applicants, men become the minority of those to whom a duty is recognised when
prioritisation is deployed and the minority of those successfully assisted. If the
reader finds the following nation-specific sections rather opaque, the big picture is
reprised in section 16.1.5.
16.1.1 Statutory Homelessness in England
In year 2017/18 in England, 215,530 households were successfully assisted under
prevention or relief duties: 93% prevented, and 7% relieved. The prevention cases
consisted of securing continued residence in their existing home in 55% of cases,
and arranging alternative accommodation in 45% of cases, (Ministry of Housing,
Communities and Local Government, 2018e). Nearly half of applicants assessed
under the "triage" system for prevention/relief have at least one support need.
Data for 2018 quarter 2 (Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local
Government, 2018f) indicates that, of all applicants for prevention/relief, 52% had
no support needs identified whilst the support needs of the rest were as follows
(the percentages being of those who had any support needs),
Mental health issues, 22%;
Physical ill-health or disability, 14%;
Experience of, or risk of, domestic or sexual abuse, 12%;
Support needs by virtue of youth, 7%;
Offending history, 7%;
History of repeat homelessness, 6%;
Drug dependency needs, 5%;
History of rough sleeping, 5%;
Alcohol dependency needs, 4%;
Learning disability, 4%;
Access to education, employment or training, 4%
Experience of, or risk of, abuse (non-domestic), 3%;
Care-leaver, 2%;
Old age, 1.1%;
Former asylum seeker, 0.9%;
Served in HM forces, 0.7%;
Unfortunately, no gender break-down of the English data at the prevent/relief
stage is currently published.
As explained above, the Main Homeless Duty category, applicable only to those
with priority, comes into play only after the "triage" represented by the initial
prevent/relief process. In 2017/18 in England there were 109,470 decisions made
regarding applications under the Main Homelessness category, of which 56,600
(52%) were accepted. These are the cases designated as unintentionally homeless
and in priority need. Local authorities assessed that they did not have a duty to
house the remaining 48%, which consisted of 8,700 (8%) intentionally homeless but
in priority need, 18,450 (17%) homeless but not in priority need, and 25,720 (23%)
not homeless, (Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, 2018d).
The 56,600 households who successfully achieved the Main Homelessness Duty are
broken down by sex in Table 16.1. Easily the most common demographic achieving
this priority status are single mothers with dependent children. Of lone parents,
mothers account for 92% of those achieving Main Homelessness Duty, which is
consistent with the proportion of lone parents who are mothers in the general
population (see chapters 11 and 12). Lone mother families account for nearly half
of households achieving Main Homelessness Duty.
Table 16.1: The Breakdown of Households Achieving Main Homelessness Duty in
2017/18 by Demographic (percentages of 56,600), England
Couple with dependent
children
Lone parent household
with dependent children
One person household
All other household
groups
Male applicant Female applicant Male applicant Female applicant
20% 4% 47% 14% 10% 5%
Table 16.2 confirms that dependent children, or the expectancy of children, are
overwhelmingly the reason for being assessed with a Main Homelessness Duty,
almost all the remainder being due to mental illness or physical disability. Only 2%
results from domestic violence, though a larger percentage (7.7%) at the
prevent/relief stage were attributed to allegations of partner violence, (Prevention
and Relief Tables, 2018e). Recall that Tables 16.1 and 16.2 do not include those
people filtered out by the prevent/relief stages, nor do they include nearly half of
applicants for Main Homelessness Duty who are filtered out by the prioritisation
process.
In 2017, 38% of successful applicants for Main Homelessness Duty did not identify
as white, (Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, 2018d).
Table 16.2: The Breakdown of Households Achieving Main Homelessness Duty in
2017/18 by Reason (percentages of 56,600), England
Household with
dependent
children
Household
member
pregnant
Household
member
vulnerable
through:
Homeless in
emergency
Old age Physical disability Mental illness Young person
Domestic
violence
Other
66% 7% 1% 8% 10% 2% 2% 3% 1%
16.1.2 Statutory Homelessness in Scotland
Homelessness data for Scotland in 2017/18 has been taken from the charts and
data tables obtainable from the (Scottish Government, 2018). The total number of
applicants under Scotland's homelessness provisions in 2017/18 was 34,972, with
82% (28,792) being assessed as homeless or at risk of being homeless. The number
of male applicants exceeded the number of female applicants by 21% (19,112 male
versus 15,860 female).
The living arrangements of applicants at the time of application in 2017/18 were,
Living with relatives, friends or partners, 42%
Owning or renting, 37%
Rough sleeping, 4% (but 8% of applicants had slept rough at some time in the
previous 3 months)
Institutional accommodation, 9%
Temporary accommodation, 3%
Not specified, 5%
The proportion of applicants who identified "fleeing domestic violence" as the
reason for their homelessness was just under 3%.
Table 16.3 breaks down the applicants by demographic. By far the largest
demographic were single males without children. Table 16.3 contrasts sharply with
Table 16.1 for England. This is because Table 16.3 is the totality of applicants (not
all successful) in Scotland, whereas Table 16.1 for England addresses only those
people achieving the Main Homeless Duty. Recall that the bulk of English
applicants are removed by the prevent/relief scheme and nearly half of those that
are not removed in these stages are removed by the prioritisation process and
hence do not feature in the Main Homeless register.
Table 16.3: The Breakdown of Applicants under Scotland's Homelessness
Provisions in 2017/18 by Demographic (percentages of 34,972)
Couple with dependent
children
Lone parent household
with dependent children
One person household
Couple without
dependent children
Male applicant Female applicant Male applicant Female applicant
5% 4% 17% 46% 21% 3%
16.1.3 Statutory Homelessness in Wales
Local Authorities in Wales have duties under Part 6 (Allocations) of the Housing
Act 1996 and Part 2 (Homelessness) of the Housing (Wales) Act 2014. For year
2017/18, Stats Wales (2018) provides data on Welsh households for which housing
assistance has been considered, broken down by gender. The data are summarized
in Table 16.4.
Table 16.4: Welsh Households for which Housing Assistance has been Considered
or Accepted, by Gender, 2017/18
Category of need and/or outcome male female
Total (Wales) 13,950 14,847
…of which the totalsuccessfully
housed
5,232 7,188
Ineligible households 234 153
Eligible, but not homeless or
threatened with homelessness
2,022 2,085
Eligible, threatened with
homelessness, prevention assistance
provided
3,282 5,790
…of which those which were
successful
2,127 3,894
Eligible, homeless, subject to duty to
help to secure
6,315 4,959
…of which those which were
successful
2,541 2,112
Eligible, homeless but not in priority
need
1,206 360
Eligible, unintentionally homeless and
in priority need
819 1,407
…of which those positively
discharged
567 1,179
Salient features of Table 16.4 are,
Similar total numbers of men (13,950) and women (14,847) were assessed, but
substantially fewer men (5,232; 37.5%) than women (7,188; 48.4%) were housed,
despite substantially more men (6,315) than women (4,959) being deemed "eligible,
homeless, and subject to a duty to help to secure housing";
Substantially more men (1,206) than women (360) were deemed "not in priority
need" despite being eligible and homeless;
Even for people deemed "eligible, unintentionally homeless and in priority need"
,
men were less likely to be housed (69%) than women (84%).
16.1.4 Statutory Homelessness in Northern Ireland
Homeless data can be obtained from the links provided by the Northern Ireland
(Department for Communities, 2018). In 2017/18 some 18,180 households applied
for provision, of which 65% (11,877) were accepted as "full duty applicants", but
only 1,837 (10% of the initial applicants) had this duty successfully discharged.
Table 16.5 indicates the demographic breakdown of the initial 18,180 applicants.
Single males are the dominant category, exceeding "families" of all types (i.e., one
or more adults with children). In absolute numbers, 5,971 single males and 5,805
families applied. Since only 1,837 duties were discharged it seems likely that very
few of these would relate to single males.
Table 16.5: The Breakdown of Applicants under Northern Ireland's Homelessness
Provisions in 2017/18 by Demographic (percentages of 18,180)
Families Couples One person household Pensioners
Male applicant Female applicant
32% 5% 33% 17% 13%
16.1.5 Statutory Homelessness: The Big Picture on Gender
It is difficult to extract a clear picture on gender from the preceding data on
statutory homelessness, largely because the "longitudinal" picture is not generally
provided, i.e., three of the UK nations do not publish the gender breakdown at
application and also the gender breakdown either after prioritisation or at
discharge of duty. (The exception is Wales).
The Scottish and Northern Irish data show that single male applicants are strongly
dominant. In Wales, the total numbers of male and female applicants are
comparable. A gender breakdown of applicants is not published for England, but
the implication of the data from the other three nations is that single males are
likely to be dominant, and the total number of male applicants likely to be
comparable with, or exceed, the number of female applicants.
In contrast, after the "triage" stage of prevention/relief, and after prioritisation,
the number of women entering the Main Homeless Duty in England considerably
exceeds the number of men. The overwhelmingly dominant demographic in the
Main Homeless Duty in England are families headed by a single mother (47%).
71% of households accepted for Main Homeless Duty include children.
Only Welsh data provide the gender breakdown both at application and discharge.
These data confirm for Wales what has been implied above for England. Similar
total numbers of men and women were assessed, but substantially fewer men than
women were housed, despite substantially more men than women being deemed
'eligible, homeless, and subject to a duty to help to secure housing'. Even for
people deemed 'eligible, unintentionally homeless and in priority need', men were
less likely to be housed than women.
16.2 Rough Sleepers
16.2.1 Rough Sleeper Counts in England
Estimates of the number of people sleeping rough in England have been taken from
(Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, 2018b). For this
purpose "sleeping rough" is defined as sleeping in the open air (such as on the
streets, in the open fields, in tents, doorways, parks, bus shelters, subways, etc.).
Also counted are people sleeping in places not designed for habitation (such as
stairwells, barns, sheds, car parks, cars, derelict boats, bus or train stations, or
makeshift shelters, often composed of cardboard boxes).
It should be noted that this definition does not include people in hostels or shelters,
people in campsites or other sites used for recreational purposes or organised
protest, nor are squatters or travellers counted. Not counting people in hostels or
shelters for the homeless is a significant omission, since these people would be
sleeping rough if this provision were not available. Consequently, I shall make an
estimate of these additional people below.
I draw the readers' attention immediately to an ambiguity in what is meant by "the
number of rough sleepers". This might mean the number of people sleeping rough
on a given night, or it might mean the number of different people who have slept
rough on one or more nights within a given period (say, within a given year).
Popular news accounts rarely distinguish between these two things. It is easy to
conflate the two though there is a huge numerical difference between them.
National estimates of rough sleepers generally relate to single-night snapshots.
This is a wild under-estimate of the problem.
Only in London has any attempt been made to estimate how many different people
have slept rough at least once in the last year. I will present these data in the
following section and use them to make a crude estimate for the nation as a whole.
This is not usually done but is crucial in order to obtain a faithful picture of the true
extent of rough sleeping.
The English data is based on a single night count, or an estimate for the number on
a single night, in October or November. These 'single night' counts involve teams
walking through areas and visibly spotting rough sleepers. It is important to
appreciate the limitations of the counts. One limitation is that many rough sleepers
deliberately hide themselves from sight, for fear of being attacked or robbed.
Another limitation is that the entire local authority area clearly cannot be
searched, so some sort of estimation is inevitable. Counts in rural areas will be
particularly challenging. (Do you fancy trying to check every barn in
Gloucestershire?). The counts will inevitably be lower bounds.
In 2017, of the 326 local authorities in England, only 54 (17%) conducted a count.
The majority (272 authorities, or 83%) provided an estimate without a count.
Moreover, 176 local authorities (54%) have not conducted a count in any of the last
8 years (2010 to 2017). This can only reflect badly on the accuracy of the data (not
to mention reflecting badly on the local authorities themselves). Key results were,
Local authorities' counts and estimates show that 4,751 people slept rough in
England on a snapshot night in autumn 2017. This has increased rapidly from 1,768
in 2010 (see Figure 16.1);
The rate of rough sleeping per 1,000 households is 0.31 for London and 0.18 for the
rest of England;
Nearly one-quarter (24%) of rough sleepers in England are in London;
14% of rough sleepers in England are women, 84% men (2% sex not recorded).
68% of rough sleepers identified in London had a support needs assessment
recorded. Of these, 44% had alcohol support needs, 47% mental health support
needs, and 35% drug support needs, with 14% having all three needs. Only 32% of
rough sleepers had none of these three needs.
In terms of gender ratio and age, there is little difference between London and the
rest of England. However, there is a large difference in nationality. In London just
under half of rough sleepers are not UK nationals. In the rest of England between
13% and 19% of rough sleepers are not UK nationals.
Figure 16.1: Rough Sleepers in England Versus Year
As explained above, the estimate of 4,751 refers to people sleeping rough on one
specific night. A meaningful estimate of the number of different people commonly
sleeping rough in the days or weeks before, or after, the night in question should be
increased by the number who were in night shelters at the time. The number of
night shelter places available increases in the winter months due to the Severe
Weather Emergency Protocol (SWEP) which provides extra bed places triggered by
forecasts of freezing, near freezing or otherwise severe weather conditions. The
number of people reported as using SWEP and extended winter provision in the
winter of 2017/18 was 6,502 across 145 service providers who responded to the
survey, (Homeless Link, 2018). What is unclear is the extent of double-accounting
between the local authority single night snap-shot figure of 4,751, and the number
recorded in night shelters, 6,502 on the severest night, when fewer might remain on
the streets. It is clear that many do remain on the streets, even in the severest of
weather, so the number of rough sleepers on a single night including those in night
shelters could be up to around 11,000.
16.2.2 CHAIN Data for London
There is an enormous difference between the number of people sleeping rough on
any one night and the number who have slept rough at some time over a given year.
People may spend some nights on the street, but other nights they may get a space
indoors – for example sleeping on someone's floor or sofa. Their period of sleeping
rough may be short. The Mayor of London's Combined Homelessness And
Information Network (CHAIN, 2018) is the only source in the UK which attempts
to identify everyone who sleeps rough at any time, but it is confined to Greater
London.
Figure 16.2 shows the variation in the number of rough sleepers identified in the
last ten years. In 2017/18 there were 7484 rough sleepers identified, down from a
peak of 8108 in 2016/17. These figures serve to illustrate the huge difference
between rough sleepers identified at any time during a given year, which is 7484 in
London alone, compared with the number sleeping rough on a given night, which is
far smaller even for the whole of England (4751).
Figure 16.3 illustrates why the CHAIN figures are so much larger than the single
night snap-shot data. The pie chart shows the proportions of individuals seen rough
sleeping on just one occasion, or twice, or three to five times, etc. 59% of the 7484
rough sleepers seen over the year were seen only once, and 87% were seen not
more than 5 times. Collecting data on a given night would be unlikely to capture
these people. However, caution is required: being seen only once does not mean
the person in question slept rough only once. 4456 of the 7484 rough sleepers seen
at some time during 2017/18 had not been seen in previous years, whereas the
remainder (3,028) had been seen in previous years. Rough sleepers are not just a
single homogeneous demographic: some are short-termers, some long term.
The CHAIN figures of 7484 (2017/18) and 8108 (2016/17) compare with the local
authority single night snapshot estimates for London of 1137 and 964 respectively.
Thus, the number of people experiencing rough sleeping at some time in a given
year is roughly 7 or 8 times greater than single night snapshot numbers (at least in
London). If this ratio is applicable to England as a whole, the local authority single
night snapshot of 4751 suggests that perhaps around 36,000 people in England have
experienced rough sleeping at least once in 2017/18.
For comparison, Homeless Link (2018) estimate the number of people who are
"single homeless" is on average, 77,000 on any one night. The low estimate is
52,000 and the high estimate is 111,000. This will include rough sleepers, but not all
"single homeless" are rough sleepers (see section 16.1).
The CHAIN report indicates that, of all identified rough sleepers in London who
provided information, 36% had been in prison, 11% had been in care, and 7% had
been in the armed services. However, 'new' rough sleepers, i.e., those seen for the
first time in 2017/18, are a distinct demographic. Of those who provided
information, only 4% reported that prison had been their last long-term
accommodation. 38% had been in private rented accommodation, and a total of
54% in some form of long term, non-institutional accommodation. 12% had been in
short-term accommodation (including hostels and asylum-seekers accommodation),
and 8% were newly arrived in the UK.
Figure 16.2: Number of Rough Sleepers Seen in London at Least Once During
2017/18 (CHAIN data)
Figure 16.3: Number of Rough Sleepers Seen in London by the Number of Times
Seen During 2017/18 (CHAIN data)
16.2.3 Rough Sleeper Counts in Wales
The Welsh Government reported a count of rough sleepers in Wales in 2017,
(Welsh Government, 2018a). The count was conducted in two periods: a two-week
period from the 16th to the 29th of October 2017, and a single night on 9th/10th
November 2017. Each of the 22 unitary authorities submitted an estimate,
(StatsWales, 2017). Six of these local authorities submitted zero rough sleepers.
Eight reported having no emergency bed places for rough sleepers.
The 'single night' count involved teams walking through areas and visibly spotting
rough sleepers. The counts are subject to the same limitations as the English
counts. The two-week count included such visual identifications but also involved
engaging with local agencies and services, including the voluntary sector, faith
groups, the police, local residents, outreach workers, health agencies and drug and
alcohol misuse and treatment teams. The counts will inevitably be lower bounds.
The number of rough sleepers identified in the single night counts was 188. Just
over half of these are accounted for by Cardiff and Wrexham. The number of
rough sleepers identified in the two-week survey, 345, was substantially greater.
The difference between the two figures suggests that the number of people who
have slept rough at some time over the last year will be far larger, but this figure is
unknown.
On the survey night in November, there were 191 people sleeping in emergency
accommodation. These people are not included in the above counts, although the
people in question would most likely have been sleeping rough had they not found
space in a shelter. Including these people, the two-week survey figure increases to
536.
Assuming 1.35 million households in Wales, (Welsh Government, 2018b), the counts
of 188, 345 or 536 correspond to a rough sleeper rate of 0.14, 0.26 or 0.40 per 1000
households. The first, and lowest, of these figures, i.e., that for the single night
count, may be compared with 0.31 for London and 0.18 for the rest of England
obtained on the same basis.
The rough sleeper count in Wales has not been conducted to current standards for
sufficiently many years to permit the long-term trend to be discerned. However,
the same methodology was used in 2016. The 2017 count was 10% greater over the
two-week period and 33% greater on the single November night. This is consistent
with the trend in England for increasing numbers of rough sleepers (Figure 16.1).
The published Welsh data does not disaggregate by sex, although the proforma
which is used to capture the data does request that sex is recorded.
16.3 Deaths of Rough Sleepers
There is no legislative requirement on the national government, nor on local
authorities, to count or record numbers of rough sleeper deaths. Nevertheless, in
recent years data has started to become available.
16.3.1 Bethany Thomas 2012 Data
In 2012, Bethany Thomas of the University of Sheffield produced a report on
deaths amongst rough sleepers 'Homelessness kills: An analysis of the mortality of
homeless people in early twenty-first century England', (Thomas, 2012). The
analysis was based on death records, searching the records for cases where the
address of the deceased was a homeless shelter, advice or day centre. The search
would not identify homeless people for which the registered address had been
recorded as a relative's address or hospital, or, in some cases, no address. The
figures will therefore be under-estimates. The headline conclusions were,
From the records of deaths in England between 2001-2009, 1,731 were identified
as having been homeless people. Of these, 90% were male and 10% female;
Nearly one-third of the identified homeless deaths were in London;
The average age at death of the above was 47 for men and 43 for women.
Thomas's figure is equivalent to 192 rough sleeper deaths per year in England.
ONS data (below) indicates that the true number is more than twice this estimate.
16.3.2 ONS Data
The ONS have been estimating rough sleeper deaths only since 2013. The
methodology deployed by ONS is similar to that of Thomas, but more inclusive. It
starts with death registration records and searches on terms like "no fixed abode"
,
"homeless" and "night shelter" or the name or address of a known homeless hostel
or project. Coroners' inquest reports are also used as a source. The ONS searches
include homeless people who had been found in need of medical attention in the
street and subsequently died in hospital, or other places of medical assistance. The
ONS also deploy sophisticated statistical tools to include allowance for more
deaths not captured by the direct searches. They state that, 'this is a robust but
conservative (lower bound) model, so that the figures produced should be taken as
the lowest probable estimates'.
Key findings from the December 2018 ONS report 'Deaths of Homeless People in
England and Wales: 2013-2017' (Office for National Statistics, 2018ah) were,
There were an estimated 597 deaths of homeless people in England & Wales in
2017 (an increase of 24% since 2013 when 482 rough sleeper deaths were
identified);
Men accounted for 84% of these deaths. Hence the gender ratio of rough sleeper
deaths is essentially the same as the gender ratio of rough sleepers, to within one
or two percentage points;
The top three causes of deaths of the homeless in 2017 were drug poisoning (32%),
suicide (13%) and alcohol-specific (10%);
Although there is a concentration of homeless in London, and hence a
concentration of homeless deaths in London, the rough sleeper death rate per
million people (15.4) is not the largest, being exceeded by the West of England
(21.0), Liverpool (20.5) and Greater Manchester (17.8);
The mean age of the deaths of rough sleeping men was 44, whilst for women it was
42. The most common age range for deaths of male rough sleepers was 45 to 49,
compared with 35 to 39 for women.
Rather remarkably, there is no seasonal trend in the rate of rough sleeper deaths,
despite the freezing weather in winter months. Figure 16.4 shows the number of
deaths per month, averaged over the five years 2013 to 2017.
Figure 16.4: Deaths per Month: ONS data (England & Wales)
16.3.3 Data from the Bureau of Investigative Journalism
The Bureau of Investigative Journalism maintain a log of rough sleeper deaths in
the UK, obtaining their information essentially from "crowd sourcing". Recall that
despite many vulnerable people being known to the authorities, the authorities are
under no obligation to report or record their deaths, so local journalists and
charities are often the only ones to do so. To compile their list, the Bureau makes
use of their extensive network of local journalists to report to the Bureau's central
register cases which appear in local papers. In addition, the Bureau speaks to
councils, hospitals, coroners' offices, police forces, charities, GPs and NGOs. This
is a "bottom up" approach and will inevitably miss many of the deaths. What the
Bureau's list includes, which ONS data lack, are the names of the deceased (where
available), and, in some cases, a brief biography, (Bureau of Investigative
Journalism, 2018).
The Bureau's data is updated continually. The data given here was obtained on
27/12/18. The Bureau started collecting data in October 2017, so the data for
England, Scotland and Wales relate to 14 month period. However, the data for
September to December 2018 appears incomplete. The Northern Irish data relate
to October 2017 to August 2018 (11 months). Table 16.6 shows how the 546 deaths
identified by the Bureau breakdown by nation. Also shown are the death rates per
million of the population. I believe the data from Northern Ireland uses an
inconsistent definition of "homeless", the Bureau's database recording that the
definition used in this case was, 'officially recognised as homeless and died while
waiting to be housed by the Northern Irish Housing Executive', i.e., this probably
includes statutory homeless, not only rough sleepers. For this reason the Northern
Ireland data has been omitted from Table 16.6.
Table 16.6: Summary of Bureau of Investigative Journalism's Data by Nation
Nation Deaths Deaths per million population
England & Wales 294 5.1
Scotland 103 19.1
UK 546 8.4
Of the 546 deaths identified by the Bureau's list, two-thirds were either
"unnamed" or "anonymous" or had only a first name or nickname given. No doubt
many of these people did have known names which were simply not reported. But it
seems that a very large proportion died without their full identities being known.
The high incidence of ex-offenders, drug addicts and alcoholics amongst rough
sleepers creates a perception that all of them can be so described. Not only is that
not true, but it is easy to lose sight of the fact that even those who end up in such
straits were not necessarily always ne'er-do-wells or drop-outs. Whilst this book
generally eschews personal anecdotes, a few brief biographies of deceased rough
sleepers is appropriate to illustrate that the background of many of these
unfortunates was productive, even laudable, a fact that is rightly disconcerting.
These accounts are taken from the (Bureau of Investigative Journalism, 2018).
Istvan Kakas died in Bath, on October 16, 2018, aged 52. He had been a chef
working under both Gordon Ramsay and Michael Caines. Kakas had completed
more than 250 parachute jumps while on military service. He received a heroism
award from the mayor of Bath after he helped save a man and his daughter from
drowning. He began selling the Big Issue in 2010.
Craig Cunningham died sleeping rough in Chester, on October 25, 2018. He used to
manage a Kwiksave store before falling on hard times.
Rob O'Connor died in Chelmsford, on February 23, 2018. He died in a shop
doorway on a night when temperatures dropped to -2C. Rob had recently
undergone treatment for cancer and had his voice box removed.
Colin Ellis was found dead behind the steering wheel of his car, in which he lived, in
late autumn 2017. By the time he was discovered, he had been there for several
days. Charity workers recalled Mr Ellis regularly bought food and gave his own
cash to other people on the streets.
Darren Greenfield died in Edinburgh, in December, 2017, aged 48, after years of
sleeping rough. He had served with the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment, the Royal Army
Pay Corps and the Adjutant General's Corps. He became homeless after leaving
the army.
Anthony Barnard died in Lowestoft, on December 28, 2017, aged 57. Mr Barnard
was found dead in the garden of his former home.
Allan "Scotch" Alexander died while sleeping rough in a car park in Taunton, on
Boxing Day 2017. The day before his death Allan was seen giving away a
Christmas meal to a homeless woman by a member of the public.
Henryk Smolarz died in Plymouth city centre, on March 12, 2018, aged 62. He was
believed to have been Polish and friends say he was a physicist and mathematician.
Hamid Farahi died in Church Langley, in March, 2018, aged 55. Hamid, a physicist
who fought in Iraq, was living in the back of his car in a Tesco car park.
Stephen Kinghorn was born in South Shields, Country Durham. He attended a
sailing school in Hull for five years where he took part in the 93/94 tall ships race,
and was a qualified skipper of small vessels. His team helped to build a school in a
remote village in Zimbabwe. Things started going downhill when his first child was
stillborn and continued to slip further downwards. Stephen went to London and was
involved with Love Activists and a homeless kitchen trying to get food for fellow
homeless. Then his second child died, which was the catalyst to sending him rock
bottom. Stephen died in London on 19th March 2018. He was 39 years old.
Remigiusz Boczarski had been living in a bus shelter in Malvern when he died,
apparently from suicide, on October 30, 2018, aged 40. A local woman who
befriended him told press: "He would turn up at my door and I would wash his
clothes and give him a meal. He was always a really nice guy. He never overstayed
his welcome."
None of these men, living or dead, would get any sympathy from Professor Erin
Dej of Wilfrid Laurier University in Canada who would dismiss them all as
perpetuating hegemonic masculinity, performing hypermasculinity to fortify the
dominance of men and the subordination of women, and adopting a "compensatory
masculinity" to cope with their failed status, (Dej, 2018), (Airaksinen, 2018). No
empathy gap there, then.
16.4 Loneliness
Loneliness impacts directly on wellbeing, but also impacts via its relationship to
physical health (as we will see). There is no objective measure of loneliness.
Measures of loneliness are inevitably subjective, being based on the subjects' selfreports of their own inner state, for example the DeJong Gierveld Loneliness
Scale. Moreover, two people subject to identical conditions may have radically
different perceptions of loneliness. Being alone, even for long periods, does not
induce loneliness in everyone. The resilience to being alone without suffering the
negative emotion of loneliness is highly individual.
Government-sponsored surveys of loneliness have been carried out in both
England and Wales. These studies used very different survey questions and so are
not directly comparable. Nevertheless, it is of interest to compare their outcomes
to identify aspects of similarity and difference, which are more likely to be due to
the differing methodologies than any major underlying national differences. This is
done in the follow sub-sections.
16.4.1 Loneliness Survey in England
The English survey was published by ONS as 'Loneliness: What characteristics and
circumstances are associated with feeling lonely?', (Office for National Statistics,
2018ag). Respondents were asked the question 'how often do you feel lonely?',
with possible answers being often/always, some of the time, occasionally, hardly
ever or never. (We will see below that the contrast with the Welsh survey is that
respondents themselves were left to judge what psychological states or feelings
corresponded to "feeling lonely").
In 2016/17, 5% of adults (aged 16 years and over) in England reported feeling
lonely often/always, 16% of adults reported feeling lonely some of the time, and
24% occasionally. 55% of adults reported feeling lonely hardly ever or never. The
English survey indicates a slightly greater incidence of loneliness amongst women
than amongst men (Figure 16.5), though a more nuanced picture will emerge from
the Welsh data when different types of loneliness are distinguished. In passing I
note that Figure 16.5 does not fit well with a stereotypical view of women as more
gregarious and men as more likely to be 'loners'. However, the data may be
skewed by the excess of widows over widowers.
Far more marked, however, is the age dependence of loneliness (Figure 16.6). One
might reasonably have guessed that old people would suffer most from loneliness,
after being pre-deceased by their partners. But it is young people who are the most
likely to be lonely, especially those under 25, but also those under 35 to a lesser
extent. What is not clear is whether this is an effect of age, or is a change in
societal behaviour which has, as yet, only manifested in the young. There is some
evidence that it is the latter. Society may be becoming lonelier.
Figure 16.7 shows how loneliness depends upon marital status, divorce/separation
or being widowed. It would appear that being married protects against loneliness,
not surprisingly. One might reasonably postulate that the prevalence of loneliness
amongst the young is a result of the delay of, and decline of, marriage. If so, it is
not really due to age, but due to a change in society, and so is likely to persist as
today's young people grow older. Loneliness appears set to become more common.
Figure 16.5: Sex Dependence of Loneliness According the ONS-English Survey
Definition
Figure 16.6: Age Dependence of Loneliness (ONS-English survey)
However, the starkest correlation with loneliness was general health, see Figure
16.8. People who reported their general health to be bad or very bad were far more
likely to report feeling lonely, often or always, and substantially less likely to say
they hardly ever, or never, felt lonely. Conversely, people who said their general
health was good or very good were significantly less likely to report feeling lonely
often/always, or even some of the time, and significantly more likely to report
hardly ever, or never, feeling lonely. This confirms the correlation claimed above
between loneliness and general health.
Figure 16.7: Loneliness Dependence on Marital Status and Living Arrangements
(England)
Figure 16.8: Loneliness Relationship with General Health (England)
16.4.2 Loneliness Survey in Wales
Loneliness in Wales was measured for the first time in the 2016/17 National
Survey, using the De Jong Gierveld 6-point loneliness scale, (Welsh Government,
2018c). This was very different in methodology from the English survey.
Respondents were asked to state which, if any, of the following six statements
applied to them,
'I experience a general sense of emptiness'
'I miss having people around'
'I often feel rejected'
'There are few people I can rely on when I have problems'
'There are few people I can trust completely'
'There are not enough people I feel close to'
For each respondent this results in a score from 0 to 6 depending upon how many
statements apply. A score of 4 or more was defined as "lonely". 17% of
respondents were found to be lonely based on this definition.
The De Jong Gierveld questions permit two distinct types of loneliness to be
captured separately: emotional loneliness, defined by questions [1-3], and social
loneliness defined by questions [4-6]. This distinction turns out to be crucial in
extracting gender dependence of loneliness.
As with the English survey, loneliness was found to be significantly more common
amongst the young than the old. Double the proportion of people under 45 were
identified as lonely (20%) compared to people over 65 (11% or fewer).
Again as found in the English survey, there is a very clear relationship between
loneliness and general health (Figure 16.9). Physical ill health is strongly correlated
with being lonely, but this effect disappears in the oldest age group. For the
youngest age group (16-24), having a limiting long-term illness increases the
probability of loneliness from 15% to 46%. For the over 75s, the probability of
loneliness is 10% irrespective of health issues.
Figure 16.9: Loneliness in Wales (2016/17) Against General Health
A strong association was found between loneliness and mental well-being as
measured using the Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale (WEMWBS),
Figure 16.10. Mental well-being is measured based on four issues: being less
satisfied with life, thinking that things you do in life are less worthwhile, having
lower levels of happiness, and raised levels of anxiety. After controlling for other
factors identified as related to loneliness, the first three of these wellbeing
measures were all found to be related to loneliness.
Figure 16.10: Loneliness in Wales Versus Subjective Wellbeing
As regards the overall loneliness scale, in contrast to the English survey there was
no significant effect of household type. Nor was there a significant effect of gender
when the overall loneliness scale was used. However, a more interesting picture
emerges when considering emotional and social loneliness separately. For this
purpose, emotional loneliness was defined as scoring 2 or more out of questions [1-
3], above, whilst social loneliness was defined as scoring 2 or more from questions
[4-6].
What now emerges is that emotional loneliness is very strongly related to household
type and age (Figure 16.11), whilst social loneliness is related to gender, being worse
for men. Social loneliness is more prevalent (34%) than emotional loneliness (20%).
43% of single parents reported emotional loneliness compared with 16% of adults in
a two-adult household with children (reducing to 10% for married pensioners
without children), see Figure 16.11. However, some of the factors found not to be
associated with emotional loneliness, after controlling for other factors, were
gender, educational attainment, economic status or rural versus urban living.
However, a gender effect was found in respect of social loneliness. Recall that the
social loneliness subscale is based on the relevance of the statements: "there are
few people I can rely on when I have problems", "there are few people I can trust
completely", and, "there are not enough people I feel close to". When controlling
for other factors, social loneliness was found to be increased by being a man, by
being middle aged, by being single, separated, divorced or widowed, by being an
internet user, and (perhaps most unexpectedly) by having higher level qualifications.
Figure 16.11: People who are Emotionally Lonely, by Household Type
16.5 The Empathy Gap in Homelessness and Loneliness
There are three levels of homelessness: the statutory homeless, the "single
homeless" who have failed to attain a designation as statutorily homeless, and a
sub-set of the latter, the rough sleepers. The number of the statutory homeless
considerably exceeds the number of rough sleepers. Details are incomplete for all
UK nations but the number of men applying for housing assistance is at least
comparable with the number of women. The Scottish and Northern Irish data show
that single male applicants are strongly dominant at the point of application.
Despite the reverse gender ratio at application, those actually housed, or placed on
the priority register, tend to be skewed towards women. This is predominantly due
to prioritisation where children are involved, and the fact that 92% of single
parents are mothers. The overwhelmingly dominant demographic in the Main
Homeless Duty in England are families headed by a single mother (47%).
However, there may be a gender bias in addition to this effect. In Wales, similar
total numbers of men and women were assessed, but substantially fewer men than
women were housed, despite substantially more men than women being deemed
'eligible, homeless, and subject to a duty to help to secure housing'. Even for
people deemed 'eligible, unintentionally homeless and in priority need', men were
less likely to be housed than women.
The numerical dominance of men among rough sleepers may be one of the
outcomes of the above process. The result is that 84% to 86% of rough sleepers
are men. The same sex ratio applies to those who die as rough sleepers. This is the
ultimate "bottom line" of homelessness, and it is overwhelmingly male.
Perhaps against expectation, loneliness is more prevalent in young people rather
than older people. Emotional loneliness is strongly related to living arrangements,
being far more prevalent amongst single parents or adults living singly. The decline
of marriage (see chapter 13) therefore suggests that loneliness will increase. Social
loneliness, resulting from having an insufficient social network, is more prevalent in
men and in middle age. Social isolation is severely exacerbated in men after
partnership dissolution, and being ejected from an ex-partner's home is one of the
possible causes of homelessness.
Consequently, gender skews in homelessness and loneliness are related to gender
skews in parental roles and presumptions, and to parental separation. These
imbalances work through the system and are ultimately visible to us all on the
streets, including deaths, primarily of men.
17. Mental Ill-Health and Substance Abuse
Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today.
If you think tough men are dangerous, wait until you see what weak men are
capable of.
When you have something to say, silence is a lie.
Jordan Peterson, 12 Rules For Life (2018)
In this chapter I present a brief review of the prevalence of mental ill health,
concentrating on data from surveys in England. The review breaks down into five
parts, the first four being general mental disorders in adults, general mental
disorders in children, substance abuse, and then the most acute mental illnesses
which lead to being detained under the Mental Health Act (colloquially termed
being "sectioned"). There are particular difficulties with mental health data,
especially if differences due to age or sex are of interest, as they are here. Unlike
physical illness, mental illnesses are not generally diagnosed by objective
measurements. Whilst it is readily apparent to an observer that acute mental
illness is a serious morbidity, diagnosis may be uncertain even in these cases. In less
acute cases, diagnosis often relies on the sufferer's self-reported symptoms.
Consequently, differences in apparent prevalence of a given disorder between the
sexes, or between age groups, may reflect differences in subjective perception due
to sex or age, rather than a genuine difference (whatever "genuine" might mean in
this context). The reader should bear this in mind throughout this chapter.
A further source of uncertainty relates to the mental disorders themselves. There
is a degree of arbitrariness in partitioning symptoms into constellations which are
then taken to define a specific named disorder. The symptoms could be divided in
alternative ways, and the boundaries between disorders may be ill-defined. This
arbitrariness is considerably exacerbated by the use of differing diagnostic criteria
for the same (or similar sounding) conditions by different investigators or different
psychiatric bodies. This can lead to wide variations in reported prevalence,
resulting in different sources being incomparable. In addition, comparison of mental
disorders in children and adults may be frustrated by the use of different defined
disorders. For example, "personality disorders" are not normally considered an
appropriate category for children, whilst "behavioural disorders" are not usually
considered appropriate for adults.
The final section considers the male-specific diagnostic guidelines published by the
American Psychological Association (APA), and a document published by the
British Psychological Society (BPS) which also includes male-specific diagnostic
advice. I explain how these new initiatives are based on the currently dominant
narrative on gender and why they conflict with the most elementary aspects of the
empirical evidence. I examine how their perspective is an example of the empathy
gap.
17.1 Mental Ill Health in Adults
Unless otherwise stated all the data given in this section will be taken from the
report 'Mental Health and Wellbeing in England: Adult Psychiatric Morbidity
Survey 2014', (McManus et al, 2016), based on a survey carried out for NHS
Digital by NatCen Social Research and the Department of Health Sciences,
University of Leicester, by 49 authors. Previous surveys had been carried out in
1993, 2000 and 2007, and results from these are included where appropriate to
indicate trends. This reference should be consulted for the various screening
procedures and diagnostic criteria used for the different disorders.
The severity of disorders was recorded using the revised Clinical Interview
Schedule (CIS-R). A score of 12 indicates "symptoms warranting clinical
recognition", whereas a score of 18 or more is considered severe and requiring
intervention.
Before looking at individual disorders, the overall picture is one of generally
increasing prevalence of mental disorders in both sexes (with some exceptions),
with the prevalence in women generally exceeding that in men and also increasing
faster in women (again with notable and important exceptions). For many
conditions, there is a spike in prevalence for young women in the age range 16 to
24.
Virtually all mental disorders are strongly demographic dependent, being far more
common in people living alone, in people with poor physical health, and in people
who are unemployed or economically inactive. There is also a strong dependence
on IQ, with mental ill health being substantially more prevalent amongst those with
low IQ.
17.1.1 Common Mental Disorders
The following common disorders are collected together under the designation
CMD (Common Mental Disorders),
Generalised anxiety disorder (GAD)
Depression
Phobias
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
Panic disorder
CMD-NOS (not otherwise specified)
Figure 17.1 shows that the prevalence of CMDs has increased in both men and
women since 1993, but less so in men since 2000. Based on all disorders upwards in
severity from "warranting clinical recognition" (CIS-R 12+), the prevalence in
2014 was 20.7% in women and 13.2% in men. So, as an average over all ages, adult
women are more than 50% more likely than men to experience CMD symptoms.
Figure 17.1: CMD Symptoms Reported in the Previous Week by Sex, 1993 – 2014,
Adults (16 – 64). Severities measured by CIS-R of 12+ and 18+ shown separately.
Figure 17.2: CMD Symptoms Reported in the Previous Week by Age and Sex in
2014, Adults (16 – 64), for CIS-R of 12+
Figure 17.2 breaks down the prevalence of CMDs by age. Women experience more
CMDs than men at every age. But there is a particularly pronounced 'spike' in the
prevalence of CMDs in women aged 16 to 24. This pattern will be seen in other
mental disorders, below.
The most common of the CMDs are those in the non-specific category, followed by
generalised anxiety disorder and then depression. The prevalence of OCD is less
than 2% at all ages, and panic disorders less than 1%.
Figure 17.3 shows the prevalence of CMDs against an estimate of verbal IQ
(estimated based on performance in the National Adult Reading Test). People with
a verbal IQ less than 80 are nearly twice as likely to suffer CMDs as those in the
above-average intelligence range (110+).
Figure 17.3: Presence of Any CMD Versus Predicted Verbal IQ
17.1.2 Personality Disorders
Personality disorders are of particular interest in the context of gender because
they can play a major role in relationship conflicts, and hence in issues relating to
the family courts, child contact, domestic abuse allegations and parental alienation.
The two most serious forms of personality disorder are Antisocial Personality
Disorder (ASPD) and Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD). There is a broader
class of personality disorders but I shall confine attention here to ASPD and BPD.
ASPD is defined as a pervasive pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the rights
of others that has persisted in the individual since the age of 15 or earlier.
Diagnostic criteria generally require at least three of the following symptoms:
failure to conform to social norms, irresponsibility, deceitfulness, indifference to
the welfare of others, recklessness, failure to plan ahead, irritability and
aggressiveness.
The ASPD rate was found to be higher in men (4.9%) than women (1.8%). Age
dependence was significant. In 18- to 24-year-old men the prevalence was
6.4%-6.6% and in 18- to 24-year-old women the prevalence was 3.3%. In the oldest
age range (55-64) the prevalence reduces to 4.1% and 0.4% for men and women
respectively. The variation with age is shown in Figure 17.4.
Figure 17.4: Screening Positive for ASPD and BPD in the Last Year (both sexes
combined)
BPD is characterised by unstable relationships with other people, unstable sense of
self and unstable emotions combined with marked impulsivity, and these indicators
start in early adulthood. Diagnostic criteria usually require five or more of the
following symptoms,
Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment;
Pattern of unstable and intense personal relationships;
Unstable self-image;
Impulsivity in more than one way that is self-damaging (e.g., spending, sex,
substance abuse, binge eating, reckless driving);
Suicidal or self-harming behaviour;
Affective instability;
Chronic feelings of emptiness;
Anger;
Paranoid thoughts or severe dissociative symptoms (quasi-psychotic).
More women (2.9%) than men (1.9%) screened positive for BPD, but the 95%
confidence intervals overlapped (i.e., the difference was not deemed statistically
significant). Younger people were more likely to screen positive for BPD than older
people, and this age dependence was more marked in women than in men. Positive
BPD screening was nearly six times more common in the 16-24 age range than the
55-64 age range (Figure 17.4).
This marked age dependence of the prevalence of BPD contrasts with stability
being a defining feature of the condition. But Figure 17.4 is cross-sectional, not
longitudinal, data. It may be tempting to interpret Figure 17.4 as implying that as
the current 16-24 cohort ages into middle age the prevalence of BPD will reduce
substantially. If so, then the condition is not stable (i.e., not always persistent) as is
usually claimed. However, this assumption is not justified. If, alternatively, the
condition genuinely is stable, then the ~6% prevalence of BPD in the 16-24 cohort
will persist as this cohort ages into middle age and beyond, and BPD will increase in
the population as a whole. Only time will tell which of these interpretations is
correct.
Figure 17.5 shows that age dependence is also marked in the totality of personality
disorders and that the incidence in the two sexes is very similar. The exception is for
women in the 16-24 age range which shows the spike in prevalence which is common
in many mental disorders.
Figure 17.5: Screening Positive for Any Personality Disorder by Age and Sex
17.1.3 Autism Spectrum Disorders
Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are developmental disorders characterised by
widespread abnormalities of social interaction and communication, as well as
severely restricted interests and highly repetitive behaviours. Practices have
varied, but currently (and in this section) such subtypes as Asperger's syndrome
are included within the ASD category. There has been some public concern over
the apparently rising incidence of ASDs. To quote the 'Mental Health and
Wellbeing in England: Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey 2014' (McManus et al,
2016),
'The number of diagnosed cases of autism increased steeply throughout the 1990s.
It is quite possible that this was due to changes in public and professional
awareness of the condition, different diagnostic definitions and practices,
availability of services and referrals, and earlier age at diagnosis. Nevertheless,
the current evidence available does not rule out the possibility that the prevalence
of ASD has increased.'
Figure 17.6 shows the prevalence of ASDs in adult men and women in 2007 and
2014. The apparent decrease in prevalence is not statistically significant due to
relatively low statistics.
Figure 17.6: Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders in Adults, 2007 and 2014
The incidence of ASDs in men is at least six times greater than in women. The
association of ASDs with males, and the nature of some of the symptoms, has even
led some researchers to regard autism as being the result of an "extreme male
brain", (Baron-Cohen, 2012).
There is a caricature of the autistic as a savant: a person with extraordinary ability
in some very narrow area. Another caricature, of the Asperger's personality, is a
young man with non-existent social skills and dubious personal habits who rarely
leaves his IT-rich man-cave but has an IQ of 160 and can hack into the Kremlin and
the Pentagon at will. The reality for the overwhelming majority of people with
ASDs is rather different from either caricature. ASD is known to be strongly
associated with learning disabilities. Amongst all people with a degree the
prevalence of autism was found to be only 0.2%. In contrast, amongst men with no
educational qualifications the prevalence was 3.2%. The caricature of the autistic
as a nerdy genius is not generally true, though these types also exist.
17.1.4 Psychotic Disorders
Psychotic disorders produce disturbances in thinking and perception that are
severe enough to distort the subject's perception of reality. The main types are
schizophrenia and affective psychosis. Organically induced psychoses, such as
dementia and Alzheimer's disease, are not included in this section.
Figure 17.7 indicates the prevalence of psychotic disorders by sex and age. For
both men and women, psychosis is most common in the age range 35 to 44. This is
unusual, as it is most often the 16 – 24 age range in which mental disorders are
most common, especially for women. Across all ages, 0.5% of men and 0.6% of
women were identified with psychosis in the last year. Figure 17.7 indicates that
there is little difference in the prevalence in men and women over 35, but that
women under 35 are more than twice as likely as men to suffer psychotic
complaints. However, the text of the Mental Health and Wellbeing in England:
Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey 2014, (McManus et al, 2016), states that, over
all ages, there was no statistically significant difference in incidence between the
sexes.
In general I do not focus on ethnic differences. However, in the case of psychotic
disorders there is such a marked ethnic dependence that it would be remiss to omit
any mention of it. The prevalence of psychotic disorders in black men was ten
times higher than that in white men (3.2% cf 0.3%). Amongst Asian men it was
four times higher (1.3%). But there was no significant variation by ethnic group
among women. These facts suggest a strong genetic component to psychotic
disorders.
Figure 17.8 plots the prevalence of psychotic disorders against an estimate of
verbal IQ (based on performance in the National Adult Reading Test). People with
a verbal IQ less than 80 are between 4 and 9 times more likely to suffer psychosis
than people with above average intelligence (110 and above).
Unsurprisingly, suffering from a psychotic illness is negatively correlated with
employment. Economically inactive people were far more likely to have a psychotic
disorder (2.3%) than those in employment (0.1%). 80% of people suffering from
psychotic disorders were receiving treatment, almost all of whom were on
medication, though about half of such people were also in active psychological
therapy. Very few were in counselling without medication. This high treatment rate
contrasts with other forms of mental disorder for which treatment rates are far
lower, and this reflects the more serious nature of the condition.
Figure 17.7: Psychotic Disorders in the Last Year by Age and Sex (2007 and 2014
data combined)
Figure 17.8: Prevalence of Psychotic Disorders Against Estimated Verbal IQ
17.1.5 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
The Mental Health and Wellbeing in England: Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey
2014, (McManus et al, 2016), states that, '9.7% of adults screened positive for
ADHD, with similar rates for men and women'. Such high prevalence is surprising,
as is the equality between the sexes. This is probably due to the particular
diagnostic criteria deployed. Discussion of hyperactivity disorders is deferred to
section 17.2.4 where data for children and young adults is presented, including a
discussion of the differing diagnostic criteria.
17.1.6 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
The Mental Health and Wellbeing in England: Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey
2014, (McManus et al, 2016), defines traumatic events as,
'an event or experience like a major natural disaster, a serious automobile
accident, being raped, seeing someone killed or seriously injured, having a loved
one die by murder or suicide, or any other experience that either put you or
someone close to you at risk of serious harm or death.'
Individuals exposed to such trauma may subsequently develop post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). This is a severe and disabling condition, characterised by
flashbacks, nightmares, avoidance, numbing and hypervigilance.
Figure 17.9 shows the percentage of people in each age range who have
experienced trauma at least once in their life. Positive screening for PTSD is far
less common than the experience of trauma itself (4.4% cf 31.4% across all ages
and sexes), see Figure 17.10.
The study states that 'screening positive for PTSD did not vary by sex'. However,
Figure 17.10 suggests this is only true for people older than 24. In contrast, women
in the age range 16 to 24 were three times more likely than men to screen positive
for PTSD, and also about three times more likely than older women. This is despite
the incidence of trauma being essentially the same for women of all ages (Figure
17.9). This suggests that young women in the age range 16 – 24 are more
susceptible to an adverse psychological effect arising from a given traumatic event
than are older women (or men of any age). This would be consistent with the spike
in the prevalence of many other mental disorders in young women of this age. In
this respect it is worth noting that the study observes that,
'research has shown that subjective appraisal of threat is more important for the
development and maintenance of PTSD than objective trauma severity…..
Epidemiological studies of PTSD typically rely on a subjective assessment by the
participant as to whether a particular event was sufficiently severe to justify being
a trauma and self-reported assessment of their symptoms – raising the possibility
of reporting bias.'
The converse effect is apparent in older people. Both men and women are subject
to substantially reduced rates of PTSD when over 65, despite experiencing
comparable levels of trauma. PTSD therefore appears to be partly a measure of
susceptibility or perception or resilience.
What remains to be seen is whether the current 16-24 cohort of young women will
retain their vulnerability as they age, and so continued to be identified with PTSD
at elevated rates compared to older women currently, or whether they will become
more resilient with age as Figure 17.10 suggests.
Figure 17.9: Percentage of People Who Have Experienced at Least One Trauma in
Their Lifetime (by age and sex)
Figure 17.10: Screened Positive for PTSD by Age and Sex
17.1.7 Bipolar Disorder
Bipolar disorder, previously known as manic depression, is a common, lifelong,
mental health condition. It is characterised by recurring episodes of depression and
of mania (feelings of elation and overactivity). Prevalence is around 2% with no
significant difference between the sexes. It is more common when young (3.4% at
16-24) but decreases linearly to very low rates in the over-65s (<0.4%)
17.1.8 Mental Disorders and Employment
There is a very strong relationship between mental illness and unemployment or
economic inactivity, see Table 17.1. This may be because the mental disorder
frustrates gaining, or retaining, employment, or it may be because unemployment
promotes mental ill health.
Table 17.1: The Relation Between Employment Status and Prevalence of Mental
Illness
Mental Illness Employed
Unemployed or Economically
Inactive
Men Women Men Women
CMD 11% 20% 24% 34%
PTSD 2.5% 10%
Psychotic disorders 0.1% 2.3%
Autism spectrum 0.7% 1.2%
Personality disorders 12% 31%
ADHD 7.5% 7% 24% 15%
Bipolar disorder 2% 1.8% 5.6% 3.3%
Drug dependency 4.5% 2% 9.5% 3%
Suicide attempts 4% 8% 20% 13%
Accessing treatment for those
with CIS-R = 12+
27% 53%
17.1.9 Access to Treatment by Demographic
Women are generally more likely to be receiving treatment for mental health
conditions than men. In part this is due to a slightly greater overall incidence of
mental disorder in women. But women receive significantly more treatment even
after controlling for this factor. The Mental Health and Wellbeing in England:
Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey 2014 (McManus et al, 2016) notes,
'In unadjusted analysis, women in the population were more likely to report mental
health treatment than men. This was true both for medication and for psychological
therapy. Overall, 16.5% of women and 9.6% of men received treatment of some
sort. The mean CIS-R score in women was 1.8 points higher than that in men. The
treatment gap was, however, more evident among those with fewer CMD
symptoms (CIS-R 11 or less). After controlling for differences in CIS-R, women
remained significantly more likely to get treatment than men (OR 1.58 compared
to unadjusted OR 1.80).' (NB: OR = odds ratio)
Despite the incidence of mental disorders being greater in the lower socioeconomic
classes nevertheless poorer people are less likely to be receiving treatment. For
people with a CIS-R score of 12+, it is more than twice as likely they will be
receiving treatment where the household income is above £36,228 than where it is
below £17,868.
In respect of the relevance of race in receiving treatment for mental disorders, the
Mental Health and Wellbeing in England: Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey
2014, (McManus et al, 2016), notes, 'After further controlling for other factors in
the final model, people in the Black/Black British group had the lowest odds of
being in receipt of treatment (OR 0.27, compared with the White British group).'
Most people will interpret this as arising from discrimination or another form of
race-based disadvantage. Fewer people will interpret the reduced frequency of
treatment for men in a similar way.
17.2 Mental Ill Health in Children and Young Adults
The data in this section on mental disorders in children and young adults is taken
from official statistics published by NHS Digital and the UK Government
Statistical Service. The survey from which these data were collected involved
9,117 children aged 2 to 19 in England between January and October 2017. The
summary report is (NHS Digital, 2018a). Behind the summary there are a sequence
of topic reports, available from (NHS Digital, 2018b), which have also been used as
sources here.
17.2.1 All Disorders
Childhood disorders are classified differently from those in adults. In the reports
found in (NHS Digital, 2018b) the categories used were,
Emotional disorders
Behavioural disorders
Hyperactivity disorders
Autism spectrum disorders, eating disorders and other less common disorders
These will be discussed in turn in the following subsections. Nearly two-thirds of
those aged 5 to 19 who exhibited one disorder also displayed at least one other
disorder (possibly within the same category).
Perhaps the most important of all the findings in respect of gender is illustrated by
Figure 17.11, which shows the prevalence of all mental disorders by sex and by age.
Recall that section 17.1 has shown that the prevalence of mental disorders in adults
is greater in women than in men. Contrast this with Figure 17.11 which shows that
boys under 11 suffer a greater incidence of mental disorders than girls the same
age. In the early teenage years (11 to 16) the incidence becomes the same. But,
consistent with section 17.1 for adults, by young adulthood, ages 17 to 19, the
prevalence of disorders has become more than twice as great in females as in
males.
Figure 17.11: Percentage of Any Mental Disorder by Age and Sex, 2017
Figure 17.12 shows that the incidence of disorders is higher in boys in age range 5
to 15 and that the prevalence in both boys and girls has increased since 1999.
Figure 17.12: Trend in All Mental Disorders, 1999 – 2017, by Sex, Ages 5 to 15
Figure 17.13 shows that emotional disorders are dominant in terms of prevalence in
teenagers. We shall see that this is what leads to women having the greater overall
prevalence of disorders in the 17 to 19 age range, as it is women who experience
emotional disorders most. In contrast, up to age 10 it is behavioural disorders which
dominate, and the majority of these are boys.
Figure 17.13: Rates of the Different Mental Disorders, Ages 2 to 19
17.2.2 Emotional Disorders
Emotional disorders comprise anxiety disorders, depression and bipolar disorder.
The anxiety disorders include OCD, phobias, panic disorder, PTSD and body
dysmorphia. Consistent with the preceding discussion, Figure 17.14 shows that,
whilst the prevalence of emotional disorders are comparable between the sexes
prior to age 10, thereafter there is an increasing difference. In the age range 17 to
19, women are nearly three times more likely to experience emotional disorders.
Figure 17.14: Emotional Disorders by Age and Sex, 2017 (percentages)
The prevalence of emotional disorders is strongly related to family circumstances.
Family functioning was measured using the General Functioning Scale of the
McMaster Family Activity Device. It comprises 12 statements that parents rate on
a four point scale. A score was derived, with scores above 2 considered to indicate
'unhealthy' family functioning. Emotional disorders were found to be five times
more prevalent for family functioning scores above 2.5 than for scores below 1.5.
17.2.3 Behavioural Disorders
Behavioural disorders are characterised by repetitive and persistent patterns of
disruptive and antisocial behaviour in which the rights of others and social norms or
rules are violated. Their presence in childhood is required for certain adult
psychiatric diagnoses, such as antisocial personality disorder. The main subtypes
are oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) and conduct disorder. ODD is
characterised by temper outbursts, arguing with adults, disobedience, deliberately
annoying others, passing on blame, being easily annoyed, resentful, spiteful and
vindictive. Conduct disorder consists of engaging in antisocial behaviours such as
shoplifting or stealing cars.
Behavioural disorders are more common in boys than girls (see Figure 17.15) but
reduce markedly in those aged 17 to 19 for both sexes. ODD is nearly six times
more prevalent if special educational needs are present, and nearly four times
more prevalent in the lowest quintiles of family income compared with the top
quintile.
Figure 17.15: Behavioural Disorders by Age and Sex, 2017
17.2.4 Hyperactivity Disorders
In section 17.1.5 I deferred discussion of ADHD (attention deficit hyperactive
disorder) because of a need to clarify the different diagnostic criteria which lead to
wildly differing reported prevalence rates. The status of differing diagnostic
standards has been explained in (NHS Digital, 2018b) thus,
'Hyperactivity disorders can be identified by two official sets of diagnostic criteria:
the International Classification of Diseases 10th Revision (ICD-10) and the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders fifth edition (DSM-5). The
results in this survey are based on the ICD-10 classification of hyperactivity
disorders. ICD-10 is the official classification system in the UK, and has been used
in the 1999 and 2004 surveys of the mental health of children and young people in
England.
The ICD-10 classification of hyperkinetic disorder is similar to the DSM-5
classification of ADHD. Both classification systems require symptoms to present
themselves in several settings such as school or work, home life and leisure
activities. However, the ICD-10 criteria for hyperkinetic disorder tends to be more
restrictive than the DSM-5 criteria for ADHD in identification of hyperactivity
disorders. For example, an ADHD diagnosis requires symptoms to be present by
twelve years of age while symptoms of hyperkinetic disorder must be present by
the age of seven. As a result, the rates of hyperactivity disorders presented in this
report (based on ICD-10 criteria for hyperkinetic disorder) are likely to be lower
compared to other surveys which utilise DSM-5 criteria (ADHD).'
For this reason the prevalence rates of hyperactive disorders in children to be
discussed here, and based on ICD-10, will be substantially lower than the adult rate
of 9.7% stated in section 17.1.5 and based on DSM-5/ADHD. Moreover, the more
restrictive ICD-10 criteria will reveal a marked sex dependence for children which
was absent from the adult data based on the DSM-5/ADHD measure.
Hyperactivity disorder is over four times more prevalent amongst boys than girls,
Figure 17.16. About 3% of boys under 17 have a hyperactivity disorder to ICD-10.
Hyperactivity disorder was also found to be substantially more prevalent amongst
white British children than other ethnicities.
The prevalence of hyperactivity disorders is strongly related to family
circumstances, being nearly six times more prevalent for family functioning scores
above 2.5 than for scores below 1.5 (recalling that scores above 2 are taken to
imply unhealthy family functioning). As always, causality must not be assumed. To
quote the survey report, 'while problems with family functioning may contribute to
the onset of hyperactivity disorders, the presence of hyperactivity disorders could
also lead to problems with family functioning.'
Figure 17.16: Hyperactivity Disorders by Age and Sex, 2017
Children who were living with a parent in receipt of disability benefit were nearly
five times more likely to have a hyperactivity disorder (5.8%) than children whose
parents were not receiving disability benefits (1.2%).
17.2.5 Autism, Eating Disorders and Less Common Disorders
The other less common disorders assessed by the survey, (NHS Digital, 2018b),
include autism spectrum disorders (ASD), eating disorders, and other types of
disorder, including tics. The latter includes Tourette's syndrome.
ASD was five times more prevalent in boys (1.9%) than girls (0.4%). The survey
data apparently indicated a decreasing prevalence of ASD with age, see Figure
17.17, but this is believed to be an artefact of the lack of third-party reports in the
older age range. ASD is a persistent condition, so a longitudinal age dependence is
not expected. The prevalence of ASD in boys in the age range 5 to 10 was 2.5%
and this may be a better indicator of the true prevalence at all ages.
Tics and related disorders were twice as common in boys (1.1%) as in girls (0.6%).
Eating disorders were seven times more common in girls (0.7%) than boys (0.1%).
In young women, ages 17 to 19, the prevalence of eating disorders was 1.6%.
Across this whole class of disorders, and in the age range 5 to 19, boys showed
higher prevalence (2.6%) than girls (1.6%). There is some indication that this class
of disorders has had increasing incidence, but this was reported as not statistically
significant. White British children were nine times more likely to have this class of
disorder than black children, and more than three times more likely than Asian
children.
The prevalence of this class of disorder was five times greater in the poorest
functioning families (score > 2.5) compared with the best functioning families
(score < 1.5). All three subtypes (ASD, eating disorders and tics) displayed
substantial family functioning dependence.
Figure 17.17: Autism Spectrum Disorders by Age and Sex, 2017
17.2.6 Mental Health Medication of Children
Psychotropic medication was being taken by about 2.5% of 5- to 19-year-olds at
the time the interviews were conducted, (NHS Digital, 2018b),
'The most commonly reported drugs were those used for treating hyperactivity
disorders (stimulants 0.8%, atomoxetine 0.1%) and emotional disorders
(antidepressants 0.9%). Melatonin, which is a hormone found naturally in the body
and used to treat sleep disturbance, was reported for 0.7% of children.'
One in six children with a disorder was taking psychotropic medication. Prescribing
rates were 14.8% for children with a behavioural disorder, 15.2% for emotional
disorders, and approaching half (45.9%) of those with a hyperactivity disorder.
In 5- to 16-year-olds with a disorder, stimulants and melatonin were the most likely
types of medication to be prescribed, reflecting the higher rate of hyperactivity
disorder in this age group (of which more than 80% are boys). The (NHS Digital,
2018b) survey reports that hyperactivity disorder has 'remained stable' between
1999 and 2017. But this does not sit easily with the fact that NHS prescriptions of
stimulants and other drugs for use against ADHD has doubled between 2007 and
2017, (Sylvester and Bennett, 2018).
17- to 19-year-olds with a disorder were most likely to be prescribed
antidepressants. This is consistent with emotional disorders being the most common
type of disorder identified at this age (of which 74% are girls).
17.2.7 Demographic, Lifestyle and Sexuality Factors
Taking into account the entire range of mental disorders, the following
relationships between prevalence and demographic and other factors were found in
5- to 19-year-olds.
17.2.7.1 Income
The prevalence of any disorder was 6.8% in the highest quintile of family income,
but over twice as great in the lowest, and second lowest, quintile of income.
17.2.7.2 Ethnicity
White British children had the highest incidence of mental disorders (14.9%),
larger than white non-British (8.3%), and nearly three times that of black or Asian
children (5.2%-5.6%).
17.2.7.3 Sexual Identity
One in ten 14- to 19-year-olds (10.2%) described themselves as lesbian or gay
(1.7%), bisexual (6.3%), or "other" (2.2%). Girls were more likely to identify with
a non-heterosexual identity (13.2%) than boys (7.1%). Young people who identified
as lesbian, gay, bisexual or "other" were substantially more likely to have a mental
disorder than those who identified as heterosexual. A disorder was present in
34.9% of young people who identified as non-heterosexual, compared to 13.2% of
those who identified as heterosexual.
17.2.7.4 School Exclusion
Children with a disorder were ten times more likely to play truant (8.5%) than
children without a disorder (0.8%). School exclusion was nearly 14 times more
common in children with a disorder (6.8%) than in those without (0.5%). Boys with
a disorder were four times more likely to be excluded from school (9.9%) than girls
with a disorder (2.4%).
17.2.7.5 Family Functioning
Family functioning was associated with the presence of mental disorder. Over a
third (38.2%) of children living in families with the least healthy functioning (score
>2.5) had a mental disorder, compared to 8.3% in the most healthily functioning
families (score <1.5).
17.2.7.6 Caring Responsibilities
Many children have caring responsibilities, despite their own tender age. This can
consist of looking after family members, friends or neighbours because of either
long-term physical or mental ill-health, disability, or old age. 18.4% of 11- to 19-
year-olds were identified with caring responsibilities, with similar rates in boys and
girls. Overall there was not a significant impact of caring responsibilities on
incidence of disorders.
Figure 17.18: Percentage of Adolescents Aged 12 – 17 Who Had at Least One
Major Depressive Episode in the Last Year (USA), after (Lukianoff and Haidt,
2018)
Figure 17.19: Percentage of College Students Responding in the Affirmative to the
Question "do you have psychological disorder?", after (Lukianoff and Haidt, 2018)
17.2.8 Teenagers and Students in the USA
In the book 'The Coddling of the American Mind', Lukianoff and Haidt (2018)
present graphs reproduced above as Figures 17.18 and 17.19 which show recent
steep increases in depressive episodes amongst adolescents and even steeper
increases in psychological disorders amongst students in the USA. These increases
have been concentrated on the years since 2011/12.
17.3 Substance Abuse
The issue of drug and alcohol abuse is extremely complex and it is not appropriate
to attempt to tackle it here. Just a few bald statistics are given. It is possible to slip
into addiction through recreational use of drugs or alcohol – they are, after all,
pleasurable – at least initially. However, well-adjusted people without exacerbating
factors will generally be alert to the dangers of slipping into addictive behaviours –
though not always, and excessive alcohol usage in older and more affluent people
without exacerbating factors has become increasingly prevalent, i.e., simply as a
bad habit.
Alcohol abuse may result from a combination of genetic, psychological,
environmental and social factors. Top risk factors are (i) stress, which may be work
related, (ii) starting drinking at an early age, (iii) self-medication for a mental
health condition, such as depression, (iv) family history of alcoholism, which may
act genetically or through learnt behaviour, (v) normalisation of excessive
consumption through peer group pressure. Illicit drug abuse shares most of these
same characteristics. In the USA, a route to opiate addiction is via prescription
drugs. Many illicit drugs are characterised by very rapid toleration, increasing
required dosage and very high levels of addictiveness.
In chapter 14 the evidence was presented for parental separation, and specifically
fatherlessness, increasing substance abuse amongst children. Not surprisingly,
there are also many studies which show a link between alcohol abuse and a greater
likelihood to divorce/separation. However, there remains a key question: does
parental separation cause increased alcohol abuse? Anecdotally this seems likely,
as in "drowning one's sorrows". But academic studies are now beginning to emerge
which confirm the effect, for example (Kendler et al, 2017). This study was based
on 950,000 Swedes born between 1960 and 1990 who married in or after 1990. The
authors reported that, after divorce, the rates of alcohol use disorder (AUD)
increased six-fold in men and seven-fold in women. These rates remained greatly
elevated even after controlling for potential confounding factors, including prior
problem behaviour, low parental education, and familial risk of AUD. It is much
more common for research to concentrate on alcohol abuse as a causal factor in
divorce. However one can discern indications in earlier work that people who are
divorced consume the greatest amounts of alcohol while the lowest levels of
alcohol consumption are found in those who are married, e.g., (Clarke-Stewart,
2007). However, the extent to which parental separation or divorce precipitates
alcohol abuse appears to require greater research attention.
17.3.1 Alcohol Abuse
Given the association of alcohol with increasing the prevalence of diseases,
especially cancers, it is a moot point whether severe (alcoholic) levels of abuse
cause more deaths than more common but lower levels of alcohol consumption. In
fact, it would require premature death (before age 75) by cancers and
cardiovascular diseases to be increased due to alcohol consumption by only 7%
among people with "non-alcoholic" levels of drinking for this to dominate over
premature deaths due to acute conditions among alcoholics. But only epidemiology
can identify the increased risk to people from cancers and cardiovascular diseases:
one cannot attribute the death of any individual from these common conditions
specifically to alcohol. In contrast, the severe abuse of the alcoholic leads to
specific, acute conditions which can be diagnosed and attributed unambiguously to
alcohol abuse. Consequently, these acute alcoholic mortalities can be recorded and
counted, and these form the basis of the statistics given here.
The ONS provides data for these alcohol related deaths disaggregated by sex,
(Office for National Statistics, 2017k). In 2016 in England and Wales, there were
4,416 premature deaths of men (before age 75) attributed directly to alcohol
abuse. The corresponding figure for women was 2,232. Hence, twice as many men
than women die prematurely due to severe conditions unambiguously attributable
to alcohol abuse. There are several different specific causes of death in this
category. The conditions which account for virtually all premature deaths due to
alcohol are,
Alcoholic liver disease, 68%
Fibrosis and cirrhosis of liver, 17%
Mental & behavioural disorders due to alcohol use, 7%
Accidental poisoning by alcohol, 6%
Alcoholic cardiomyopathy, 2%
In addition, a large proportion of deaths in car accidents can be attributed to
alcohol and these do not appear in the statistics for the overall destructiveness of
alcohol abuse.
17.3.2 Drug Abuse
The ONS publish data on drug related deaths disaggregated by sex, (Office for
National Statistics, 2017m). They distinguish between all drug poisoning, in which
the underlying substance may be illicit or a prescription drug, and deaths due
specifically to illegal drugs. In 2016 there were 2,572 deaths of men from drug
poisoning, of which 1,899 involved illegal drugs. The corresponding figures for
women were 1,172 and 697 respectively. Consequently there are more than double
the number of drug poisoning deaths of men than women, and 2.7 times as many
from illegal drugs.
17.4 People Detained under the Mental Health Act
People who are judged by qualified professionals to be a danger to themselves or
to others may be detained in secure accommodation. The legislation covering such
involuntary detainment is the Mental Health Act 1983, (Legislation UK
Government, 1983), as amended by the Mental Health Act 2007, (Legislation UK
Government, 2007). Involuntary detainment is colloquially referred to as "being
sectioned", in reference to Sections 2 and 3 of the 1983 Act which address this
legal procedure. The Act has separate provision in Sections 4 and 5 for Short Term
Orders, which include an element of consent, and also Community Treatment
Orders which are subject to recall to hospital for assessment. The statistics of
people treated under the Mental Health Act gives an indication of the prevalence
of the most serious disorders. The following data were taken from the 'Mental
Health Act Statistics, Annual Figures 2016/17: Data Tables', (NHS Digital, 2017).
The data relate to England only.
The number of people involuntarily detained ("sectioned") has increased each year
from 2012/13 to 2016/17. In 2012/13 there were 50,408 detentions, increasing to
63,622 in 2015/16 (the last year for which complete data is available at the time of
writing). Known detention rates were higher for males (83.2 per 100,000
population) than females (76.1 per 100,000 population). Note that this contrasts
with the greater prevalence of most common mental disorders in adult women
rather than adult men, including psychotic disorders, and the greater access to
treatment services by women.
The number of people subject to Short Term Orders under Sections 4 and 5 of the
Act has also increased each year from 2012/13. In 2012/13 there were 25,112 such
orders, increasing to 35,955 in 2015/16 (the last year for which complete data is
available at the time of writing). Known rates were higher for males (29.3 per
100,000 population) than females (22.3 per 100,000 population). Again this
contrasts with the greater prevalence of most mental disorders in adult women and
their greater access to treatment services.
Community Treatment Orders are less used, some 4,966 in 2016/17, but these
again involve more men than women (corresponding to rates of 11.4 per 100,000
for men and 6.6 per 100,000 for women). The greater use of "sectioning", Short
Term Orders and Community Treatment Orders for men than women, despite the
apparently greater demand from women, may reflect a perception by the
responsible authorities that men tend to pose a greater risk (though this is
supposition on my part).
17.5 APA and BPS Guidelines for the Psychological Practice with Boys and Men
The American Psychological Association (APA) published their 'Guidelines for
Psychological Practice with Girls and Women' some 12 years ago as I write,
(American Psychological Association, 2007). The APA's equivalent 'Guidelines for
the Psychological Practice with Boys and Men' was published only 11 years later,
(American Psychological Association, 2018). The two documents read rather
differently, though both are consistent with the dominant narrative on gender. The
APA's guidelines for boys and men focus strongly on masculinity as a social
construct and traditional masculinity as a source of harm. This met with
widespread criticism when the guidelines were published. The criticism did not
escape the APA's notice and they felt it necessary to issue a statement 'Addressing
Media Misrepresentation of the Men's Guidelines', (MacDermott, 2019). The
criticisms were not just from the media but also from some psychologists, for
example John Barry (2019), one of the leading lights of the new Male Psychology
Section of the British Psychological Society (BPS).
The BPS has not published formal guidelines on psychiatric treatment for boys and
men, but it has published a large and radical document called the 'Power Threat
Meaning Framework', with lead authors Dr Lucy Johnstone and Professor Mary
Boyle, (British Psychological Society, 2018). This initiative seeks to overturn the
whole basis of psychiatric diagnosis. The proposed radical alternative to
conventional mental disorder diagnosis starts with questions such as, 'how is power
operating in your life?' and 'what kind of threats does this pose?'. Therapy starts
by asking, 'what did you have to do to survive?' and 'what access to Power
resources do you have?' I do not intend to be drawn into a digression on the
philosophical origins of this slant on mental ill health other than to note that, as
these examples demonstrate, it puts victimhood and power at the centre of the
proposed new conception of mental disorder.
The relevance of the 'Power Threat Meaning Framework' is that it includes a
section on men. In this respect it is broadly similar to the APA guidelines for boys
and men, being firmly based on the prevailing dominant gender narrative. The
'Power Threat Meaning Framework' has also attracted criticism, again including
some psychologists, for example Martin Seager (2018).
The different approaches to the two sexes proposed by these professional
institutions could not be more stark. Stripped down to its essentials, both claim that
mental disorders suffered by men and boys are, in large part, due to "traditional
masculinity", or patriarchy. Moreover, the mental disorders suffered by women
and girls are also perceived as commonly the product of patriarchal society, i.e.,
"traditional masculinity". The 'Power Threat Meaning Framework' expresses how
women's oppression under patriarchy is reinterpreted as mental disorder, noting
the existing criticisms of…
'the psychiatric diagnostic system for systematically pathologising what are seen as
women's rightful and reasonable responses to unreasonable events occurring in
repressive, dangerous and damaging social contexts…..(some) psychologists have
challenged abnormality as a construct and gender bias within psychiatric diagnosis,
arguing that it is the "pathologies" of patriarchy, of racism, classism, heterosexism
and ableism that are the "disorders" women suffer from, not "disorders of mental
illness'".'
It is startlingly bold to suggest that women do not, in fact, have mental illnesses,
but that their appearance of mental illness is actually an artefact of their
oppression – but this hypothesis appears to be seriously entertained. The APA's
guidelines on women and girls also allude to men as culpable for women's mental
disorders,
'Salient mental health statistics reveal that women are two times more likely than
men to be depressed, and girls are seven times more likely than boys to be
depressed. Women who are subject to group and individual discrimination are even
more likely to experience depression. Girls and women are also roughly nine times
more likely to have eating disorders than boys and men. Compared with men,
women are two to three times more likely to experience many types of anxiety
disorders. The abuse and violence in U.S. society (e.g., abuse, battering, rape) may
contribute to the development of dysfunctional behaviors, such as eating disorders,
depression, anxiety, and suicidal behavior, whereas discrimination against women
and girls of color can result in lowered self-expectations, anxiety, depression, and
negative attitudes toward self. In general, the physical and mental health concerns
of women and girls are related to complex and diverse economic, biological,
developmental, psychological, and sociocultural environments.'
No evidence is offered to support "abuse and violence" being responsible for
women's elevated rates of "dysfunctional behaviours, eating disorders, depression,
anxiety, or suicidal behaviour".
If I may indulge in personal opinion for a moment, I find it quite extraordinary that
anyone can seriously entertain the idea that women in general lack agency.
Perhaps it comes of being raised in a family with three older sisters. But neither
the young women nor the grandmothers of my acquaintance align well with being
helpless before an onslaught of ubiquitous abuse, as depicted in the APA's
Guidelines.
Nevertheless, the APA claim that the origin of the mental health problems
experienced by women and girls lie in society – and specifically patriarchal society
- but not in the individuals themselves and certainly not in any generic problem
inherent in "femininity". This contrasts sharply with the perceived origin of much
of the mental ill health in men and boys, which is explicitly put down to men
themselves, as individuals or as male society. Men are victims of their own
pathology (traditional masculinity) and women too are victims of men's pathology. I
will let the APA guidelines speak for both documents in some extracts which follow
(omitting references, for which see the original).
'boys and men, as a group, tend to hold privilege and power based on gender' (see
the Introduction)
It is not my intention to critique gender theoretical ideas such as this. However this
perspective is relevant because of the claimed causal connection between
"power", or lack thereof, and mental disorder (made explicit in the 'Power Threat
Meaning Framework'). Attempts to refute that all men are powerful are futile:
even homeless men, at the very bottom of our society, exhibit hegemonic
masculinity, so we are told (Dej, 2018). The APA are clear in attributing blame for
much of men's and boy's mental disorders on "traditional masculinity", e.g.,
'…socialization for conforming to traditional masculinity ideology has been shown
to limit males' psychological development, constrain their behavior, result in gender
role strain and gender role conflict and negatively influence mental health and
physical health.' (see section 'Need for Professional Practice Guidelines for Boys
and Men')
What the APA mean by "traditional masculinity" is as follows,
'Masculinity ideology is a set of descriptive, prescriptive, and proscriptive of
cognitions about boys and men (sic)…...including: anti-femininity, achievement,
eschewal of the appearance of weakness, and adventure, risk, and violence. These
have been collectively referred to as traditional masculinity ideology.' (Definitions)
'traditional masculinity ideology can be viewed as the dominant (referred to as
"hegemonic") form of masculinity that strongly influences what members of a
culture take to be normative.' (Guideline 1)
One assumes that "anti-femininity" refers to homophobia, or to a reluctance to
engage in touching or affectionate behaviour with other men.
These extracts are important because they make clear that what is being called
"traditional masculinity" is assumed by APA to be the norm for men. Hence, in
asserting that "traditional masculinity" is harmful, this carries the implication that
essentially all men are culpable. The APA does not think at all highly of
"traditional masculinity". Under Guideline 3 ('the impact of power, privilege, and
sexism on the development of boys and men and on their relationships with others')
we read,
'Researchers in the psychology of men and masculinity have identified that
insecurities stemming from early childhood experiences (such as attachment
insecurities) are linked to adherence to traditional masculinity ideology. Research
also suggests that insecurely attached men not only rigidly adhere to sexist gender
role ideology, that they may act on those schemas in ways that promote or justify
intimate partner violence.' (sic)
'Traditional masculinity ideologies have also been linked to parenting concerns,
including work-family conflicts.'
Based on the errors noted above, it seems that the Guidelines have not even been
well edited to ensure grammatical English. Under Guideline 4 we read,
'…several studies have identified connections between adult attachment insecurity
and men's adherence to traditional masculinity ideologies.'
'Additionally, traditional masculinity ideology encourages men to adopt an
approach to sexuality that emphasizes promiscuity and other aspects of risky
sexual behavior….. Indeed, heterosexual men's adherence to traditional, sexist
aspects of masculinity has been connected to sexual assault perpetration.'
Of the many harmful features which (we are told) are inherent within "traditional
masculinity", emotional control – or stoicism – comes in for particular criticism, as
does the (alleged) reluctance to express affection, or even to touch, other men, as
follows,
'…traditional masculinity ideology discourages men from being intimate with
others…… Because of the pressure to conform to traditional masculinity ideology,
some men shy away from directly expressing their vulnerable feelings and prefer
building connection through physical activities, talking about external matters…..
and seeking and offering practical advice with their male friends.' (Guideline 4)
'…men experience conflict related to four domains of the male gender role…..
(including) restrictive emotionality (discomfort expressing and experiencing
vulnerable emotions); restrictive affectionate behavior between men (discomfort
expressing care and affectionate touching of other men)' (Introduction)
'Psychologists can discuss with boys and men the messages they have received
about withholding affection from other males to help them understand how
components of traditional masculinity such as emotional stoicism, homophobia, not
showing vulnerability, self-reliance, and competitiveness might deter them from
forming close relationships with male peers.' (Guideline 4)
There is something disingenuous about the ostensible favour bestowed upon intramale bonding in the above extracts, given that the same ideological lobby has
vetoed the formation of men's groups on countless university campuses in the USA,
Canada and the UK in recent years. The claims of homophobia, and men's
inhibitions against affectionate friendships with other men, seem painfully out of
date. For example, in their book 'Men and Maculinities', Eric Anderson and Rory
Magrath (2019) write,
'Dozens of other ethnographic and qualitative studies show that young men today
associate much more freely with symbols that were once coded as gay. As they do,
those symbols lose their stigma.'
'In 2016 Anderson and McCormack…..utilized several large-scale surveys from
several nations to show that decreasing cultural homophobia from the 1980s was
sustained and profound. They next highlighted that.….qualitative research on gay
and bisexual men show(s) that their lives are dramatically better now than they
were in the 1980s.'
'… the decline of cultural homophobia in the West means the stigma attached to
homosexuality - and any behaviors related to homosexuality - has been largely
removed. In such a context, men are no longer culturally compelled to perform a
rigid form of masculinity or avoid behaviors which would traditionally feminize
them. Accordingly, the narrow range of gendered presentation has been extended,
meaning that men are able to embrace a same-sex friendship to the point of a
bromance.'
The difference between the APA guidelines for males and for females could hardly
be more startling. Mental ill health in females is due to their mistreatment by
society, especially its male component, whilst men are to blame for their own ills.
Nor can this be evaded by appeal to it being applicable to only a few pathological
men. The text makes clear that "traditional masculinity", complete with its array
of claimed pathologies, is the dominant form of masculinity which society takes to
be normative. The different treatment of men and women recommended by the
APA has formed the basis of a Title IX complaint against Harvard University, who
partner with the APA and whose program in clinical psychology is accredited by
the APA, (Airaksinen, 2019). (Title IX is a US federal law prohibiting
discrimination on the basis of sex in an educational institution's programs or
activities).
Bringing all the above extracts together, we see that the APA are claiming that
"traditional masculinity" causes men to be prone to partner violence, family
problems, sexual assault perpetration, and being emotionally stunted, homophobic
loners - not forgetting being the cause of women's mental ill health as well.
Absolutely no sexism or empathy gap there, then.
Did the authors ask themselves what effect these views were likely to have on
prospective male patients? I can only speak for myself: should I ever suffer from a
mental disorder, I am now firmly deterred from seeking help from these
professionals. This is ironic in view of the APA writing,
'Research suggests that socialization practices that teach boys from an early age
to be self-reliant, strong, and to minimize and manage their problems on their own
yield adult men who are less willing to seek mental health treatment.' (Section
'Need for Professional Practice Guidelines for Boys and Men')
The APA guidelines attribute to stoicism, not just reluctance in help seeking, but
also many of the ill effects themselves. Harvard psychologist and famous author,
Steven Pinker, has referred to the APA's guidelines for boys and men as being
'blinkered by dogmas'. One of the dogmas is that gender is entirely a social
construct, without regard to biological and genetic factors. The other dogma,
Pinker argued,
'is that repressing emotions is bad and expressing them is good - a folk theory with
roots in romanticism, Freudian psychoanalysis, and Hollywood, but which is
contradicted by a large literature showing that people with greater self-control,
particularly those who repress anger rather than "venting," lead healthier lives:
they get better grades, have fewer eating disorders, drink less, have fewer
psychosomatic aches and pains, are less depressed, anxious, phobic, and paranoid,
have higher self-esteem, are more conscientious, have better relationships with
their families, have more stable friendships, are less likely to have sex they
regretted, and are less likely to imagine themselves cheating in a monogamous
relationship.' (Edsall, 2019)
A paper published in February 2019, by the APA's PsychNET, comes to a very
different view of traditional masculinity to the APA's guidelines for boys and men.
Based on a survey of 1,233 people including a large percentage of transgender men
and women (34%), Levant et al (2019) conclude, 'traditional masculine ideology
may be a general and mental health protective factor for self-identified men, and a
mental health protective factor for women, regardless of assigned sex at birth'.
I do not wish to be drawn into debates about gender theory, but some aspects are
impossible to avoid in this context as the APA guidelines, for both sexes, are
overtly gender political. For example, in the Guidelines for Psychological Practice
with Girls and Women (2007) we read,
'Good practice requires that psychologists remain abreast of new developments in
contemporary social forces and their interaction with gender and other social
identities. Many contemporary issues could be cited here; however, four
particularly salient and recent examples include (a) the increasing prevalence of
global terrorism, violence, and war in which women are particularly victimized by
vulnerability to rape, assault, and poverty; (b) the effects of the media in popular
culture, which portrays an image of woman as thin, White, sexualized, and
victimized; (c) biopsychosocial realities and changes relevant to women's
reproductive experiences; and (d) the phenomenon of increasing lifespan with an
aging population that consists mostly of women.'
Three of these four "social forces" impact adversely on men and boys even more
than upon women, and yet there is no mention of them in the APA's Guidelines for
the Psychological Practice with Boys and Men (2018). Why would that be? It is
worth a digression to consider how these examples betray the depth and extent of
the empathy gap.
To claim that women are victimised in violence and war is true; to claim they are
particularly victimised is false. In simple statistical terms, men are the primary
victims of war. As regards the direct deaths of combatants, this needs no defending
(see section 7.3.2). Men are also the majority of the victims of violence generally,
as we have seen for the UK in chapter 9. As for worldwide, the World Health
Organisation confirms that the number of deaths of men associated with war and
conflict in 2004 exceeded that of women by over five times (155,000 versus
29,000), and for violence outside of war, men's deaths exceed that of women by
more than four times (485,000 versus 115,000), (Global Burden of Disease: 2004
Update).
Death is not the only measure of the impact of violence. "Disability-adjusted life
year", or DALY, is calculated as the sum of the years of life lost due to premature
mortality and the healthy years lost due to disability resulting from the violence.
The impact of war on men in 2004, as measured by DALY, was nearly six times that
upon women, whilst violence outside of war impacted men nearly five times as
much. Similarly the DALY data for 2016 indicates that men are 2.4 times more
victimised by "collective violence and legal intervention" and 3.5 times more
impacted by "interpersonal violence", (World Health Organisation, 2018a).
Even war rape, which is usually assumed to be the particular province of female
victims, is not confined to women and girls. One of the primary purposes of war
rape is to humiliate the vanquished. In some conflicts, particularly those in Africa,
the war rape of men is widespread. Anyone citing war rape is obligated to be
familiar with the work of the Refugee Law Project, 'Gender Against Men'
(Refugee Law Project, 2012), 'Investigating Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
against Men in Africa' (Dolan, 2014), 'They Slept With Me' (Refugee Law Project,
2015) and 'The Rape of Men: the Darkest Secret of War' (Storr, 2011) and the
associated TV documentary, 'An Unspeakable Act (Part2)' (BBC World Service,
2012).
I labour these off-topic points not only to emphasise that the APA's claim that
women are particularly victimised by war and violence is false but also to
illustrated that the absence of any mention of their impact upon men in their 2018
Guidance can only be interpreted as a disturbing asymmetry of empathy.
Some might opine that empathy is inappropriate because men start wars in the first
place. But this is an example of the apex fallacy: blaming all men for the actions of
a few. Exceedingly few men engaged in war ever want to be there. Down through
the ages, the majority of fighting men would have preferred not to be the target of
other men's violence. But men at war are either professional servicemen doing
their duty, without option, or they have been conscripted to fight, without option.
And the implied claim that female leaders would be less inclined to start wars and
send men (yes, predominantly men) into battle is not born out by history, (Dube and
Harish, 2017). In more recent UK history, the majority of female MPs in 2003
voted in favour of the UK joining the Iraq war (83 out of the 104 women who
voted, a larger proportion of women MPs in favour of the war than male MPs). A
majority of female MPs also voted in favour of bombing Syria (98 women in favour,
83 against).
As for the second of the APA's "social forces", some women may be unhappy
about being portrayed in the media, in adverts and in dramas, etc., as unfailingly
thin and sexualised, but for men this would be a considerable improvement on being
almost always either a despicable villain or a bumbling oaf. Heroes these days are
almost always heroines, (Nathanson and Young, 2001). And as for the APA's
complaint that the media portrays women as victimised, this is remarkably
hypocritical given that the entirety of their Guidelines for Psychological Practice
with Girls and Women (2007) presents women as victimised.
The final "social force" which the APA mention as disadvantageous to women is
their ageing population. There are, of course, many valid health concerns relating
to the elderly, both mental and physical. And this ageing population, especially the
over-80s, mostly comprises women. But it is rather peculiar to single out this
phenomenon as a disadvantage to women, since the alternative – which applies to
men – is being dead. It is not a particular disadvantage to women that they remain
alive longer than men.
17.5.1 APA Versus Data
Rather than critique the hypotheses presented by APA and the 'Power Threat
Meaning Framework' we can take a different approach: the scientific method. We
can confront the implications of these hypotheses with the broad aspects of the
data on mental disorders, in particular their gender dependence. What follows is
not rigorous, it is heuristic: a "reasonableness check". I fully realise that different
disorders have widely differing prevalence between the sexes.
Observation 1
If social constructionism were correct, as APA assume, there would be no
difference between the prevalence of mental ill-health in very young boys and
girls. In fact, there is a difference as indicated by Figure 17.11. Boys exhibit a
significantly greater prevalence of mental disorders even at pre-school age (2-4)
and up to age 10. This suggests an innate difference in the sexes. The far greater
prevalence of behavioural disorders, hyperactivity and autism spectrum disorders
in boys also points to innate sex differences.
Observation 2
If masculinity were entirely socially constructed and also largely to blame for
men's and boys' mental ill-health, as APA propose, then the ratio of men's to
women's prevalence of such mental ill-health should increase with age through
childhood because the masculine cultural conditioning will not have occurred in
very young children but will become far more marked towards puberty and
throughout adolescence. In fact we see the opposite (Figure 17.11). Whilst boys
show greater prevalence of mental disorders before the age of 10, in the age range
11 to 16 there is equality of prevalence, but after age 16 it is women who have the
greater prevalence (Figures 17.2 and 17.11), and this is especially marked in the
age range 17 to 24. Greater prevalence in young women is further illustrated by
Figure 17.5 (personality disorders), Figure 17.7 (psychotic disorders) and Figure
17.10 (PTSD). Though there are disorders where males predominate, notably
autism spectrum, hyperactivity and behavioural disorders, the latter two are
largely childhood disorders whereas autism is probably largely genetic. There is
nothing in these broad-brush observations to support the idea that socially
constructed masculinity is a substantial cause of mental ill-health.
Observation 3
If traditional masculinity were a major cause of mental disorders in boys and men,
as APA suggest, then over recent decades the prevalence of disorders in men and
boys would be expected to have declined because boys and young men have
become less 'macho' acculturated and more accepting of a softer, more emotive,
nature, including markedly reduced homophobia, see (Anderson and Magrath,
2019). But actually the prevalence of disorders in men and boys has increased
(Figures 17.1 and 17.12 for England, Figures 17.18 and 17.19 for the USA).
Observation 4
Over the last several decades, young women have become markedly more
assertive, confident and often dominant in many social, educational and workplace
settings. Violence in society generally has reduced, and domestic abuse in
particular has reduced. If abuse were a central cause of mental disorders in girls
and young women, as APA have proposed, then their prevalence would be
expected to have reduced. In fact, the incidence of mental disorders in young
women has increased markedly, substantially more than for young men (Figures
17.1 and 17.12 for England, Figures 17.18 and 17.19 for the USA).
Conclusion: The feminist theories of the APA and BPS's 'Power Threat Meaning
Framework', based on the hypothesis that traditional masculinity is damaging, fail
elementary reasonableness checks.
Here is an alternative hypothesis, offered by Barbara Kay, (The American
Psychological Association goes to war against boys and men, 2019),
'All this depression and anxiety "may" come from female ideologues, who as
educators and role models: routinely tell girls they can "be anything" and "have it
all," which causes anxiety when "all" fails to emerge, as it almost invariably does;
who encourage girls to explore their sexuality without letting emotion get in the
way of healthy pleasure, but fail to warn them that promiscuity can leave them
feeling sad and empty and humiliated; who valorize abortion, but fail to warn of
abortion's frequent psychological impact; who deplore early commitment, even
when a young woman and man happen to be right for each other; who encourage
misandry by belittling or ignoring men's legitimate concerns, or fail to acknowledge
men's legitimate contributions to society; who value career ambitions over
motherhood; who confuse girls regarding the difference between being wooed and
sexual misconduct; and of course who persuade girls and women that if they are
unhappy, the reason never lies within, or from poorly-considered choices, but is
always the fault of a "traditional" male asserting his privilege, or "social
construction" that thwarts their self-realization.'
This perspective of Barbara Kay's does a better job than the hypothesis that
"masculinity is harmful" in explaining the greater prevalence of mental disorders
amongst women than amongst men. Note that Kay's last point, that young women
are being taught to believe that all their woes are caused by men, is an
encouragement to believe in a pervasive external locus of control. But this is
known to be associated with mental ill-health. Teaching young women to adopt this
exaggeratedly negative attitude towards men is therefore not only misandric, it is
also imposing mental fragility upon women. If you are brought up to believe that
the other half of the human race is dedicated to finding ways to abuse and assault
you, it probably would not do your peace of mind much good. You might just suffer
from an anxiety disorder.
On the other hand, if you are brought up to believe that you are the heir to an
unbroken line of violent abusers, and that you are under universal suspicion of
having acquired similar behavioural habits, then you are also unlikely to be in good
psychological shape. This perspective is consistent with the most striking feature of
recent data, namely the increasing prevalence of mental disorders in both sexes. In
short, the APA's hypothesis originates from an ideology which may be driving
increasing mental ill-health rather than the opposite, and the APA have adopted a
position of complicity.
17.6 The Empathy Gap in Mental Health Perceptions
In adults, women are diagnosed with more mental disorders than men. However,
even after controlling for this greater prevalence, women remain significantly
more likely than men to be receiving treatment (by 58%). After controlling for
other factors, including disorder prevalence and severity, lower rates of treatment
were indicated by being poor, being black and being male.
In contrast, the prevalence of mental disorders is greater in boys under 11 than in
girls the same age. The prevalence becomes the same in the early teenage range,
11 to 16. By late teenage, 17 to 19, the prevalence of mental disorders increases
markedly in young women but falls in young men (Figure 17.11). This is confirmed
by the adult surveys which show a very marked spike in the prevalence of many
disorders in young women aged 16 to 24. The reason for this turn-around is that, up
to age 10, it is behavioural disorders, hyperactive disorders and autism spectrum
disorders which dominate, and in these boys are the majority. But in the teenage
years, emotional disorders dominate, and in these girls are the majority.
Psychotropic medication was being taken by about 2.5% of 5- to 19-year-olds when
the survey was conducted in 2017. Below the age of 16 most of the medication was
for hyperactivity, generally stimulants, around 80% of which are boys. In the 16 to
19 age range, prescriptions were mostly antidepressants for young women.
The incidence of disorders was strongly related to lower income and to
dysfunctional families. The incidence was also nearly three times greater in
teenagers who identified as non-heterosexual.
School exclusion was nearly 14 times more common in children with a disorder than
in those without. Boys with a disorder were four times more likely to be excluded
from school than girls with a disorder.
The rate at which people are detained under the Mental Health Act is greater for
men than women, despite the greater prevalence of mental disorders amongst
women, and women's greater use of treatment services.
I have critiqued the APA's guidelines on psychological practice for boys and men,
in contrast with those for girls and women. Mental disorders in the latter are
claimed to arise largely from the assaults which society imposes on the psyches of
women and girls. They need and deserve our assistance, which will include
protecting them from these externally imposed harms. Mental disorders in men and
boys, in contrast, are said to arise largely out of the pathologies of their own
"traditional masculine" psychologies; men and boys are the architects of their own
suffering – as well as the suffering of others. They are broken and need to
concentrate on fixing themselves. In the different perceptions of male and female
sufferers from mental disorders we see a particularly emphatic example of the
empathy gap. It is disturbing that this is manifest in an area in which the subjects
are so vulnerable. Yet the APA themselves note that,
'…many men report experiencing gender bias in therapy…'
'…investigations have identified systemic gender bias toward adult men in
psychotherapy…'
'A disparity exists between the occurrence and severity of men's mental health
problems and the disproportionately low number of men served by psychological
services. It has been suggested that many men do not seek psychological help
because services are not in alignment with masculine cultural norms that equate
asking for assistance for psychological and emotional concerns with shame and
weakness.'
Have the APA asked themselves whether blaming traditional masculinity might
reinforce these perceptions of shame? Remarkably, the APA do not interpret these
observations as a salutary lesson for their own practice. Instead of aiming to
provide a therapeutic service aligned to the needs of the patient, the APA consider
it more appropriate to demand that the patient change to align with their
diagnostic preconceptions.
It is a pity the APA takes such a pejorative attitude towards men. A pernicious
aspect of this stems from the refusal to contemplate an innate component to male
psychology. As a result, they replace a man's shame at failing to achieve success in
a perceived gender role with a profounder shame of his own nature. This is where
the dearth of empathy takes you. The ultimate irony is that the APA's attitude,
indeed the feminist position, is profoundly traditional itself, being based upon
assumptions of men's agentic nature, and hence their culpability, as contrasted with
women's lack of agency, and hence that their ills are imposed upon them by the
agentic within society, namely men.
18. Suicide, Suicidality and Self-Harm
There is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that is suicide.
Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus (1942)
This chapter presents the statistics on suicide in the UK. It has become fashionable
to lament the high rates of male suicide. This gives the impression, which one
suspects the general public believe, that male suicide rates have increased in
recent years. Is this correct? The data are presented here and provide a less
simple picture than this suggests.
Whenever male suicide is mentioned in public utterances one can guarantee that
reference will immediately be made to men's reluctance to talk about their feelings
or to seek help. Is this valid? Or is it another example of the oblique victim blaming
which so often follows any acknowledgement of male disadvantage? In this chapter
I concentrate on the alternative, exogenous, factors which increase suicide rates:
intimate partner separation and domestic abuse. The effect of separation or
divorce on suicide rates will be seen to be more marked for men than for women. I
then critique the dominant narratives which seek to rationalise high male suicide
rates, confronting theoretical explanations based on hegemonic masculinity with
elementary empirical observations.
Before turning to these aspects of completed suicides, I review the data on selfharm, suicidal ideation and suicide attempts. Together with data on mental
disorders, the contrast between the female dominance in relation to these
problems, and the emphatic male dominance as regards completed suicides,
constitutes the suicide paradox. It is pointed out that this ceases to be paradoxical
if, instead of assuming that suicide is always a result of mental illness, that instead
exogenous factors might be dominant, especially for men.
Suicide in prison is not covered here as it has been addressed already in section
8.6.1.
18.1 Self-Harm, Suicidality and Suicide Attempts (England)
Data on self-harming, suicidal ideation and suicide attempts have been taken from
McManus et al (2014), which is Chapter 12 of the Adult Psychiatric Morbidity
Survey 2014, based on the English survey carried out for NHS Digital by NatCen
Social Research and the Department of Health Sciences. The data is based on
answers obtained from both face-to-face interviews and self-completion
questionnaires. For reasons of comparability, trends over time draw on the face-toface reports, which tend to be lower. See the source for further details of the
methodology.
Figure 18.1 shows the percentage of people who have ever self-harmed by age and
against year. Self-harming has increased markedly between 2000 and 2014 for all
age ranges. However, self-harm is far more prevalent amongst the youngest adults
(ages 16 to 24) and reduces with age. People of retirement age are nearly 14 times
less likely to self-harm than those aged 16 to 24. It is worth noting how remarkable
this is. Whilst Figure 18.1 presents cross-sectional data, it has a longitudinal
implication because the question asked by the survey related to having ever selfharmed. For those who were of retirement age in 2007, the answer was virtually
zero – implying that even 40 or 50 years earlier, when they were at the most
susceptible age, self-harming was extremely rare. This suggests that self-harm is
almost entirely a recent phenomenon.
Figure 18.1: Percentages Reporting Having Ever Self-Harmed by Age, 2000 to
2014
Figure 18.2 shows the prevalence of self-harming by sex in the most susceptible age
range, 16 to 24. Self-harming has increased steeply for both sexes, doubling for men
between 2000 and 2014, but tripling for women. Women were 65% more likely than
men to self-harm in 2000. By 2014 they were 150% more likely.
Figure 18.3 shows the percentages of people who have ever had suicidal thoughts,
broken down by sex and by age range. Figure 18.4 displays, in the same format, the
percentages who have attempted suicide. These histograms illustrate a feature
which was seen in chapter 17 to be typical also of mental disorders: there is a very
clear 'spike' in prevalence amongst women in the age range 16 to 24. Apart from
that, suicidal ideation is very similar between the two sexes, and quite flat until
retirement age when it reduces substantially.
Figure 18.2: Percentages of 16 to 24 Year Olds Reporting Having Ever SelfHarmed, by Sex, 2000 to 2014
Figure 18.3: Percentages Reporting Ever Had Suicidal Thoughts by Age and Sex,
2014
Suicide attempts by men peak in young men aged 25 to 34. This will be seen to
contrast with completed suicides which are substantially less common below 30 than
in the age range 30 to 60, peaking in the mid-40s.
Figure 18.5 shows the trends, between 2000 and 2014, in suicidal ideation and
suicide attempts within the last year, comparing with self-harm at any time. Both
self-harm and suicidal ideation have increased significantly. In contrast, suicide
attempts have remained relatively stable. To quote the source, 'between 2007 and
2014, reporting of a suicide attempt in the past year remained stable at 0.7% of 16-
to 74-year-olds. Since 2000 there has been a slight increase, but only among women
(0.5% in 2000, 1.0% in 2007)'.
Figure 18.4: Percentages Reporting Ever Attempted Suicide by Age and Sex, 2014
Figure 18.5: Trends in Self-Harm (ever), and Suicidality and Suicide Attempts
within the Last Year, 2000-2014 (all adults, 16 – 74)
It is worth emphasising the huge difference in annual rates of suicidal ideation,
suicide attempts and completed suicide. Over all adult age ranges and both sexes,
these rates are 5.4% (suicidal ideation, 2014), 0.7% (suicide attempts, 2014) and, as
we shall see in the next section, 0.01% (completed suicide, 2012-2016). Hence, only
13% of people with suicidal thoughts go on to attempt suicide, and only 1.4% who
attempt suicide actually succeed. In the next section, when I address completed
suicide, the reader might wish to bear in mind that suicide data is actually the
extreme tail of a distribution of unhappiness.
Finally in this section I consider the relationship between self-harm, suicidal
ideation, suicide attempts and indicators of mental disorder. In chapter 17 the CIS-R
score was introduced as a measure of the severity of common mental disorders.
Figure 18.6 plots the prevalence of self-harm, suicidal ideation and suicide attempts
against CIS-R (larger scores indicate greater severity of disorder). There is a very
clear relationship between mental disorder severity and self-harm, suicidal ideation
and suicide attempts. The relationship appears to be roughly linear. For ages 11 –
19, Table 18.1 shows a similarly clear relationship between mental disorders and
having ever self-harmed or attempted suicide.
Figure 18.6: Suicidal Ideation, Suicide Attempts and Self-Harm (Ever) by Severity
of Symptoms of Common Mental Disorders in the Last Week, 2014 (as measured by
CIS-R score)
Table 18.1: Percentages Ever Self-Harming or Attempting Suicide by Sex and by
Reporting Any Mental Disorder
Any Mental Disorder? Ages 11 to 16 Ages 17 to 19
Boys Girls Boys Girls
No 2.0% 4.0% 6.9% 11.7%
Yes 18.6% 31.2% 34.1% 52.7%
18.2 Suicide
18.2.1 UK Suicide Statistics and Trends
Suicide data for England and Wales has been taken from (Office for National
Statistics, 2018s) for the years 1981 to 2016. These data refer to suicides of people
aged 10 and over. Some suicide rate data from 1950 is also quoted and this was
taken from Gunnell (2003). Suicide rates are defined per 100,000 of the population
of the same sex and age range. Figures 18.7 and 18.8 give the number of suicides in
England and Wales respectively, separately for males and females, between the
years 1981 and 2016. The most striking feature of the data is that suicides of
women have reduced markedly over this period, to about half their 1981 level, in
both nations. In contrast, the number of male suicides in England has remained
fairly flat. In Wales, however, the number of male suicides has increased, by
perhaps 25% over the period (based on a running average).
Figure 18.7: Number of Suicides in England, by Sex, 1981-2016
Figure 18.8: Number of Suicides in Wales, by Sex, 1981-2016
However, in contrast to Figures 18.7 and 18.8, the male suicide rate in England and
Wales combined has reduced between the early 1980s and recent years, from
around 19 to around 15. Figure 18.9 shows the ratio of male to female suicide rates
over the same period, for England and Wales separately. This ratio has increased
markedly over the period. In England the suicide rates, averaged over a five year
period to 2016, were 15.2 for men and 4.6 for women, hence an average of 3.3 male
suicides to every female suicide. The suicide rate for men in Wales averaged over
the same five year period was substantially worse than in England, namely 20.0,
whilst that for women was 4.7, hence 4.3 male suicides in Wales for each female
suicide.
Figure 18.9: Ratio of Male to Female Suicide Rates in England and Wales, 1981-
2016
For both nations, the increase in the male:female suicide rate ratio since 1981 was
primarily due to the reduction in the number of female suicides, rather than the
increase in male suicides. This fact tends to be elided in popular accounts of suicide.
But it has a significant implication. A rational approach to suicide prevention would
start by asking what has caused the reduction in female suicides? If this can be
identified, perhaps it can be rolled out to men. But there appears to be a reluctance
to acknowledge that something beneficial has been done for women, so this
approach is never considered.
Figures 18.7-9 are not disaggregated by age. Carrying out that disaggregation
reveals some surprising long-term trends. Figure 18.10 shows the male suicide rate
in England and Wales combined from 1951 to 1998, and Figure 18.11 shows the rate
from 1981 to 2016. These show the trends separately for various age ranges
(though the age ranges differ between the two graphs). In the second half of the
20th century, Figure 18.10 shows that the suicide rate for men over 54 in England
and Wales reduced quite dramatically. That for men aged 45 to 54 also reduced
significantly. In stark contrast, the suicide rate for younger men, from age 15 to 44,
increased significantly over the same period. Over the later period, 1981 to 2016,
Figure 18.11 shows that there has been little discernible trend in male suicide rate
for men below the age of 60 (consistent with Figure 18.7). However, men aged 60
and older showed markedly reduced suicide rates over the period, roughly halving
between 1981 and 2016.
The popular perception that men's suicide rate has substantially increased in recent
years is false (though there may be local increases, such as that in Wales).
Moreover, the reduction in older men's suicide rates goes largely unremarked.
Figures 18.12 and 18.13 present the same data for women. Here the story is simpler,
at least if we consider changes from the mid-1960s. For women, the suicide rate has
decreased for all age ranges above 30, whilst for women younger than 30, for whom
the suicide rate is much smaller, there has been little change.
It should be recalled from the previous section that there have been large increases
in rates of self-harm and suicidal ideation, for both men and women since 2000. Yet
in contrast we see relatively steady, or falling, rates of suicide, especially for
women. This indicates that there is no simple relationship between completed
suicide and what might have been assumed to be precursor indicators: self-harm
and suicidal ideation.
To reiterate: the marked increase in the male:female suicide rate ratio (Figure
18.9) is primarily due to the reduction in the female suicide rate. Moreover, any
increase in male suicide rate is concentrated in young and middle-aged men, with
older men having seen reductions in suicide rates. Attempting to explain these
observations based on statistical modelling, Gunnell (2003) concluded,
'The factors most consistently associated with the rises in young male suicide are
increases in divorce, declines in marriage and increases in income inequality. These
changes have had little effect on suicide in young females. This may be because the
drugs commonly used in overdose - their favoured method of suicide - have become
less toxic or because they are less affected by the factors underlying the rise in
male suicide.'
The impact of intimate partner separation or divorce on suicide rates will be
examined in greater depth in section 18.2.3.1, and the role of domestic abuse in
section 18.2.3.2.
Figure 18.10: Male Suicide Rates in England and Wales by Age Range, 1951-1998
Figure 18.11: Male Suicide Rates in England and Wales by Age Range, 1981-2016
Figure 18.12: Female Suicide Rates in England and Wales by Age Range, 1951-
1998
Figure 18.13: Female Suicide Rates in England and Wales by Age Range, 1981-2016
18.2.2 The Suicide Paradox
The term "gender suicide paradox" is often used to describe the fact that women
have a higher prevalence of reported mental disorders than men, but a far lower
suicide rate. The "paradox" can be widened to include self-harm, suicidal ideation
and suicide attempts – all of which are more prevalent among women than men,
despite women's substantially lower rate of completed suicide.
But this supposed paradox is not only a gender issue. The prevalence of selfharming and suicidal ideation by both sexes has increased substantially, as has the
prevalence of mental disorders (chapter 17). Yet the suicide rate in the UK has not
increased overall, in fact it has decreased, even for men alone, and has reduced
markedly for women. Consequently, the suicide paradox relates to a disconnect
between increasing mental disorders, self-harming and suicidal ideation and
reducing rates of completed suicides. The paradox applies also to men, though it is
even more marked for women.
In this respect it is worth recalling the relative rarity of completed suicide
compared with self-harming, suicidal ideation or even suicide attempts. To recap:
over all adult age ranges and both sexes, the relevant yearly rates are 5.4%
(suicidal ideation, 2014), 0.7% (suicide attempts, 2014) and 0.01% (completed
suicide, 2012-2016). Completed suicide is at the extreme tail end of the distribution
of misery underlying these phenomena.
18.2.3 Reasons for the High Male Suicide Rate
A number of factors which elevate suicide rates can be identified. The role of
intimate partner separation/divorce is considered in some detail in section 18.2.3.1,
and the effect of domestic abuse in section 18.2.3.2. A major correlate of suicide,
however, is socioeconomic class. The report 'Men, Suicide and Society',
(Samaritans, 2012), summarises it thus,
'There are systematic socio-economic inequalities in suicide risk. Socio-economic
position can be defined in many ways – by job, class, education, income, or housing.
Whichever indicator is used, people in the lower positions are at higher risk of
suicide. As you go down each rung of the social ladder, the risk of suicide increases,
even after taking into account underlying mental health problems. There is debate
over precisely how low social position increases suicide risk. Suggestions include
having many more adverse experiences, powerlessness, stigma and disrespect,
social exclusion, poor mental health and unhealthy lifestyles.'
Male suicide is particularly strongly associated with socioeconomics. This is hardly
surprising. For those in poorly paid, or irregular, employment, it can be difficult to
pay for the basics of life in the modern world. And if the only means you have to do
so involves long hours of laborious work in unpleasant conditions, with no hope of
your lot improving, succumbing to despair may be hard to avoid. Financial
pressures on men are likely to be greater than on women, there still being an
expectation that the man is the family's main breadwinner. It does no good to
disparage this as "hegemonic masculinity" if it is simply a man's daily lived
experience. And the sheer unpleasantness of much of the work that men in the
lower socioeconomic classes are obliged to do is a factor which seems to receive
little attention.
Section 18.2.3.3 will critique the various narratives which surround the issue of
high male suicide rates. But first I shall look at the relationship between suicide
and partner separation, followed by the impact of domestic abuse.
18.2.3.1 Partner Separation and Suicide Rates
There is a wealth of research evidence regarding the relationship between partner
separation or divorce and subsequent suicide rates. To pre-empt the conclusion of
this section, it is clear that separation results in increased suicide rates in men, and
most studies show increased suicide rates in women also, though the increase for
men is substantially greater. As usual we must be cautious and refer to
"correlation". However, a causal connection is almost certain in this case. The
usual proviso is that suicidality might be related to the precipitation of
separation/divorce. Whilst this cannot be completely dismissed, it is made less
credible by the fact that the separation might be initiated by one partner but the
suicide by the other. This is, in fact, the most common permutation, since women
initiate most separations/divorces, but men kill themselves far more often.
Evans, Scourfield and Moore (2016) have performed a thorough literature search
for reputable publications addressing associations between relationship breakdown
and suicide or suicide risk, and how this is differentiated by sex. Confining
attention to Western and Anglophone countries, from a coarse sort of 1,066
articles, they examined the full texts of 52. Of these, 19 were considered of the
appropriate quality and level of detail and presented data at the "individual level".
A further 10 papers were "ecological studies" which the same authors had
considered in an earlier publication. This earlier publication appears as an
Appendix to the report 'Men, Suicide and Society', (Samaritans, 2012). The
authors are cautious about over-stating their conclusions, the 2016 article
concluding that,
'Nineteen published articles that included individual-level data were identified.
Twelve reported a greater risk of suicide in men following relationship breakdown,
two indicated a greater risk in women, and a further five showed no clear gender
differential. Although there are possible indications of increased risk for men, no
definitive conclusion about gender differential can be drawn.'
The 2012 report, which included more studies, concludes,
'This paper presents a systematic review of the evidence on gender differentials in
suicide risk after breakdown in intimate relationships (including divorce and
separation). Twenty-nine published papers were identified, which included analysis
of individual-level data and ecological studies. Of these, 17 found suicide risk to be
higher in men, six found risk to be higher in women and six had no consistent
findings on gender difference.'
A simple counting of how many reports indicate a greater, or equal, effect of
separation on suicide rates in the two sexes may not, however, be the best
indicator. Differences may be small or large in magnitude and will vary in statistical
significance. Consequently, I have used the sources quoted in these two studies by
Evans, Scourfield and Moore (plus one more, namely Wyder 2009) to compile two
sets of results, given in Tables 18.2 and 18.3.
Table 18.2 lists those studies which provide an explicit numerical factor by which
separation, divorce or widowhood increased the rate of suicide or suicidality,
separately for the two sexes. These factors measure the enhancement after
separation with respect to the base rate for non-separated persons of the same
sex. (The non-separated reference might be married people or single people,
usually the former). Most of the data relate to completed suicide, though some
refer to suicidality or suicide attempts. Data in italics in Table 18.2 had a 95%
confidence interval consistent with no effect. The rest indicated a statistically
significant effect at the 95% confidence level, or better. None of the data of Table
18.2 relate to Great Britain and only one study to Northern Ireland.
Figure 18.14 uses the data of Table 18.2 to plot the factor of suicide rate increase
due to separation for men against that for women. The black line is the line of
equality. Only two points lie below the line (and only one significantly so). Several
points lie on, or very close to, the line of equality. But a substantial number of data
points lie well above the line, indicating a larger effect of separation/divorce on
men's suicide rates than upon women's. Of the 27 data points on Figure 18.14, 2 lie
below the line, 7 lie very close to the line, while 18 points (67%) lie clearly above
the line.
Table 18.2: Increase in Suicide or Suicidality after Separation, Divorce or
Widowhood for Men and Women Separately. Note that the reference base rate for
non-separated people is markedly greater for men than for women. Data in blue
italics indicates that the effect is not significant at the 95% confidence level.
Sources Fekete and Kolves gave only the relative rates for separated men and
women, hence the X in the female column is unknown.
Reference Country Category Male Female
(Trovato, 1991), 1981 Canada Suicide 1.67 1.61
(Rodríguez-Pulido,
1992)
Canary Suicide 8.06 8.6
(Cantor, 1995) Australia Suicide 6.2 1.6
(Burgoa, 1998) Spain Suicide 2.99 1.5
(Kposowa, 2000) USA Suicide 2.38 1.27
(Agerbo, 2005)
divorced
Denmark Suicide 1.75 1.68
(Agerbo, 2005)
separated
Denmark Suicide 1.93 1.97
(Masocco, 2008) Italy Suicide 1.79 1.96
(Denney, 2009)
separated/divorced
USA Suicide 1.39 1.42
(Denney, 2009)
widowed
USA Suicide 1.6 1.18
(Petrovic, 2009) Serbia Suicide 3.79 1.47
(Masocco, 2010) 24-
44
Italy Suicide 1.47 2.67
(Masocco, 2010) 45-
64
Italy Suicide 1.77 1.62
(Corcoran, 2010) N.Ireland Suicide 2.61 2.57
(Wyder, 2009)
separated,15-24
Australia Suicide 12.1 3.07
(Wyder, 2009)
separated,25-44
Australia Suicide 8.45 3.15
(Wyder, 2009)
separated,45-64
Australia Suicide 5.25 4.08
(Wyder, 2009)
separated, 65+
Australia Suicide 2.82 1.58
(
Wy
d
e
r,
2
0
0
9
)
w
ido
w
e
d
,
2
5
-
4
4
A
u
s
tr
a
lia
S
uic
id
e
2.7
2.0
8
(
Wy
d
e
r,
2
0
0
9
)
w
ido
w
e
d
,
4
5
-
6
4
A
u
s
tr
a
lia
S
uic
id
e
1.8
7
1.6
3
(
Wy
d
e
r,
2
0
0
9
)
w
ido
w
e
d
,
6
5
+
A
u
s
tr
a
lia
S
uic
id
e
1.9
8
0.8
5
(
K
o
v
e
s
s
-
M
a
s
fe
ty,
2
0
1
1
)
S
p
a
in
S
uic
id
a
lity
1.6
8
1.1
4
(
K
o
v
e
s
s
-
M
a
s
fe
ty,
2
0
1
1
)
F
r
a
n
c
e
S
uic
id
a
lity
1.4
3
0.9
6
(
K
o
v
e
s
s
-
M
a
s
fe
ty,
2
0
1
1
)
S
p
a
in
A
tt
e
mp
t
s
8.0
4
0.9
(
K
o
v
e
s
s
-
M
a
s
fe
ty,
2
0
1
1
)
F
r
a
n
c
e
A
tt
e
mp
t
s
4.4
6
0.7
8
(
F
e
ke
t
e
,
2
0
0
5
)
H
un
g
a
r
y
S
uic
id
a
lity
1.6
4X
X
(
K
õ
lv
e
s
,
2
0
1
0
)
A
u
s
tr
a
lia
S
uic
id
a
lity
2.0
6
X
X
Despite the professional reticence of Evans, Scourfield and Moore, I suggest that
Figure 18.14 indicates convincingly that the increase in suicide rate due to
separation tends to be significantly greater for men than for women. However,
more obviously still, Figure 18.14 shows that the suicide rate for both sexes is
increased by separation. Of the 27 data points, all show an increase for men, and
22 (81%) are significant at the 95% confidence level or better. For women, of the
27 data points, 14 to 16 (52%-59%) show an increase which is significant at the
95% confidence level or better. The median factor by which separation/divorce
increases the suicide, or suicidality, rate for men is 2.1 (mean 3.5). For women the
median is 1.6 (mean 2.0).
The reader should bear in mind when interpreting the data in Table 18.2 and Figure
18.14 that the factors given are with respect to the base suicide rate for the same
sex, and that the base suicide rate for men is substantially higher than that for
women. For example, in England in recent years we have seen in section 18.2.1
that the suicide rate for men was 3.3 times that for women. For such a base rate
ratio, Figure 18.14 implies a relative suicide rate for men and women after
separation as given in Figure 18.15 (which is obtained from the suicide data of
Figure 18.14 by multiplying the y-axis by 3.3). Hence, Figure 18.15 gives the suicide
rate for men and women after separation normalised by the base rate for nonseparated women. Separated men are 8 times more likely to commit suicide than
non-separated women (based on the median, or 12 times more likely based on the
mean).
Figure 18.14: Increase in Suicide or Suicidality due to Separation, Divorce or
Widowhood Comparing the Increase for Men and Women. Note that the reference
base rate for non-separated people is markedly greater for men than for women.
Figure 18.15: Suicide Rates for Separated Men and Separated Women Compared.
The rates plotted for both sexes are normalised by a base rate for non-separated
women. This Figure assumes a male:female suicide rate ratio of 3.3, representative
of England in recent years.
Those studies identified in (Evans, Scourfield and Moore, 2016) or (Samaritans,
2012) which did not provide a quantification of the increase in suicide or suicidality
rates, but which did provide a qualitative indication of the relative enhancement for
the two sexes, are listed in Table 18.3 together with their principal results. (One
further source has been added, namely the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2012). Of these additional 16 studies, 12 indicated a significant
association of separation/divorce with suicide rate for one or both sexes. Of the 16
studies, 10 indicated a greater effect on men than on women, whilst only 2 indicated
a greater effect on women. Hence these qualitative results are broadly consistent
with the quantitative results of Table 18.2. Across the 43 studies listed in the two
Tables, 28 (65%) indicate a greater adverse effect of separation/divorce on men
than on women, and only 4 (9%) a greater effect on women.
A striking thing about these studies is how very few use contact with children, or
even the existence of children, as a covariate in their statistical analyses. One
cannot help but think that the authors might have profited from spending some time
attending meetings of the charity Families Need Fathers Both Parents Matter
Cymru. Here they would see first-hand that men's distress after separation is very
evident, freely expressed, and almost exclusively concerned with child contact.
Table 18.3: Sources Indicating Relative Suicide or Suicidality Incidence for the
Two Sexes after Separation or Divorce where Rates are Not Quantified.
Reference Country Result
(Zeiss, 1981) USA
Significantly fewer suicidal feelings
amongst women
(Kposowa, 2003) USA
Divorced men 9.7 times more likely
to kill themselves than divorced
women
(Walsh, 2009) USA
Departure of an intimate partner
cited as a factor in significantly more
male than female suicides
(Rossow, 1993) Norway
Correlation significant for men (0.35)
but not significant for women (0.25)
(Burnley, 1995) Australia
For ages 15-24 and 65-74, correlation
significant for men (0.52-0.56) but
not significant for women (0.26-
0.28). For ages 25-39, correlation
significant for both: men 0.53, women
0.52.
(Lester, 1995) USA
Correlation significant for both: men
0.42, women 0.50
(Gunnell, 2003) UK
Significant association for both sexes
at ages 25-34, but for neither sex for
ages 60+
(Andres, 2005) Europe
Significant association for men but
not for women
(Barstad, 2008) Norway
Significant association with
separation for both sexes but larger
for men (0.42 cf 0.25)
(Andres, 2010) Denmark
Association not significant for either
sex (but best estimate greater for
men, 0.33 cf 0.16)
(Fernquist, 2003) Many
In highly religious countries,
significant association for both sexes
but greater for men (0.53 cf 0.45)
(Agerbo, 2011) Denmark
Significant association and twice as
great an effect on women
(Heikkinen, 1995) Finland Sex difference not significant
(Cutright, 2005) USA Sex difference not significant
(
L
e
s
t
e
r,
1
9
9
2
)
A
u
s
tr
a
lia
N
o
s
ignific
a
n
c
e
a
s
s
o
c
ia
t
io
n
fo
r
e
ith
e
r
s
e
x
(
C
e
nt
e
r
s
fo
r
D
is
e
a
s
e
C
o
ntr
o
l,
2
0
1
2
)
U
S
A
M
e
n's
s
uic
id
e
r
a
t
e
is
e
nh
a
n
c
e
d
mo
r
e
th
a
n
w
o
me
n's
b
y
p
a
r
tn
e
r
s
e
p
a
r
a
t
io
n
Data from the USA (Centers for Disease Control, 2012) is also given in Table 18.4.
The majority of men who killed themselves in the USA (~60%) had no known
mental health problem, whereas the majority of women who killed themselves
(~61%) did have a known mental health problem. This is consistent with a greater
role of exogenous factors in male suicide. Overall there were 3.6 male suicides for
each female suicide (broadly like the UK and most other Western countries). A
larger percentage of men who killed themselves had a known problem with their
intimate partner (33%) than did women who killed themselves (25.5%). Bearing in
mind that an intimate partner problem is likely to be mutual, these data imply that
men with such a problem are 4.6 times more likely to commit suicide than women in
the same position (2,289/493).
Table 18.4: Suicide Data from the USA (Centers for Disease Control, 2012)
Reason for Suicide Men Women
number % of total number
% of
total
All reasons 6,931 100 1,931 100
Current mental health problem 2,724 39.3 1,184 61.3
Physical health problem 1,419 20.5 442 22.9
Intimate partner problem 2,289 33.0 493 25.5
Other relationship problem (nonintimate)
659 9.5 267 13.8
Suicide of family member or
friend within past 5 years
127 1.8 34 1.8
Other death of family member or
friend within past 5 years
443 6.4 110 5.7
The large number of sources prohibits a detailed discussion of their findings beyond
the broad outcomes recorded in the above Tables and Figures. However, a few
quotes are appropriate. (Rossow, 1993), Norway, concludes,
'Times series analyses on differenced data from 1911 to 1990 showed that both
alcohol consumption and divorce were independently and statistically significantly
associated with the male suicide rate, but not with the female suicide rate.'
(Gunnell, 2003), UK, concludes,
'The factors most consistently associated with the rises in young male suicide are
increases in divorce, declines in marriage and increases in income inequality. These
changes have had little effect on suicide in young females.'
(Andres, 2005), Europe, concludes,
'…the effect of divorce rate is specific to gender.'
(Andres, 2005) finds the influence of divorce on men's suicide rate is significant at
the 99% confidence level (i.e., p < 0.01). In contrast, the influence for women is not
statistically significant (p > 0.1). (Walsh, 2009), USA (Kentucky), concludes,
'In 2005, intimate partner problems were documented as a contributing factor in
128 (29%) of all suicide cases where the circumstances were known. In 54 (42%)
of the 128 cases, the coroner noted that the decedent's intimate was in the process
of leaving, breaking up, had recently left, had recently separated, had recently
filed for divorce, was awaiting divorce, or had a divorce recently finalized. Of
those 54 cases involving intimate partner problems most (87%) of the suicide
victims were men and were significantly different from the women.'
This suggests that separated, or separating, men are 6.7 times more likely to
suicide than women in the same position. (Wyder, 2009), Australia, concludes,
'During the examined period, 6062 persons died by suicide in Queensland (an
average of 551 cases per year), with males outnumbering females by four to one.
For both males and females separation created a risk of suicide at least 4 times
higher than any other marital status. The risk was particularly high for males aged
15 to 24 (relative risk 91.62). This study highlights a great variation in the
incidence of suicide by marital status, age and gender, which suggests that these
variables should not be studied in isolation. Furthermore, particularly in younger
males, separation appears to be strongly associated with the risk of suicide.'
(Kposowa, 2000), USA, concludes,
'Divorced and separated persons were over twice as likely to commit suicide as
married persons. Being single or widowed had no significant effect on suicide risk.
When data were stratified by sex, it was observed that the risk of suicide among
divorced men was over twice that of married men. Among women, however, there
were no statistically significant differentials in the risk of suicide by marital status
categories. Conclusions: Marital status, especially divorce, has strong net effect on
mortality from suicide, but only among men.'
While (Kposowa, 2003) concludes,
'Divorced men were over eight times more likely to commit suicide than divorced
women. After taking into account other factors that have been reported to
contribute to suicide, divorced men still experienced much increased risks of
suicide than divorced women. They were nearly 9.7 times more likely to kill
themselves than comparable divorced women. Put another way, for every divorced
woman that killed themselves, over nine divorced men killed themselves.'
18.2.3.2 Domestic Abuse and Suicide Rates
There is evidence that domestic violence is related to suicide, and that domestic
violence has at least as great, or greater, impact on male suicide than on female
suicide. Published data are still sparse, but emerging indicators are that male
victims of domestic violence are more likely to kill themselves than female victims.
In the book 'You Can Stop Male Suicide', (Poole, 2017) observes that,
'UK government data suggests that male victims of domestic violence are 50%
more likely to attempt suicide than female victims, while US researchers have
found that men who were sexually abused in childhood are up to 11 times more
likely to suicide…..Another form of abuse that men are more prone to is false
allegations of physical and sexual assault. A recent survey of 30 victims of false
allegations (24 men and 6 women) by the University of Oxford's Centre of
Criminology, found that over a quarter reported being suicidal.'
The Oxford survey which Poole refers to here is that by Carolyn Hoyle, NaomiEllen Speechley and Ros Burnett, (2017). Based on the observation that 'men in
mid-life are dependent primarily on female partners for emotional support'
,
(Samaritans, 2012), it is reasonable to expect that men would be particularly
susceptible to psychological harm as a result of abuse by their female partner. This
can only be exacerbated by the dearth of provision for male victims of domestic
abuse (see chapter 9) and further exacerbated by the disbelief and lack of
sympathy which male victims face from the public generally. All these societal
factors amplify the natural tendency of men not to disclose their abuse to others,
which in turn can only increase their silent distress.
Moreover, it is not just the victims but also the perpetrators of domestic violence
who have elevated rates of suicidal ideation. For example, 22% of a sample of 294
men attending a batterer's intervention programme in the USA had experienced
suicidal ideation in the two weeks prior to entering the programme, (WolfordClevenger et al, 2015). This is less surprising than it initially appears given that
roughly half of domestic violence is reciprocal. However, as usual, one needs to be
cautious about assuming causal connection. Mutual correlates are likely and
causality may be more complex.
Causality has been investigated in the context of the suicidality of domestic
violence offenders by (Cero et al, 2015) and (Wolford-Clevenger et al, 2017). Both
support the association of suicidal ideation in domestic abuse perpetrators with
"perceived burdensomeness". Perceived burdensomeness is the belief that one is a
burden on others or society, generally accompanied by feelings of self-hatred and
of being a liability. The sufferer believes that he (or she) will assist others best by
dying, in other words that their suicide is a socially beneficial act.
The study of (Wolford-Clevenger et al, 2017) was based on 312 men and 84 women
with an average age of 35 who were arrested for domestic violence and mandated
to attend batterer intervention programmes in Rhode Island. No gender
differences emerged for suicide ideation, drug use, alcohol use, depression or
borderline personality disorder symptoms. Men reported greater capability for
suicide than women, whereas more women reported a suicide attempt history than
men. ("Suicidal capability" refers to being fearless about death and tolerant of
physical pain, factors which are believed to be associated with suicide attempts and
completions). Men and women did not differ in levels of perceived burdensomeness
(though it should be recalled that the subjects were far from being a typical crosssection of the public). The authors conclude, 'the present study adds to the
suggestion that perceived burdensomeness may be a more salient risk factor for
suicide ideation than thwarted belongingness and showed that association held in
both men and women'. ("Thwarted belongingness" refers to involuntary social
isolation).
Another emerging observation, as yet with limited published support, is that male
perpetrators are significantly more likely to kill themselves than they are to kill
their partner. It must be recalled that men labelled as perpetrators are often also
victims, though this may not be recorded. Indeed, the true perpetrator and victim
might be entirely the reverse. It has been suggested that the number of male
deaths resulting from partner abuse would exceed the number of female deaths, if
suicides due to such abuse were included. Direct support for this corollary comes
from the study by Davis (2010) which concludes,
'When domestic violence-related suicides are combined with domestic violence
homicides, the total numbers of domestic violence-related deaths are higher for
males than females. This paper recommends that to understand the broad scope
and tragic impact of domestic violence, further research is needed concerning
domestic violence-related suicide.'
This is an extremely significant finding given the powerful influence that
accusations of domestic violence have in determining the outcomes of Family Court
cases, and the manner in which related deaths have been used for lobbying
purposes (see chapters 10 and 12).
What has been well established in the UK is perhaps the most surprising finding of
all, namely that suicidal ideation by potential perpetrators is the best predictor of
partner homicide. This has been revealed by the analysis of Bridger et al (2017)
which reviewed 188 cases of intimate partner homicide recorded in England and
Wales between April 2011 and March 2013. Offenders in these cases were 86%
male and 14% female, and vice-versa for the victims. Whilst perpetrators had high
rates of substance abuse (mostly alcohol) and prior offending, the most
disproportionately prevalent characteristic was suicidal ideation, self-harm or
suicide attempts by the perpetrator. Prior to the homicide, 40% of the male
offenders were known by someone, but often not to police, as suffering suicidal
ideation, self-harm or attempted suicides. For female offenders the figure was
28%. Post-offence suicide attempts occurred in 33.4% of cases with a 'success'
rate for the perpetrator of 24.2% of those attempts. It is striking how dramatically
higher this success rate is than amongst the general public (see sections 18.2.1-2 ).
The authors conclude, rather remarkably, that,
'Of all of the characteristics (considered) suicide ideation appears to be the most
over-represented in relation to the general population. Chronic substance abuse,
cohabitation and even prior crime against the victim are so widespread and
prevalent in the population generally that they would massively over-predict
domestic homicide. Suicidal ideation or attempts, however, appear to be much rarer
in the population. Thus, a 40% rate of suicidal indication among the male offenders
may be the most useful of any of these characteristics in distinguishing people who
are much more likely to kill their partners than other offenders.'
And also,
'It is plausible that many more intimate partner homicides might be accurately
predicted, and perhaps prevented, with more public investment in obtaining data on
suicidal indicators and more proactive treatment of domestic abuse offenders
known to suffer suicidal tendencies.'
This is particularly noteworthy as research by the police in Thames Valley and in
Dorset have shown that tools such as the Domestic Abuse Stalking and Harassment
instrument (DASH) have failed to predict most cases of domestic homicide, see
Bridger et al (2017) for details.
18.2.3.3 Lack of UK Research
It is striking that none of the studies in Table 18.2 relate to Great Britain, and only
one to Northern Ireland. As for the sources given in Table 18.3, there is just one
UK study, Gunnell et al (2003), and this provided no quantification of the effect of
separation on suicide, only showing it to be significant. One of the UK's leading
male-specific suicide charities (CALM) appears not to carry out research into
causes.
Wales has a national suicide prevention strategy, 'Talk to me 2', (Welsh
Government, 2015a), but the Objectives, (Welsh Government, 2015b), and the
Key Activities, (Welsh Government, 2015c), make no mention of the male sex
despite this being the demographic of concern. The Key Activities recognise
domestic abuse as a suicide risk for women but not for men, which is odd.
It may well be that this absence of UK research is because research funding gets
deflected onto anything but the elephant in the room: men. For example, the UK
Government made £1.5M available for suicide research starting in November 2012
and running for 3 years. Despite initial strategy documents paying appropriate lipservice to male suicide, (UK Government, 2012b), the invitation to tender which
emerged, (Department of Health, 2012), called for proposals against the following
five categories only,
How to reduce the risk of suicide in a key high-risk group: people with a history of
self-harm;
How approaches and interventions can be tailored to improve mental health in
specific groups;
How self-harm can be better managed and suicide reduced in children and young
people, including looked-after children and care leavers;
How the media can be better supported in delivering sensible and sensitive
approaches to suicide and suicidal behaviour;
How the health and social care system can provide better information and support
to those bereaved or affected by a suicide.
There is no mention of the demographic which accounts for 77% of the suicides in
the UK in these proposals, the male sex. Observations on these tender categories
are,
The focus on self-harm and mental disorder seems inappropriate since these
phenomena appear to be very poor predictors of suicide. By focussing on self-harm
and mental disorder, focus will shift primarily onto women, who suffer more from
these issues, and away from men, who are the main victims of suicide.
Whilst the focus on children and young people stirs one's sentiments, suicide peaks
in adult men of middle age: men in their mid-forties. So the research areas again
deflect attention away from the demographic upon which suicide is concentrated.
The proposed research areas fail to address the most obvious and pressing
question: why do the majority of people committing suicide do it? And this means
adult men.
Two of the five work areas relate to the media and "providing better information".
But better information needs to be acquired before it can be disseminated, and the
information which is still sadly lacking is quality UK data on the motivations for
adult men's suicide, how it relates to life events and the implied causalities.
There appears to be a reluctance to approach the question of what lies behind the
high male suicide rate. Is it because this is a loose thread that the Department of
Health has no desire to pull? Is it because there is a political wish to avoid drawing
attention to the known exogenous factors: unemployment, deprivation,
homelessness, imprisonment, domestic abuse, divorce, separation and child
contact? Or is it simply the empathy gap which relegates adult male suicide to a
lesser status, regardless of the suicide arithmetic?
18.2.4 Methods of Suicide and Suicide Attempts
Data on the method adopted for completed suicides in the UK in 2017 has been
published, (Office for National Statistics, 2018t), and are reproduced in Table 18.5
below. Hanging is the most common method leading to a successful suicide, for both
sexes. However this is misleading as regards the relative frequency of the methods
used for suicide attempts. Recall that the overwhelming majority of suicide
attempts do not succeed. Those which succeed tend to be those which opt for the
most lethal methods, e.g., hanging. For the same reason, Table 18.5 is misleading as
regards the choice of method by sex. Actually, a far smaller proportion of women
than men who attempt suicide opt for hanging, but those who do are more likely to
be successful.
Table 18.5: Proportion of Suicide Deaths by Method and Sex, UK 2017.
Method Men Women
Drowning 4.0% 5.2%
Fall and Fracture 3.7% 3.1%
Poisoning 18.2% 38.3%
Hanging 59.7% 42.1%
Other 14.4% 11.3%
As an indication of the methods used in suicide attempts I shall quote the results of
a Swedish study because it has particularly large statistics and a very long followup period. The study identified 48,649 individuals admitted to hospital in 1973-82
after attempting suicide, but surviving. Over a period of up to 31 years after the
index event, the study also identified whether these individuals subsequently
succeeded in killing themselves, (Runeson et al, 2010). The number of women
attempting suicide exceeded the number of men by 6.7% (noting that the data
relates to failed attempts only). Within the follow up period, 13.8% of these men
and 9.9% of the women subsequently succeeded in killing themselves. (Because
these data relate to people with a history of suicide attempts they are not
indicative of the general public).
Table 18.6 reveals a very different relative prevalence of methods used in
unsuccessful suicide attempts, as compared with Table 18.5 for completed suicides.
Poisoning was overwhelmingly the most common method for attempted, but failed,
suicide (77% of men and 90% of women). In contrast, hanging, strangulation or
suffocation accounted for only 2.0% of men's suicide attempts and only 0.9% of
women's attempts. This stands in stark contrast with Table 18.5.
Table 18.6 also gives an indication of the degree of determination shown by those
using the various methods as indicated by the percentage of each which
subsequently resulted in a successful suicide. Hanging, strangulation or suffocation
appears as easily the most successful, with a second attempt success rate of 53.9%
for men and 56.6% for women (although more than twice as many men chose this
method).
The data on subsequently completed suicides in Table 18.6 should not be conflated
with data applicable generally, because this is a skewed sample of people who have
attempted, but survived, earlier suicide attempts. Thus, for example, people who
previously opted for hanging will be under-represented in Table 18.6 because most
will have succeeded first time around.
It may be that the relative prevalence of the various methods is culture dependent.
A much smaller scale study in Poland, involving 234 failed suicide attempts,
(Tsirigotis et al, 2011), indicated the following method statistics,
Drugs/poisoning: 48% of women and 25% of men;
Exsanguination (wrist-cutting): 29% of women and 13% of men;
Hanging/asphyxia: 11% of women and 56% of men;
Jumping from height: 10% of women and 6% of men.
In Poland over the relevant period the suicide rate for men was more than six
times that for women. This aligns with men opting far more often for the most
lethal method – hanging.
I note in passing that USA data on methods of suicide, or suicide attempts, might be
misleading if assumed to be indicative of European countries due to the prevalence
of suicide/attempts in the USA using firearms, something which is rarer in
countries with less readily available firearms.
Table 18.6: Methods of Attempted Suicide, and Ultimate Successful Suicide, from
Swedish Study (Runeson et al, 2010). The number of attempts is given as a
percentage of the total attempts. The number of subsequently completed suicides
is given as a percentage of the number of attempts using the same method, giving
an indication of lethality.
Suicide attempt method Men Women
No (%) of attempts
No (%) of suicides
during follow-up
No (%) of attempts
No (%)
of
suicides
during
followup
Poisoning 18 225 (77.4) 2247 (12.3)
22 521
(89.7)
2023
(9.0)
Cutting or piercing 1686 (7.2) 219 (13.0) 737 (2.9)
79
(10.7)
Gassing 318 (1.4) 69 (21.7) 101 (0.4)
15
(14.9)
Hanging, strangulation, or
suffocation
479 (2.0) 258 (53.9) 221 (0.9)
125
(56.6)
Drowning 165 (0.7) 50 (30.3) 161 (0.6)
70
(43.5)
Firearm or explosive 287 (1.2) 99 (34.5) 40 (0.2)
3
(7.5)
Jumping from a height 467 (2.0) 155 (33.2) 335 (1.3)
74
(22.1)
Other method 1403 (7.7) 125 (8.9) 579 (2.3)
58
(10.0)
Late effect of suicide
attempt/other self inflicted
harm
508 (2.8) 38 (7.5) 416 (1.7)
33
(7.9)
All methods 23 538 3260 (13.8) 25 111
2480
(9.9)
18.3 Male Suicide: Narratives, Rationalisations and Blaming
Rather than attempt an impossibly open-ended literature review, in this section I
shall take the report 'Men, Suicide and Society', (Samaritans, 2012), to be
indicative. This report contained a series of chapters written by leading social
scientists in psychology, sociology, economics and gender studies. One of these has
already been employed in the foregoing section on the effect of partner separation.
Here I extract the salient features from the remaining four chapters which
address, in turn, psychological factors, economic issues, private troubles and their
relationship to larger society, and finally "masculinities".
Firstly, the chapter written by Olivia Kirtley and Rory O'Connor which addresses
psychological factors. They ask why men of low socio-economic position in mid-life
may be at higher risk of death by suicide. They note that the data shows that males
who are suicidal are more likely to be unemployed or in low paid manual work.
Despite a brief to focus on psychological issues, these authors note the major
influence of unemployment, financial and housing difficulties, and relationship
issues on suicidality in men. The key psychological issues they identify are a lack of
skill in problem solving, and, in particular, "socially prescribed perfectionism".
Social perfectionism is defined as the perception that one must always meet the
expectations of others, with these perceived prescribed standards often being
unrealistic. Personally, I find the use of the word "perfectionism" in this context to
be inappropriate. I suggest a better term for this psychological orientation would
be "socially prescribed or perceived obligation" or "socially prescribed or
perceived burden". Indeed, it is revealing to meditate upon a key distinction
between "perfectionism" and "burden". The former implies an origin within the
mind of the man in question: a character flaw or psychological weakness. In
contrast, the word "burden" clearly indicates an imposition upon the man from
society. The distinction is therefore between victim blaming and being victimised.
Narratives surrounding male disadvantages almost always favour the former. This
is male disposability and male agency, the flip side of gynocentrism, in action. Why?
Because this judicious choice of wording, in suggesting a man's own failing is
responsible for his suicidality, relieves society of any obligation beyond instructing
men to improve.
Kirtley and O'Connor find a significant association between this so-called
"perfectionism", or perceived social burdening, and suicidality. However, given
that their brief was to investigate psychological factors, it is telling that they
actually emphasise external factors, concluding,
'At the point of contact with psychiatric or other support services, more careful
attention should be paid to individuals' life circumstances, particularly financial,
employment or housing difficulties – and how these impact one's well-being.'
They also lament the lack of research thus,
'…from the perspective of psychological research, the potential routes to suicide
for males in their middle years remain "roads less travelled" and there is a distinct
dearth of literature relating to this population. Those in middle age are a neglected
population within psychological research and with little or no research within
suicidology giving substantial focus to age or gender (as opposed to simply
controlling for it); there are significant gaps in our knowledge, which must be
addressed as an urgent priority.'
Brendan Kennelly and Sheelah Connolly address the relevance of economic issues
on suicide. As is generally the case with social science research, different studies
adduce contradictory findings. Kennelly and Connolly review a wide range of
studies and highlight these conflicts. Nevertheless, they conclude,
'The balance of evidence suggests that, controlling for other risk factors, including
the presence of psychiatric illness, being unemployed, having a low income, or
living in a socio-economically deprived area, increase one's risk of dying by suicide.
In addition, most researchers have found that deaths by suicide tend to increase
during recessions.'
However, perhaps surprisingly, the effect of gender was less clear. A study on
suicide in the UK found…
'…a clear social gradient, with a four-fold difference in mortality between social
classes I and V….this was mostly associated with excess mortality in social class
V…..There was also evidence of a step-change in risk between non-manual and manual
social classes.'
I suggest it might not only be pay that is the issue here, but also the sheer
unpleasantness of hard manual labour. Kennelly and Connolly also make the
following observations,
'…some researchers have pointed out that regular fluctuation between suicide and
economic conditions could be regarded as evidence that suicide is not solely due to
irrational behaviour.'
Indeed, and exogenous factors generally have been underplayed in the narratives
around male suicide. In respect of the impact of economic issues on suicide, the
authors observer that,
'This point has not been adequately recognised in suicide prevention strategies
which tend to be dominated by psychiatric and mental health research.'
In this context they ask a reasonable question,
'Is it feasible or sensible for the Samaritans to alter their longstanding approach to
callers by becoming more adept at helping people think through financial problems
as well as emotional problems?'
Julie Brownie takes a sociologist's view of male suicide, concentrating on
emotional issues. She asks what it is about men from lower socioeconomic groups in
their middle years which produces emotional vulnerabilities. There is a degree of
presumption by Brownie that suicide must be related to emotional problems,
though it is clear from the discussions above that exogenous factors play a
significant role. There can be a confusion between the two, with external issues
being reinterpreted through an emotional or psychological lens. For example, we
read 'where children are involved…..relationship breakdowns are likely to have an
impact on men's identity as fathers'. But the problem is not 'men's identity as
fathers', an internal issue, but rather the external issue of men's access to children.
It is being permitted to be a father that is actually the issue. This is another
example of how a form of words is used to make an exogenous factor seem like a
psychological factor, and thus to facilitate its transmogrification into a failing of the
man himself, rather than a socially imposed disadvantage.
Brownie quotes other researchers regarding the significance of shame and selfrespect, noting that the latter is, 'derived from being able to work hard and to
provide for and protect their families'. Indeed, this is a major source of a man's
self-respect, and it is an aspect of matricentrism in its family-centric form, as
explained in chapter 1. Consistent with the evidence for the significance of partner
separation/divorce presented in section 18.2.3.1, she writes,
'Increasing levels of partnership dissolution and re-partnering contribute to the
complexity of relationships experienced in mid-life, including an increase in the
number of men living apart from their children. These shifts potentially place men
from lower socio-economic backgrounds at risk from a lack of emotional support at
a time when they may also be facing considerable economic pressures.'
Exactly so. Brownie also observes the potential significance of men ending up living
alone, and that 'there is some evidence that this is more likely for men than women
to result from choice than from circumstances'. This choice may, however, be the
aftermath of painful separation. And this observation about living arrangements
may be significant if it is also true, as Brownie claims, that 'men of all ages and
classes continue to remain dependent on women – mothers and then partners – as
their main emotional conduits'.
The significance of "emotions talk" in male suicide is, however, more problematic
and I do not think that Brownie makes a particularly compelling case. She states,
'The inability to express distressing emotion has been viewed as a risk factor for
suicide and the argument that some forms of masculinity position men as stoical
and unwilling to seek help has meant that emotions talk by men has come under
scrutiny.'
But the evidential support she offers for the thesis that stoicism and reluctance to
express emotions is a risk factor in men's suicide is weak. I refer the reader back
to the quote from Steven Pinker in section 17.6. He states that the idea that
repressing emotions is bad and expressing them is good is merely a folk theory
which is contra-indicated by abundant evidence. The main source which Brownie
quotes in support of the contention is (Cleary, 2012), an extract from the Abstract
being,
'This inquiry, based on in-depth interviews with 52 young Irish men who made a
suicide attempt, examines suicidal behaviour at the individual level. The findings
demonstrate that these men experienced high levels of emotional pain but had
problems identifying symptoms and disclosing distress and this, along with the
coping mechanisms used, was linked to a form of masculinity prevalent in their
social environment. Dominant or hegemonic masculinity norms discouraged
disclosure of emotional vulnerability, and participants used alcohol and drugs to
cope – which exacerbated and prolonged their distress. Over time this led to a
situation where they felt their options had narrowed, and suicidal action
represented a way out of their difficulties. These men experienced significant,
long-lasting, emotional pain but, in the context of lives lived in environments where
prevailing constructions of masculinity constrained its expression, they opted for
suicide rather than disclose distress and seek help.'
The problem with this is that it does not establish any causal connection. One does
not doubt the emotional stoicism or the drinking. But one suspects that hegemonic
masculinity was in the dock in a show trial. As Pinker has emphasised, there is
plenty of evidence against the thesis that stoicism is harmful. Recall from chapter
17 that Levant et al (2019) concluded that traditional masculine ideology provides
protection against mental illness, not the reverse.
There are some obvious problems with the theory that "emotions talk" is
beneficial to men in respect of suicide. For example, the concentration of suicide on
the lower socioeconomic groups does not sit well with Brownie's observation that,
'men from lower socio-economic backgrounds are not especially resistant to the
idea of discussing their feelings – at least, no more so than their middle-class
counterparts.'
The dependence of suicide prevalence on age is also in conflict with the theory that
"emotions talk" is beneficial to men. Brownie writes,
'Those currently in mid-life have grown up in an era in which emotions culture has
been changing. Unlike those born in the first half of the twentieth century –
referred to above as the 'silent generation' – they are less likely to maintain a
stoical 'mustn't grumble' attitude in the face of emotional difficulties. Certainly,
their own children will have broken decisively with such a culture.'
If talking of feelings was a significant preventative, suicide would have become less
prevalent among younger men and would not have reduced amongst old men, those
unreconstructed patriarchs. If fact, as Figures 18.10 and 18.11 show, the reverse is
the case. There is no indication from suicide data that the softer, less macho,
orientation of younger men has proved beneficial, just as there was not either from
the data on mental illness (chapter 17): quite the opposite. But Brownie's closing
shot seems eminently sensible,
'Given the continuing stigma attached to seeking help for mental distress, however,
and given the centrality of relationships to wellbeing, helpline organisations might
want to think how they can use their contact time with men to encourage them to
develop sustainable sources of support in their own lives and communities. In other
words, although talk might be the medium for accessing support, working with men
on developing their own support networks (not all of which will be talk based) or
helping them identify other non-talk-based ways of managing distress might be
more effective, and might be perceived by men as being so.'
Amy Chandler explored the role of masculinities in men's suicidal behaviour. She
examined 'the claim that suicide might be related to the failure of hegemonic
masculinity'. Specifically, she proposes that the reason why men in lower
socioeconomic groups suffer greater suicide rates is that they find it harder to
achieve the hegemonic masculine ideal. From this perspective, unemployment or a
man's estrangement from his children can lead to increased risk of suicide because
these issues prevent successful alignment with the hegemonic masculine ideal.
One notes immediately a conflict between this view and the APA's perspective on
mental ill-health (chapter 17). It seems men have a choice: achieve hegemonic
masculinity and risk a mental disorder, or fail to achieve it and risk suicide instead.
There is something unconvincingly elastic about this position.
Chandler's position on hegemonic masculinity is yet another example of converting
exogenous causes into internal causes by verbal legerdemain. Unemployment or
separation from partner or children is recast as failure to achieve hegemonic
masculinity. The failure to achieve hegemonic masculinity is then held to be the
cause of increased suicide risk. You see how that works? Why not simply say that
unemployment or separation causes increased suicide risk? Why bring the concept
of hegemonic masculinity into the picture at all? I suggest the answer is because it
reallocates blame from society back onto the man himself.
18.4 The Empathy Gap in Suicide
In the book 'How You Can Stop Male Suicide', (Poole, 2017) advises that, 'we need
to look beyond male suicide as a mental health issue to the role of exogenous
factors'. We have seen that these exogenous factors include separation, the
associated child contact issues, domestic abuse, low socioeconomic social class, and
unskilled manual labour.
I have reviewed the plentiful and convincing evidence that separation/divorce
significantly increases suicide rates for both sexes, but more so for men than for
women. Since men have a base suicide rate 3.3 times that of women in England,
after separation/divorce men's suicide rate is 8 times that of a non-separated
women (based on the median, or 12 times based on the mean). In Wales these
figures would be higher still. Remarkably, despite a large number of studies which
analyse such suicide data, almost none have considered the significance of children
or child contact. Anyone with experience of supporting fathers undergoing
separation where there is a child contact dispute will confirm that this is the preeminent issue, to the exclusion of all else. In surveys of the experiences of such
fathers, disclosure of suicidality does occur, (Both Parents Matter, 2017). The
Welsh Assembly member Neil McEvoy has personally testified that suicidality is a
very common feature of people coming into his constituency surgeries on matters
relating to child contact, (McEvoy, 2019).
(Kposowa, 2003) speculates, following other authors, on the reasons for the high male
suicide rate after separation/divorce,
'…while social, psychological, and even personal problems facing women are
readily denounced, societal institutions tend to ignore or minimise male problems as
evident in suicide statistics. For instance, in many jurisdictions in the US there
seems to be an implicit assumption that the bond between a woman and her
children is stronger than that between a man and his children. As a consequence, in
a divorce settlement, custody of children is more likely to be given to the wife. In
the end, the father loses not only his marriage, but his children. The result may be
anger at the court system especially in situations wherein the husband feels
betrayed because it was the wife that initiated the divorce, or because the courts
virtually gave away everything that was previously owned by the ex-husband or
the now defunct household to the former wife. Events could spiral into resentment
(toward the spouse and "the system"), bitterness, anxiety, and depression, reduced
self-esteem, and a sense of "life not worth living"….. it may well be that one of the
fundamental reasons for the observed association between divorce and suicide in
men is the impact of post-divorce (court sanctioned) "arrangements".'
We have also seen that there is clear evidence of an association between suicide
and domestic abuse, for the suicides of both victims and perpetrators. In many
cases a man designated as a perpetrator may also be the victim of abuse, because
rather more than half of partner abuse is mutual but the man is more likely to be
identified as the abuser.
Suicide is also strongly associated with the lower socioeconomic classes. This
relationship is probably not linear but disproportionately affects the lowest
socioeconomic group (social class V). Men in this class are frequently unskilled
labourers. Remarkably, none of the studies I reviewed considered the nature of
men's employment as implicated in suicidality. There were many studies which
addressed income, unemployment and socioeconomic class – and a few did
explicitly identify the lowest class of manual worker to be especially vulnerable.
But none made the obvious connection with the sheer unpleasantness of a man's
daily work.
One hardly needs an academic study to spot the gendered nature of manual work
in the outdoors: we all see it every time we go out. Whether it is an urban
environment, where it is exclusively men digging holes in the road, removing
garbage, working on scaffolding, etc., or in the countryside. More women than men
study agriculture at college. But I walk around the countryside frequently and
those I see working in the fields are all men.
How much imagination does it take to understand that doing dirty, laborious, and
potentially hazardous work outside in all weathers, and earning little from it and
even less respect, might impact adversely on one's equanimity when one reaches
middle age with no expectation from life beyond being decreasingly able to sustain
the physical effort? And then your wife throws you out, makes an allegation of
violence against you, refuses to let you see the kids, and you are now homeless and
not the local authority's priority to assist. This is not a rare scenario.
How is it that the hordes of academics carrying out suicide studies were unable to
make the cognitive leap to the obvious: that men in the lowest socioeconomic
classes tend to kill themselves more frequently because their lives are crap. After
all, you can see them. They are not hidden. Could it be an empathy gap which
blinds us to the staringly obvious?
And even the minimal encouragement of slightly better pay than more congenial
jobs, typically favoured by women, is being eroded, by design. For example,
consider the legal actions against supermarkets which claim equivalence of out-oftown warehouse work with in-town jobs in stores. The former employ almost
entirely men, whereas the latter employ more women. These claims tend to be
successful, but – from my own personal experience working in both environments
as a student – I'd say the claimed equivalence is spurious.
It is clear, then, that there are multiple exogenous factors which contribute
substantially to male suicide. Nevertheless, the persistent popular narrative,
reinforced by parts of academia, attempts to deflect the blame back onto men
themselves. This can be achieved by verbal legerdemain which recharacterizes
external factors as psychological states (for example, a child contact problem
becomes a man's "problem with identifying as a father", or a man's obligation to
support his family becomes "perfectionism"). But the shortcomings of masculinity
itself provide the most common scapegoat.
By relating suicide to hegemonic masculinity, culpability is laid squarely at the door
of the man himself. If only the silly thing had not been so wedded to an outdated
notion of what it means to be a man, he need not have died! If hegemonic
masculinity were not smuggled into the picture we might be obliged to
acknowledge that it was societal disadvantage which precipitated the suicide. But
this is the conclusion which our society ties itself into cognitive knots to avoid. We
must, at all costs, preserve the notion of men as autonomous and invulnerable to
societal harm, because men's neediness would detract from those whose neediness
is actually sanctioned. The worldview sanctioned by gynocentrism, male agency
and feminism must be protected, if necessary by reconfiguring the world through
whatever lens of verbiage is required to distort it to fit our preconceptions.
In section 18.3 we have seen that the deception is exposed by the fact that
hegemonic masculinity may be held to blame (as championed by Brownie), or the
failure to achieve hegemonic masculinity may be blamed (as proposed by
Chandler). It works either way, just so long as exogenous causes can be redirected
so that only the man himself is culpable.
By positing that hegemonic masculinity, or its lack, is to blame, society as a whole –
and dominant gender narratives in particular – ensure that men continue to be
perceived as autonomous, self-sufficient, agentic and in control of their own lives.
Feminism pretends to speak against this supposed hegemonic masculinity, but
actually it depends upon this mythology to delegitimise men from social concern. It
cannot be admitted that men could be harmed by societal processes in which
women might play a significant part. That men could be harmed by women cannot
be admitted: it would reverse gynocentrism and male agency and challenge male
disposability.
Only by his own failings can a man be harmed, not by others' doings: that is the
fiction which must be maintained. By redirecting the blame back onto the man,
society is absolved from any need to assist such men. Instead, the message to men
is to improve themselves because their problem is that they are broken. By such a
device, any need to acknowledge or address exogenous factors which disadvantage
men is avoided. And any such acknowledgement must be avoided because men are
required to function within society, not to impose a burden upon it. Men are not
authorised to be needy. This is the operation of gynocentrism and male agency and
disposability. This is the empathy gap.
19. Rape and False Allegations
Male sexuality is apparently activated by violence against women and expresses
itself in violence against women to a significant extent.
Catharine MacKinnon, Pleasure under Patriarchy, in Ethics (1989)
Referring to men who are unjustly accused of rape: 'They have a lot of pain, but it
is not a pain that I would necessarily have spared them. I think it ideally initiates a
process of self-exploration. "How do I see women?", "If I didn't violate her, could
I have?", "Do I have the potential to do to her what they say I did?"
Catherine Comins, former Assistant Dean at Vassar College. Time Magazine,
24/06/01
I feel that man-hating is an honourable and viable political act, that the oppressed
have a right to class-hatred against the class that is oppressing them.
Robin Morgan, Going Too Far: The Personal Chronicle of a Feminist, (1977)
I believe that women have a capacity for understanding and compassion which man
structurally does not have, does not have it because he cannot have it. He's just
incapable of it.
Barbara Jordan (1936 – 1996) former US Senator.
Sexual assault is often considered to be the particular province of female victims.
Indeed, sexual assault and rape are the pre-eminent feminist evidence for the
toxicity of masculinity. And yet it is in sexual assault that we also find the most
extreme discrimination against men. This discrimination lies in incredulity of the
general public that a woman offending sexually against a man is a possibility. Some
people even have difficulty in accepting that an adult woman can commit a sexual
offence against a male minor. And almost everyone will baulk at the idea of a
woman sexually assaulting an adult man. And yet, sexual offences are defined by
lack of consent, not by force. The psychological disposition of the majority of the
public is that the issue of a man's consent simply does not arise. But this is not the
position of the de jure law. Unfortunately, it is the position of the de facto law.
The offence of rape is a rare example of an English law which is explicitly sexist. In
English law, rape is defined as penetration using a penis. Hence a biological female
cannot rape. But the definition of rape requires no use of force; the offence of rape
hinges entirely upon lack of consent. And it is only the consent of the penetrated
party which is required.
In this chapter I review the statistics of rape in England and Wales, covering
CSEW estimates, police reports, prosecutions and convictions. Males and females
can both be raped and statistics for both sexes of victim are presented. Prison rape
is excluded but will be considered in the next chapter. Attention is drawn to the
obfuscation of which the CPS is culpable in their annual VAWG reports. The
number of convictions for rape is a small fraction of the number of reports to the
police of rape, known as attrition. The attrition rates for male and female
complainants are compared. It is often implied that the attrition for rape cases is
particularly large, i.e., compared with other offences. The veracity of this claim is
examined here. Concern by women's groups that too many rapists are allowed to
"get away with it" have led to calls for changes in the trial process for rape. These
are reviewed and critiqued.
False allegations of rape occur. A perennial question is what percentage of rape
complaints are false? This contentious issue is discussed. Finally, and closely linked
to false allegations, is a long section on failures of the disclosure process in sexual
offence trials.
This is the first of two chapters on sexual assault. The following chapter will
concentrate upon the less told story of sexual offences against males, including
perpetration by women. As for the present chapter, I start with the legal definition
of the main sexual offences.
19.1 Definition of Sexual Offences
Within the UK, sexual offences are defined by the Sexual Offences Act 2003, (UK
Government, 2003). There are a great many of them. Some are specific to minors,
some relate to people in positions of trust, or offences within the family, or
offences against people with a mental disorder, and many more, including offences
related to prostitution, trafficking and indecent photographs of children. I cannot
address all of them here, and it is not necessary to do so. The main offences are
rape, assault by penetration, sexual assault and 'causing a person to engage in
sexual activity without consent'. The key elements of the definition of the offence
of rape are that person A commits rape against person B if,
A intentionally penetrates the vagina, anus or mouth of person B with his penis,
B does not consent to the penetration, and,
A does not reasonably believe that B consents.
Whether a belief is reasonable is to be determined having regard to all the
circumstances, including any steps A has taken to ascertain whether B consents.
Only a biological male, i.e., someone possessing a penis, can commit rape in this
jurisdiction. The victim, however, may be of either sex. Rape carries a maximum
sentence of imprisonment for life. The Act includes some stipulations about what
constitutes "consent". One of these is that a person consents if he (or she) agrees
by choice, and has the freedom and capacity to make that choice. The issue of what
constitutes "capacity" or "incapacity" then arises, and is problematical.
The offence of 'assault by penetration' is essentially the same as rape except that,
(i) penetration is not carried out with a penis but any other body part (such as a
finger) or with an object, and, (ii) the orifice penetrated must be a vagina or anus.
Assault by penetration also carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life.
Adolescent fumbling in which a young man's finger touches a girl's vagina, and
inevitably "penetrates" a millimetre or two, constitutes the offence of assault by
penetration, a crime almost on a par with rape. It also carries a maximum penalty
of imprisonment for life.
The offence of sexual assault is defined as follows: Person A commits sexual
assault if,
He intentionally touches person B,
The touching is sexual,
B does not consent to the touching, and,
A does not reasonably believe that B consents.
Whether a belief is reasonable is to be determined having regard to all the
circumstances, including any steps A has taken to ascertain whether B consents.
Conviction carries a maximum sentence of 10 years. Clearly this offence hinges
upon what sort of touching is regarded as "sexual". Article 78 of the Act is
intended to clarify this, but to my non-legal mind it is incomprehensible. This means
that any touching of another person without their consent carries a risk of being
regarded as sexual assault.
The offence of 'causing a person to engage in sexual activity without consent' is
defined as: Person A commits the offence if,
He intentionally causes person B to engage in an activity,
The activity is sexual,
B does not consent to engaging in the activity, and,
A does not reasonably believe that B consents.
Whether a belief is reasonable is to be determined having regard to all the
circumstances, including any steps A has taken to ascertain whether B consents.
Where the activity involves penetration, the offence reiterates the terms under
rape and assault by penetration. The offence is distinct when these conditions do
not apply (e.g., there is no penetration), in which case the maximum sentence
becomes 10 years, though it is unclear what then constitutes an activity which is
sexual.
The characteristic of all four of the above sex offences is similar: person A is
agentic, whilst person B is passive. Person A does the penetrating, or does the
touching, or induces the other person to take part in an activity. Person B is
passive and is acted upon. In the old gendered mindset, males are presumed agentic
and females are presumed passive. There is therefore a strong psychological bias
towards male culpability. But what if the ancient gender norms were never quite
fully aligned with reality, and what if the old gender norms are now less indicative
than ever?
In rape or assault by penetration, the person being penetrated cannot be culpable
in English law. But what if a biological female coerces, or even physically forces, a
biological male into a penetrative act against his wishes? Being "made to
penetrate" or "non-consensually enveloped" is not covered by these laws. In the
case of adult women carrying out sexual acts upon male minors, there are specific
laws related to the victim's minor status, although we shall see that there is
evidence that extremely few of these offences come to light.
For adult men, being "made to penetrate" is addressed, in principle, by the
offences of sexual assault and 'causing a person to engage in sexual activity
without consent'. But in the case of an adult woman coercing an adult man into
sexual activity against his wishes, few men would know that they had any legal
grounds for raising a complaint. Few would complain even if they knew in principle
that they could. Men are not socialised to recognise their sexual victimisation by
women, even when they feel violated by it. In this context, people who criticise
men for their alexithymic tendencies may like to imagine what would happen if men
were as sensitive to their emotional assaults as women. They may like to meditate
upon the relationship of men's alexithymia to their toleration of disposability.
In cases involving women who have been drinking, or taking drugs, the issue of
their capability to consent arises. The Crown Prosecution Service has offered the
following advice, (CPS, 2017a),
'…if, through drink, or for any other reason, a complainant had temporarily lost
her capacity to choose whether to have sexual intercourse, she was not consenting,
and subject to the defendant's state of mind, if intercourse took place, that would
be rape. However, where a complainant had voluntarily consumed substantial
quantities of alcohol, but nevertheless remained capable of choosing whether to
have intercourse, and agreed to do so, that would not be rape. Further, they
identified that capacity to consent may evaporate well before a complainant
becomes unconscious.'
'Prosecutors and investigators should consider whether supporting evidence is
available to demonstrate that the complainant was so intoxicated that he/she had
lost their capacity to consent. For example, evidence from friends, taxi drivers and
forensic physicians describing the complainant's intoxicated state may support the
prosecution case.'
Hence, the loss of capacity to consent has been tied, legally, to some level of
intoxication which is entirely ill-defined and will inevitably vary wildly from one
case to another. A man is therefore at risk if he has sex with a woman who has
drunk any alcohol at all. However, the most disturbing guidance is this,
'The Act imposes an evidential burden on the defendant to adduce sufficient
evidence to raise an issue that the complainant consented' (CPS, 2017a)
Taken literally, one needs evidence of consent for every sexual encounter – and
this need not mean full intercourse but applies for any sexual touching or sexual
activity (whatever those terms might mean).
As regards the de jure law, a woman could, in principle, be guilty of assault by
penetration, or sexual assault, or 'causing a person to engage in sexual activity
without consent'. But at this point we run hard up against the distinction between
the de jure law and the de facto law. In principle, a woman commits an offence if
she touches a man sexually without his consent, or if she initiates a sexual act
without his consent. In principle she too must 'adduce sufficient evidence of
consent'. In principle, a man too should be deemed incapable of consent if he has
consumed alcohol (to some unspecified degree), and hence a woman having sex
with such a man commits an offence even if she believed him to be consenting.
But the de facto law could hardly be more different when the sex roles are
reversed. Our profound, ancient prejudice overrules the de jure law. Men will
rarely even perceive that they have been importuned by a woman; they are
prevented by their upbringing, by society and by evolved psychological disposition.
With sex and relationship education about to become obligatory in schools in the
UK, it would be a good thing if boys were told about the legal fragility of their
position if they have sex with, or even make intimate overtures to, a female. To
quote from the book 'Legalising Misandry: From Public Shame to Systemic
Discrimination against Men', (Nathanson and Young, 2006),
'Ewanchuk exposed a problem of profound importance – one that goes far beyond
rape cases that come up in court. If implied consent is so difficult to argue in court,
why would any man have sexual relations with any woman in any circumstances
without written proof of her consent? Even that would be legally irrelevant. A
woman could change her mind in the few minutes or seconds between signing a
consent form and engaging in sexual activity. And "no", of course, means "no".
Perhaps unintentionally, this doctrine severely erodes the kind of trust that is
necessary for healthy sexual relations. We would have said "destroys" except for
the fact that most men and women, ignorant of the law, continue to copulate on the
basis of trust that has no legal standing whatsoever.'
19.2 Prevalence of Rape and Police Reports
It is frequently stated that rape is under-reported: that the rate of reporting of
rape to the police is substantially smaller than its actual incidence. The surveys
certainly bear this out, though recent data suggest that this under-reporting has an
unacknowledged implication, which I will elucidate in due course. The true
prevalence of rape is taken to be that estimated from the Crime Surveys for
England and Wales (CSEW). It should be noted, however, that this estimate
necessarily involves extrapolation from a small sample. There have been two
major changes in recent years. The first is that the CSEW estimate of the
incidence of rape of adult women has reduced markedly. (It is odd that we have not
heard that reported in the press). The second is that the rate at which rapes are
recorded by the police has increased steeply (for both sexes of victim).
Figure 19.1 shows how the CSEW estimate of the incidence of rape of adult women
has varied from 2005 to 2016, (Office for National Statistics, 2017t). Note that the
CSEW is confined to adults in the age range 16 to 59. In years 2005 to 2012,
inclusive, the average incidence of rape of adult women was 0.93%. In the three
reported years 2014 to 2016 the estimated incidence has fallen to about one-third
the previous rate, 0.3%. This contrasts sharply with the steep increase in the rate
of reporting of rape to the police, as shown by Figure 19.2, (Office for National
Statistics, 2019b). Figure 19.2 refers to victims of all ages. Note the different
scales for males and females in Figure 19.2. The Figure illustrates that the steep
increase in reporting of rapes applies to victims of both sexes, the percentage
increase for males being even larger than for females. However, the overall
incidence remains far lower for males (6,218 in 2018) than for females (50,480).
Hence males currently account for 11% of rape victims reported to the police.
Figure 19.1: CSEW Estimate of Incidence of Rape of Adult Women, 2005 to 2016
Figure 19.2: Police Reports of Rape in England & Wales, All Ages. Note the
different scales for males and females.
Figure 19.3: CSEW-based Estimates of the Incidence of Rape of Adult Women
Compared with the Rate of Police Reports of Rape of Adult Women
It is of interest to compare the CSEW estimate of the incidence of rape of adult
women to the reported incidence. For this purpose the CSEW incidence, expressed
as a percentage of women aged 16 to 59, can be converted to total incidents by
multiplying by 160,000. The error in the CSEW estimate is perhaps about +/-23%,
based on Figure 1.1 from (Ministry of Justice, 2013a). Figure 19.3 shows the CSEWbased estimate of the number of rapes of adult women compared with the number
of police reports of the same. The upper and lower bound CSEW estimates, based
on the above error, are also shown. The CSEW estimates do suggest a very large
under-reporting of rape in year 2012 and earlier. But the position now appears to be
rather different. The CSEW based estimate of the number of rapes of adult women
in the year ending March 2016 is in the range 40,000 to 63,000. This compares with
the number of police reports of rapes of adult women in the latest year (ending
September 2018) of 37,369. The rate of police reports of rape of adult women is
now closely approaching the lower bound of the rate estimated from the CSEW.
This might suggest that the rape of women is no longer substantially underreported. Alternatively, if rape of adult women is still substantially under-reported,
then the near-convergence of the data in Figure 19.3 would imply a large
prevalence of false allegations. I shall argue later that the latter appears to be the
case.
The error in the CSEW estimate is inevitably large. To see why consider year 2015
when the female 'unweighted base' (i.e., the number of women contributing to the
0.3% estimate) was 10,363. But 0.3% of 10,363 is just 31 women who stated in their
survey response that they had been raped in the previous year – a rather small
statistic. Estimating the order of 50,000 victims from just 31 is quite an
extrapolation.
How does the CSEW estimate of the incidence of rape of adult males compare with
the reporting of rape of males to the police? The comparison is shown in Figure
19.4. The CSEW estimates vary wildly from year to year because the statistics are
too small for stability. Over the years plotted, the average incidence was 0.032%,
an order of magnitude smaller than the female incidence. Consequently, the number
of men surveyed who report having been raped, from a typical 'unweighted base' of
around 10,000 is only 3 per year. This could easily be 0 or 6 in any given year, hence
the wild swings. (NB: The projected number of adult male rapes in Figure 19.4 has
again been estimated by multiplying the percentage incidence by 160,000). The
estimated average number of rapes of adult men per year is thus about 5,100. This
is still about double the most recent annual rate of police reports of adult male rape,
namely 2,609 in the year ending September 2018.
Figure 19.4: CSEW-based Estimates of the Incidence of Rape of Adult Men
Compared with the Rate of Police Reports of Rape of Adult Men
One of the differences between male and female rape victims, apart from the
absolute volume of offences, is the differing age profile. Rape of females is
concentrated in the adult age range, 16 and over (Figure 19.5). Rape of males is
concentrated in the age range under 13 (Figure 19.6), although adult male rape is
catching up, (Office for National Statistics, 2019b).
Figure 19.5: Police Reports of Rapes of Females by Age Range
Figure 19.6: Police Reports of Rapes of Males by Age Range
19.3 Conviction Statistics for Rape
Each year the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) produces a report titled the
'Violence against Women and Girls Report', or the annual VAWG report. At the
time of writing the latest is the 11th in the sequence, (CPS, Violence against
Women and Girls Report, 2018a). Links to previous editions are (CPS, 2017b),
(CPS, 2016). In this section I use all these reports back to year 2008/9. The
purpose of these reports is to give special focus to females as victims.
The reader can be forgiven for assuming that VAWG, or "Violence Against Women
and Girls", refers to violence against women and girls. Not so. In the CPS VAWG
reports, "Violence" does not mean violence, "Women" does not mean women, and
"Girls" does not mean girls. Rather, VAWG is defined as a certain category of
crimes, namely: domestic abuse, child abuse, sexual offences and rape, stalking,
harassment, human trafficking and modern slavery, pornography and obscenity
offences, so-called 'honour-based' violence, forced marriage, female genital
mutilation, and offences related to enforced prostitution. The victims of crimes
classed as VAWG may be of either sex. So "Women" subsumes men, and "Girls"
subsumes boys. But genital mutilation of males is not a VAWG crime, though that
of females is.
Until the 2015/16 VAWG report, the reader would have needed to be very astute
to realise that "Violence Against Women and Girls" also included crimes against
men and boys. Since the 2015/16 report, the VAWG reports have carried a note on
the title page reading "inclusive of data on men and boys" (a concession won after
a number of people expressed their disquiet to the CPS). However, within the
document the data still generally relate to both sexes under the banner "VAWG".
It is hard to attribute this peculiar convention to any noble motive. As well as
inflating the statistics which ostensibly apply to females, by including the male
victimisation within them, it also rather neatly hides away male victimisation. The
VAWG subterfuge is a ruse to make victimisation a female monopoly. And the
insistence that females retain a monopoly of public concern is precisely male
disposability and the empathy gap made manifest.
The data on prosecutions and convictions for rape in this section, being based on
the VAWG reports, therefore relate to victims of both sexes combined unless
otherwise stated. There is a further potential source of confusion due to the
definitions employed within the CPS VAWG reports. The CPS place the emphasis
on convictions arising from so-called "rape flagged" cases. Cases which enter the
process as potential rape cases are "flagged" as rape cases and retain this
designation even if the eventual prosecution is not for rape, or an initial charge for
rape is later amended. Convictions obtained in rape flagged cases are not,
therefore, necessarily convictions for rape. The conviction is frequently for a
lesser offence (which therefore implies either an outcome of "not guilty" against
the charge of rape, or that rape was never tried). The distinction is numerically
large. For example, in the VAWG report for year 2017/18 there were 2,635
convictions which followed from rape flagged cases, but only 1,127 convictions for
rape (and this includes attempted rape). This has led many people to conflate the
larger number with the number of rape convictions, which is incorrect. Many
people will also make the mistake of assuming that these numbers refer exclusively
to female victims, which is also false.
It is difficult not to ascribe to the VAWG reports a desire wilfully to mislead the
reader. For example, the caption to Graph 11 of the 2014/15 VAWG Report is
'Rape volumes 2008-09 to 2014-15'. It contains the title 'Total Rape Crime', and
the Key describes the conviction data as being 'Rape Convictions'. However, the
conviction data plotted (up to 2,581 in 2014/15) are not all convictions for rape at
all: most of these 2,581 convictions are for lesser offences. The 2015/16 VAWG
Report is hardly much better. The caption of its Table 3 is 'Completed rape
prosecutions by outcome', which hardly encourages the reader to interpret
correctly the data which follows under 'Convictions'. In the latest 2017/18 VAWG
Report, the corresponding Table caption is 'Completed rape-flagged prosecutions
by outcome', which is strictly accurate though the reader must be aware that a
conviction for a rape-flagged offence does not mean a conviction for rape, and
hence continues to invite misunderstanding by the general reader.
However, for the last few years the VAWG reports have also included Ministry of
Justice (MOJ) data for the number of prosecutions where the principal charge was
rape, and the number of convictions for rape. The VAWG reports state that these
data include attempted rapes as well as completed rapes. Figure 19.7 plots these
data against year. The number of convictions for rape, including attempts, has not
varied markedly since 2010, being an average of 1,180 per year over the years
2010 to 2017 with an average of 37% of those prosecuted on a principal rape
charge being convicted of rape or attempted rape. This covers victims of both
sexes. The conviction rate, assuming prosecution, for defendants accused of rape
of males is shown in Table 19.1 for sample years. The conviction rate for adult male
rape is especially low.
Table 19.1: Conviction Rate for Male Rape Assuming Prosecution
Offence 2014 2015 2017
Rape of male under 13 50% 54% 46%
Rape of male aged 13 to 15 29% 21% 47%
Rape of male aged 16 or
over
15% 35% 21%
In contrast, Figure 19.8 plots the prosecution and conviction data given most
prominence within the CPS VAWG reports, i.e., prosecutions of rape flagged cases
and the resulting convictions, which may relate to any offence, generally a lesser
offence than rape. Unlike the data which strictly relates to rape (or attempts), the
number of "rape flagged" prosecutions has been trending upwards since 2006/7, as
have the number of convictions resulting from such prosecutions, though an
increasing proportion of these convictions is not for rape. Note the far larger
conviction rate for these prosecutions (average 59%) compared to that for rape or
attempted rape (37%).
Figure 19.7: The Number of Convictions for Rape or Attempted Rape (of Both
Sexes), and the Number of Prosecutions for a Principal Charge of Rape, and the
Percentage Convicted (MOJ data)
Figure 19.8: The Number of Convictions for Any Offence Resulting from
Prosecutions of Rape Flagged Cases, and the Number of Such Prosecutions, and the
Percentage Convicted of Any Offence (CPS data)
An interesting feature of the data is the marked increase in the proportion of all
acquittals which arise from being acquitted by a jury at trial, when all rape flagged
prosecutions are considered. (Note that there are many reasons for acquittal which
do not involve exoneration by a jury, the main one being the prosecution dropping
the case). The percentage of such acquittals-by-jury is plotted against year in
Figure 19.9. It has increased from 36% in 2007/8 to 63% in 2014/2017.
Figure 19.9: Jury Acquittals as a Percentage of All Acquittals for All Prosecutions
of Rape Flagged Cases Versus Year
This increase in exonerations by juries has not escaped the attention of the CPS, or
rape activists. The remarks made in the VAWG Reports on the matter make clear
that the CPS regard it as axiomatic that increasing jury acquittals simply means
that juries are failing to convict the guilty. For example, the 2010/11 VAWG Report
states,
'The rise in jury acquittals tends to suggest that more work may be needed with
partners to address public awareness and challenge myths and stereotypes, which
have traditionally led to high jury acquittal rates in sexual cases.'
The same remarks are repeated in other VAWG Reports (e.g., 2012/13). It is worth
recalling that in CPS terminology any verdict other than "guilty" is an
"unsuccessful outcome" (and hence the conviction of an innocent man is a
"success").
The CPS view that the high jury acquittal rate is due to juries "getting it wrong"
fails to explain why this acquittal rate has increased substantially. There is,
however, a consistent and simpler explanation of the data. Suppose that the actual
incidence of rape is reasonably constant, as indeed is implied by Figure 19.7. But we
know that the CPS have been prosecuting a growing number of rape-flagged cases
(Figure 19.8). It would follow that a correct outcome (i.e., one aligned with truth)
would be an increasing acquittal rate, as seen in Figure 19.9. If this view is correct,
i.e., that the increasing jury acquittal rate is due to the CPS pursuing a greater
number of weak cases, we would expect the jury acquittal rate, as a percentage of
all acquittals, to be correlated with the volume of prosecutions. This is indeed the
case, as displayed graphically by Figure 19.10. The Pearson correlation coefficient
between the percentage of acquittals due to juries and the volume of prosecutions,
for years 2006/7 to 2017/18, is 0.80: a strong correlation. There appears to be no
reason to suppose that rape juries are any more lenient now than in earlier years,
only that a greater percentage of cases are too weak to convict because of the
CPS's over-zealous pursuance of cases which should fail.
Figure 19.10: Jury Acquittals as a Percentage of All Acquittals for All Prosecutions
of Rape Flagged Cases Versus the Volume of Prosecutions
Table 19.2: Outcome of Rape-Flagged Prosecutions
Outcome 2006/7 2007/8 2008/9
Jury acquittal 578 539 575
All other acquittals* 908 943 902
Jury conviction 701 786 788
Guilty plea 1,077 1,235 1,230
*Almost all due to prosecution dropping the case, most often because they had no
evidence to offer
As an illustration of outcomes not determined by juries, Table 19.2 is derived from
the 2008/9 VAWG report and relates to rape-flagged prosecutions (which, you will
recall, may not involve a charge of rape, and, even if they do, a conviction may be
for a lesser offence). In these years, juries most often returned a guilty verdict (for
some offence or other).
At the time of writing we await a new review by Professor Cheryl Thomas of UCL
into the effectiveness of juries in rape trials. In her 2010 review of this subject,
(Thomas, 2010), she concluded that, contrary to popular belief and previous official
reports, but consistent with Table 19.2, juries in rape trials convict more often than
they acquit, with a 55% conviction rate in crown court rape trials. In 2010
Professor Thomas also concluded that,
'Jury conviction rates for rape vary according to the gender and age of the
complainant, with high conviction rates for some female complainants and low
conviction rates for some male complainants. This challenges the view that juries'
failure to convict in rape cases is due to juror bias against female complainants.
Juries are not primarily responsible for the low conviction rate on rape
allegations.'
However, it remains to be seen what Professor Thomas will make of the latest
data. I expect she will spot the much-reduced conviction rate. It remains to be seen
whether the Professor will identify, as I have above, that this appears to be a
simple consequence of the CPS pursuing an increasing number of weak cases,
rather than a failure of juries to reach the correct verdict as dictated by the
evidence and the principle of "innocent until proven guilty". I draw readers'
attention to the especially low rates of conviction when the complainant is male.
We shall see this again below when we look at attrition.
19.3.1 Sex of Rape Victims and Defendants
It may seem odd to address the sex of rape defendants, since rape is defined as an
offence committed using a penis and hence can only be committed by a biological
male. However, women appear in the rape defendant statistics for aiding and
abetting rapes or conspiring to rape. Each year there are a certain number of such
prosecutions of women. In years 2015/16, 2016/17 and 2017/18 there were
respectively 65, 64 and 83 women prosecuted for aiding, abetting or conspiring to
rape.
The Witness Management System records the sex of (alleged) rape victims for the
majority of complaints. The data are given in Table 19.3. Note that 12.1% to 13.9%
of alleged victims are male. This is broadly similar to the proportion from police
reports (11% male, see Figure 19.2). Recall that none of the data in this section
include prison rapes.
Table 19.3: Sex of Rape Victims as Recorded by the Witness Management System
year female male unknown
% male where
known
2015/16 4,312 608 1,734 12.4%
2016/17 4,657 754 1,790 13.9%
2017/18 4,067 560 1,607 12.1%
19.4 Attrition
The issues which most exercise rape activists are, (i) that rape is massively underreported, and, (ii) that only a very small proportion of rapes reported to the police
result in a conviction. As regards under-reporting, I have noted above that the
CSEW estimated incidence of rape of adult women is beginning to align with the
number of police reports of such rapes in England & Wales (Figure 19.3). However,
severe under-reporting is still indicated by the CSEW and this suggests that a large
proportion of police reports are false (as will be discussed in more detail below).
The second issue, that only a small proportion of reported rapes result in a
conviction, is known as "attrition". An example of this attrition is provided by
Figure 1.1 of (Ministry of Justice, 2013a) which gives the average of the data for
years 2009/10, 2010/11 and 2011/12. Of 15,670 cases of alleged rape recorded by
the police, 3,850 were flagged as "detected" in that the police were content that
the crime had taken place and a perpetrator had been identified. Of these, 2,910
were prosecuted for rape and 1,070 were convicted of rape. Hence, only 6.8% of
the police recorded rape allegations resulted in a conviction for rape. Some
women's advocates insist that all the police reports of rape are genuine, as women
never lie about rape. That is certainly untrue as one can readily identify many
specific cases where women have lied about being raped (see section 19.6).
However, the percentage of rape allegations which are false is a more contentious
issue. This is reviewed in section 19.6. For now, two questions arise. Firstly, what is
the reason for the large attrition between police reporting of rape and conviction?
Secondly, how does the attrition for rape cases compare with the attrition for other
serious crimes, say violence against the person (VAP) crimes? I take these two
issues in order.
A Bristol criminologist specialising in the study of sexual offending has emphasised
that attrition in rape cases is 'not all about criminal justice system failure', (Phil
Rumney, 2018). He has listed 22 reasons for the high levels of attrition in sexual
assault cases, as follows,
The complainant reports with no wish for a police investigation;
The complainant reports but decides not to do a victim interview;
The complainant reports and s/he decides specialist help/practical support is
preferable to a criminal investigation, at least for now;
The complainant is uncertain or confused. Even after investigation it's not clear
what has happened and there is no basis for criminal prosecution;
The report does not legally constitute rape;
The report is contradicted by other evidence;
Equally credible accounts are given by complainant & suspect and there is no other
evidence;
Suspect cannot be found;
Suspect is dead;
Reported by a 3rd party, but the complainant who disclosed does not wish for the
case to be formally investigated;
The complainant wants to move on;
The complainant decides s/he cannot cope with the criminal justice process at this
time;
The complainant is worried that family members or friends might find out about the
rape and has general anonymity concerns;
Withdrawal from the investigative process (many, many reasons for this, some
listed above);
A recorded offence of rape is cancelled or transferred in line with the Home Office
Counting Rules;
Retraction of the allegation because it is untrue;
Retraction of the allegation resulting from intimidation/manipulation by the suspect
or 3rd party;
The report includes a false account that is so significant it undermines the
complainant's credibility as a witness;
The case does not meet the CPS test for charging;
CPS discontinues the prosecution;
Jurors acquit on the basis that the standard of proof is not met;
Jurors acquit because they conclude that the defendant has a reasonable belief in
consent.
To these one should add "perpetrator is unknown and investigation fails to identify
him". The attention given to the high attrition rate in rape cases gives the
impression that this attrition is greater than for other crimes – but is it? A study by
the Ministry of Justice compared the attrition for rape offences, and for other sex
offences, with GBH offences, both with and without intent, (Burton et al, 2012).
Within each of these four serious offence types, a random sample of files of cases
reported in eight police force areas were chosen to include a mix of urban and rural
locations (though not claimed to be statistically representative of the whole of
England and Wales). The sample comprised the following number of police reports:
rape 292, sexual assault 287, GBH with intent 270, and GBH without intent 266.
Figure 19.11 shows the attrition through the criminal justice process of this sample
of serious cases. The striking thing is that the overall attrition is very similar for all
four offence types. At the end of the process, the percentage of initial reports
which led to convictions for the original reported offence were: rape 9%, sexual
assault 11%, GBH with intent 10.5%, and GBH without intent 8.9%.
Based on this study it would appear that the presumption that rape cases, or other
sexual assault cases, are subject to especially high attrition is not true. The
attrition is comparable to that for serious VAP offences, with comparable final
conviction rates as a proportion of initial reports. This is quite remarkable when
one considers the particular difficulties in prosecuting sex offences which, by their
nature, rarely have independent witnesses and often have no physical evidence, or
even independent evidence that the offence has occurred at all.
Figure 19.11: Comparison of the Attrition at Various Stages Through the Criminal
Justice Process for Sex Offences and GBH
An aspect of attrition that is not usually brought out is that the attrition rate for
sexual offences against males is greater than that for sexual offences against
females. The overall attrition is measured by the percentage of reports to the police
which fail to result in convictions for the reported offence. Attrition data for rape in
England and Wales are given in Tables 19.4a-c. Table 19.4a gives the number of
police reports of rape in 2013/14 and the number of convictions for rape in 2014.
The latter as a percentage of the former is a measure of attrition. It is
acknowledged that not all of the cases initially reported in 2013/14 will reach a
verdict in 2014, so these attrition percentages are a rough indication only. Table
19.4b has the corresponding data for 2014/15 and 2015, whilst Table 19.4c has that
for 2016/17 and 2017. These Tables have been compiled using the police recorded
data given in (Office for National Statistics, 2019b) and the conviction data given in
(Ministry of Justice, 2018e).
These Tables give the data separately for rape offences against the two sexes, as
well as in different age ranges. It can be seen that the attrition for rape of males is
greater than the attrition for rape of females in every age range and in every year
(i.e., a smaller percentage of defendants are convicted for cases involving male
victims). Recall that prison rape is not included in any of the data of this chapter.
Table 19.4a: Attrition for Rape Offences, the Sexes Compared; Police Recorded
Rape Allegations in 2013/14 cf Convictions in 2014
Offence
Police Recorded
2013/14 Convictions in 2014
Convictions as
Percentage of Recorded
Rape of female aged 16
and over
12,307 525 4.3%
Rape of male aged 16 and
over
661 7 1.1%
Rape of female aged 13 to
15
3,407 321 9.4%
Rape of male aged 13 to 15 416 22 5.3%
Rape of female under 13 2,835 234 8.3%
Rape of male under 13 1,125 55 4.9%
Total (female victims) 18,549 1,080 5.8%
Total (male victims) 2,202 84 3.8%
In conclusion, we have found that attrition in rape cases involving female
complaints is comparable with that for VAP offences, not especially high as
suggested by rape activists. In contrast, the attrition in rape cases involving male
complainants is especially great, but that receives no attention, concern or
acknowledgement.
Table 19.4b: Attrition for Rape Offences, the Sexes Compared; Police Recorded
Rape Allegations in 2014/15 cf Convictions in 2015
Offence
Police Recorded
2014/15 Convictions in 2015
Convictions as
Percentage of Recorded
Rape of female aged 16
and over
18,328 616 3.4%
Rape of male aged 16 and
over 1,023 19 1.9%
Rape of female aged 13 to
15
4,462 343 7.7%
Rape of male aged 13 to 15 667 24 3.6%
Rape of female under 13 3,527 226 6.4%
Rape of male under 13 1,382 69 5.0%
Total (female victims) 26,317 1,185 4.5%
Total (male victims) 3,072 112 3.6%
Table 19.4c: Attrition for Rape Offences, the Sexes Compared; Police Recorded
Rape Allegations 2016/17 cf Convictions in 2017
Offence
Police Recorded
2016/17 Convictions in 2017
Convictions as
Percentage of Recorded
Rape of female aged 16
and over
26,602 573 2.2%
Rape of male aged 16 and
over 1,630 11 0.7%
Rape of female aged 13 to
15
5,897 266 4.5%
Rape of male aged 13 to 15 837 34 4.1%
Rape of female under 13 4,426 187 4.2%
Rape of male under 13 2,098 57 2.7%
Total (female victims) 36,925 1,026 2.8%
Total (male victims) 4,565 102 2.2%
19.5 Rape Trials and Juries
Numerous suggestions have been made by women's advocates to increase the
number of rape convictions. It is axiomatic to this lobby that every man found not
guilty of rape is a wicked villain who has got away with it. Three suggestions to
modify the trial process have been made. The first is to permit the complainant to
testify by video, rather than face cross-examination in court. This has already been
adopted. The second is a suggestion to "train" juries in rape trials prior to the
commencement of the trial. The third suggestion is to do away with juries in rape
trials altogether. These latter two suggestions would be serious corrosions of the
principles of justice.
19.5.1 Video Evidence by Complainants
By custom and practice it is usually considered the accused's right to face his
accuser. This is no longer the case. Complainants are now permitted to give
evidence via pre-recorded video in rape cases, and also in domestic abuse cases.
The overturning of the precept that the accused has a right to face his accuser
would appear to conflict with the Human Rights Act 1998, Article 6, which states
'everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following minimum rights….to
examine or have examined witnesses against him and to obtain the attendance and
examination of witnesses on his behalf under the same conditions as witnesses
against him'. Is permitting the accuser to give evidence by pre-recorded video
consistent with this precept? As a minimum it would appear to imply that if the
accuser is allowed to pre-record her evidence, then the accused should be afforded
the same privilege (i.e., 'under the same conditions'). In the USA the situation is
clearer, I think, as the 6th amendment states 'In all criminal prosecutions, the
accused shall enjoy the right …… to be confronted with the witnesses against him'.
The phrase 'be confronted with' effectively prohibits pre-recorded witness
evidence. There is something to be said for a written constitution: it is not so easily
overridden as constitution by precedent and Parliamentary fashion.
19.5.2 "Training" Rape Trial Juries
"Training" juries prior to trial is a terribly disturbing suggestion. Who will provide
the material with which to do the "training"? It will clearly fall to those who claim
to be expert in the area: the feminist/rape activist lobby. This "educating" will
merely provide an opportunity for the trainers to impose their desired bias on
perceptions. The purpose of the jury system is to allow the accused to be judged by
his peers: ordinary untainted citizens. Any "education" prior to the trial is
prejudicial to this ideal, even if it were of benign motivation. It would not be of
benign motivation – it would be motivated by the objective of gaining more
convictions, not a more accurate verdict. As just one example, what if the jury
were told, as they almost certainly would be, that "false allegations of rape are
extremely rare"? If the jurors believe it, the verdict would be assured.
19.5.3 Rape Trials Without Juries?
Those who interpret any not-guilty verdict in a rape trial as the jury's error have
long called for juries to be scrapped in rape trials, for example (Bindel, 2016). But
now that Members of Parliament have started calling for the abolition of juries in
rape trials, as MP Ann Coffey has done, (Topping, 2018), the situation is becoming
very worrying. A recent debate in Parliament on the matter increases one's
concern, (Hansard, 2018). "Debate" in this case means feminist MPs agreeing with
each other. Coffey also suggested "specialist rape courts" and referred to juries
being "reluctant to convict young men". She stated that, "the most common cause
of unsuccessful prosecutions in rape cases is jury acquittal". But she is here using
the prosecutors' definition of success, i.e., conviction. She has absolutely no way of
knowing how "successful" juries are if success is judged by the correlation
between their verdict and the truth. Like all feminists, Coffey simply assumes male
guilt and she has not taken the trouble to look critically at the reduced conviction
rates for rape and its relationship with increased volumes of weak cases being
prosecuted, as I have discussed above.
The system of trial by jury is a central principle of justice which I had thought to
be inviolate. This is even more especially the case given that a guilty verdict can
carry a sentence of life imprisonment. But I failed to account for the growth of
anti-male prejudice within the corridors of power and influence, which is what lies
at the heart of this latest attempt to erode the fundamentals of our system of
justice.
QC and tax barrister, Jolyon Maugham, has expressed sympathy for the idea of
scrapping juries in rape trials. 'We might start by asking, as Julie Bindel has urged,
whether trial by jury serves the public interest in rape cases', he suggested, in an
article titled, 'No, the legal system isn't biased against men - it allows them to rape
with near impunity', (Maugham, 2018). He also offered this perspective on justice,
'it is not good enough for us to repeat the saying that it is better for ten guilty men
to escape than one innocent man to suffer'. I beg to differ. I think it was far wiser
men than Jolyon Maugham who created that principle in the first place. I find it
extremely concerning that such a view is held by a QC. Mr Maugham is perhaps
overly confident that he will not be accused himself.
At least one barrister blogger failed to be impressed by Mr Maugham's opinions,
namely Matthew Scott (2018a). Amongst other criticisms, Mr Scott observed,
wisely I think, that if juries were abolished for rape trials, their abolition in other
trials would surely follow thereafter. Here is the same author, a criminal barrister
at Pump Court Chambers, writing in The Spectator in response to Ann Coffey's
suggestion and reminding us that scrapping juries in rape trials would be a mistake.
He left us with a stark warning,
'A future Labour government may be very receptive to the abolition of juries in
rape cases. It would be taken up by many on the left as a progressive measure to
help rape victims. What's more, because jury trials are more expensive than judgeonly trials, it would be enthusiastically implemented by a civil service long inclined
to seeing juries (and even legal representation itself) as a dispensable luxury. Once
rape juries have gone, juries in all other cases will not be far behind', (Scott,
2018b).
19.6 False Allegations of Rape
Few things are as contentious as claims regarding the percentage of rape
allegations which are false. I had considered including here a Table of estimates of
false allegation rates made in various studies, of which there are many. On
reflection, however, I am of the view that this would give such estimates a
credence which is undeserved. Instead I give a discussion which sets estimates in
context. However, I will say at the outset that the rate of false allegations is
certainly not trivial, as some try to claim. Towards the end of this long section I will
give an estimate of the rate of false allegations which is both alarming and also
hard to discredit.
For many years a figure of 2% was cited by many people. This derived from Susan
Brownmiller's 1975 book 'Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape'. This is the
delightful work in which the author opines that rape is 'a conscious process of
intimidation by which all men keep all women in a state of fear'. This is a statement
which I can categorically refute immediately. It is a claim about all men and is
stated to be a conscious process. Because I am a man and I am not conscious of any
such thing, the statement therefore stands refuted (sorry to deploy patriarchal
logic on you). Brownmiller's 2% figure turns out to have no credible basis, being a
remark made in a speech by a judge in 1974 but of provenance there is none,
(Greer, 2000).
The most egregious piece of misinformation about the frequency of false rape
accusations is that put about by the CPS when Kier Starmer was the Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP, head of the CPS). In March 2013 the CPS published a
report titled 'Charging Perverting the Course of Justice and Wasting Police Time
in Cases Involving Allegedly False Rape and Domestic Violence Allegations', (CPS
Equality and Diversity Unit, 2013). It was co-authored by Alison Levitt QC. As a
matter of personal history, it was this report, together with some VAWG
documents, which caused me to become a blogger on men's issues in 2013. It
opened my eyes to the degree to which the establishment were committed to
misinformation and bias.
The Foreword, by Kier Starmer, notes that 'closer working with the police and
specialist services has helped to address the types of ingrained practices which can
ignore, or even add to, the victimisation of women and girls'. This is a rather odd
message in a report about prosecuting false allegations of rape and DV, given that
most false allegations are against men and made by women, i.e., it is a report
ostensibly investigating male victimisation but expresses particular sympathy for
women. This makes the mindset clear.
The Foreword continues, 'In recent years we have worked hard to dispel the
damaging myths and stereotypes which are associated with these cases', and states
that, 'One such misplaced belief is that false allegations of rape and domestic
violence are rife. This report presents a more accurate picture'. It does not. It does
exactly the opposite, and deliberately so.
The report takes data from a 17 month period between 2011 and 2013. The
relevant data are contained in this quote, 'In the period of the review, there were
5,651 prosecutions for rape and 111,891 for domestic violence. During the same
period there were 35 prosecutions for making false allegations of rape, 6 for
making false allegations of domestic violence'. Hence, of all prosecutions for rape,
only 0.6% (i.e., 35 out of 5,651) result in a prosecution for false allegation of rape,
a very small percentage. The report deliberately misleads by concluding as follows,
'The review has allowed us to examine the suggestion that false allegations of rape
and/or domestic violence are rife. It is plain that there were a large number of
prosecutions for rape and domestic violence but that only a very small number of
individuals were prosecuted for having made a false complaint.'
The juxtaposition of these two sentences gives the impression that the claim made
in the first sentence is justified by the second sentence. It is not. The second
sentence is not in the least surprising to anyone: no one has disputed that the rate
of prosecution for false allegation of rape is very low. However the first sentence
is false. The reader is being led by the presentation to conflate the number of
prosecutions for false accusation with the actual number of false accusations. But it
is the claimed huge disparity between these two things which is actually in dispute.
The report has not addressed the issue at all. It is not true that the review 'has
allowed us to examine the suggestion that false allegations of rape and/or domestic
violence are rife'. Actually the rate of false rape or DV allegations has not been
addressed by this report at all. The DPP's claim that 'this report presents a more
accurate picture' is untrue. It presents a grossly misleading picture, and does so
deliberately because the authors are not so foolish as to be ignorant of the
distinction between false allegations and prosecutions for false allegations. The
success of this misinformation is proved by the number of people since March 2013
who have been quoting a false allegation rate of 0.6% on the basis of this report. It
was always the intention of the report to create a woozle. This is the degree of
institutionalised dishonesty we are dealing with.
In a study primarily about anonymity for those accused of rape, the MOJ noted
that 'various studies have estimated that 8% to 11% of rape allegations in England
and Wales are false' and refers to a range of sources, (Ministry of Justice, 2010a).
However it adds that 'the lack of a consistent definition of what constitutes a false
rape allegation, as well as variations in recording practices by police and others in
the CJS, make accurate assessment of the true extent of such allegations very
difficult'.
One of the oft-repeated claims is that false allegations of rape are no more
common than false reports of other crimes. Another MOJ report, (Burton et al,
2012), makes the following observation on a sample of cases examined in detail,
'"False allegation" is not an officially recorded case outcome. However casefiles
were reviewed to identify those cases that were seen as false. Files indicating a
false allegation were then coded by the research team using the broad and narrow
definitions highlighted by practitioners as part of the qualitative research. Taking
the broader definition of false allegations would classify 12% of cases in the
database reported as rape as false. However, the narrower definition focusing on
'malicious' complaints only would suggest a much lower figure of 3%. The
prevalence of false allegations in GBH cases was lower than for rape and sexual
assault. Some 2% of our sample of cases reported as GBH were considered false
by police taking the broad definition covering both 'malicious' and 'non-malicious'
allegations.'
The quest to determine the rate of false allegations of rape is like hunting the
snark: one does not even know what it is one is looking for, let alone where to find
it. Exactly what constitutes a false allegation? Certainly an allegation which is
entirely fabricated, where no sexual encounter at all ever took place. But what if
sexual intercourse did take place and is not disputed, but consent is disputed? What
if the inebriation of the complainant is the issue? Because rape hinges upon
consent, whether the crime of rape took place at all is not objectively verifiable.
This little problem is brushed under the carpet. Consequently, those, like myself,
who seek a factual position are ultimately frustrated by the nature of the crime
itself: it has been rendered ineffable. The hard-line feminist position is that rape
took place if the woman says it did – full stop. And that is why they want to see all
accused men convicted – because they are all guilty as soon as accused. The
conflict in perspectives is epistemological: the feminists have no truck with the
idea that there is an objective truth. Truth is what they say it is.
Even if one could agree on a definition and quantification of false allegations, as a
percentage of what should it be expressed? As a percentage of those prosecuted?
Or as a percentage of all reports to the police? The latter is the only meaningful
measure (since it is perfectly possible – in fact quite likely – that the number of
false allegations considerably exceeds the number of prosecutions for rape).
The reader may wish to pursue the matter further, in which case I will reference a
couple of studies as a place to start. Firstly, Lisak et al (2010) which, on the basis
of their own study and also reviewing other referenced studies, concluded that 'the
prevalence of false allegations is between 2% and 10%.'. Their paper may be
consulted for a review of a number of other studies, many of which report far
higher rates of false allegations (such as in the 30s or 40s of percent). However,
Lisak et al remind us of the definition recommended by the International
Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP), which emphasises the need to determine
falsity through evidence of absence (as opposed to absence of evidence),
'The determination that a report of sexual assault is false can be made only if the
evidence establishes that no crime was committed or attempted. This
determination can be made only after a thorough investigation. This should not be
confused with an investigation that fails to prove a sexual assault occurred. In that
case the investigation would be labelled unsubstantiated. The determination that a
report is false must be supported by evidence that the assault did not happen.'
Hence, studies reporting higher rates than about 10% tend to fall foul of this
criterion. The other review the reader may wish to peruse is that of Rumney
(2006). His Table 1 quotes the results of 20 studies which give false allegation rates
ranging from 1.5% to 90%, which demonstrates rather well that the true rate is
almost totally unknowable from such studies. 17 of the 25 quoted rates are in the
range 10% to 47%. Rumney also critiques his sources and, rightly, indicates that
the higher percentages result from studies in which either the reasons for
designation of reports as "false" were unclear, or the reason fell well short of an
actual demonstration of falsity.
My interpretation of this sea of confusion is that, if care is taken to include only
cases where falsity is demonstrated, then the rate lies in the 2% to 10% range.
However, all this establishes is a lower bound to the actual rate of false allegations.
Even in the small percentage of cases which are tried in court one cannot be sure if
a false allegation has been made. A conviction does not prove that the allegation
was not false: there are plenty of case histories of such miscarriages of justice.
Similarly, a not-guilty verdict does not prove that the allegation was false, or even
that the man was innocent. And these are the cases which have received most
investigative attention. We have seen above that the large majority of reports of
rape do not result in prosecutions. It is not the focus of the police to compile
evidence that the complaint is untruthful. Their focus is to attempt to compile
evidence which makes a prosecution case for rape, and if they cannot do so, then
the case does not go forward to the CPS. In many cases it will be difficult to find
evidence that the allegation is false, and in most cases the attempt to do so is not
made. It is sufficient for police purposes, as regards not proceeding with a case,
that evidence supporting a rape prosecution is not sufficient. In short, for the bulk
of cases, evidence of falsity is not sought and may not exist if it were.
Consequently, the 2% to 10% estimate for the rate of false allegations is not only a
lower bound, but may well be a wildly conservative lower bound, i.e., the actual
rate may be far greater since the police make no attempt to find evidence which
demonstrates falsity.
If the CPS takes the prize for the most reprehensible misinformation, Laura Bates,
proprietor of the web site Everyday Sexism, takes the prize for the silliest. She is
currently touring UK schools telling boys that 'a man is 230 times more likely to be
a victim of rape than to be falsely accused of rape'. She adds, 'they're being fed all
these misleading lies', (Aitkenhead, 2019). Indeed they are, and Ms Bates is
responsible for some of them. To see how silly her claim is, suppose for sake of
argument the CPS's figure of 0.6% were the correct rate of false rape allegations.
In the year ending September 2018 there were 50,470 reports to police of rape of
females (or 56,688 if rape of males is included). The number of false allegations
would thus be 340. If a man were truly 230 times more likely to be a victim of rape
than to be falsely accused of rape, there would have to be 340 x 230 = 78,000 rapes
of males annually, 28 times the actual current rate of reporting adult male rapes to
the police. But, I have argued above, the lower bound to the false allegation rate is
in the range 2% to 10%. That gives us 1,134 to 5,669 false allegations per year, and
hence – if Bates were right - an implied number of male rapes annually of 261,000
to 1,300,000, the latter being 470 times greater than the reporting rate to the
police of adult male rapes. Err, no, I don't think so. Bates's claim is absurd. The
false allegation rate only has to exceed 5%, as seems almost certain, for the
probability of an adult man being falsely accused to exceed his probability of being
raped. Ms Bates was attempting to minimise the significance of female offenders
(false accusers) by eclipsing them with male offenders (rapists). This is what
feminists always do.
The incidence of false rape allegations is certainly not a trivial percentage, as is
sometimes claimed. Aileen McColgan claimed the rate of false allegations of rape
to be 'infinitesimal', for example, (Rumney, 2006). That lower bound estimates lie
in the range 2% to 10%, and that these estimates leave the bulk of allegations
uninvestigated, is sufficient to prove the point that false allegation rates are not a
trivial percentage. Personally, though, I was convinced of the matter by my own
exercise to identify cases of false allegation.
I confined my search to the UK and to recent years. My only source was
newspaper articles, which will severely limit what can be found. My expectation is
that most cases of false allegation will not be reported in newspapers (or even
identified as such). Hence, my trawl could only possibly pick up a small fraction of
cases. Yet I easily found 146 cases, not including politicians or celebrities. My
review, together with all 146 case histories, can be found in (Collins, W, 2018b).
The 146 cases involved 16 deaths. 12 of these were the suicide of the wrongly
accused, one was the suicide of the falsely accused's mother, one was the suicide of
the alleged false accuser, one was a homicide due to vigilante action, and one was
the death in prison of an innocent man. At least 28 of these cases involved
disclosure failures, possibly more but news reports are not always explicit.
Disclosure is discussed further in the next section. 25 cases involved serial
accusers, 14 of them had accused more than two men.
I also reviewed allegations of rape or sexual assault against politicians, (Collins W.
, 2018c), and celebrities, (Collins W. , 2018d), looking for all such allegations not
just false allegations. I identified 25 cases of alleged sex offences against senior
politicians (not including councillors), 24 men and one woman. Whilst I cannot be
certain, my judgment was that 21 of these 25 were not guilty of any criminal
offence, with 4 being guilty. You may judge differently. For celebrities I identified
45 cases, all men. My opinion was that 12 men were probably guilty, 29 men were
innocent, and in 4 cases the matter was not clear. So, of the 70 cases against
politicians or celebrities, the allegations appeared to be false, or below the criminal
level, in at least 71% of cases. I had hoped that this would provide a handle on the
rate of false allegations among the general public, but on reflection this can hardly
be claimed. Politicians and celebrities have a target on their back and will
potentially attract accusations to a far greater extent than an unknown member of
the public. Nevertheless, the 71% figure is salutary. Of course, you may disagree
with my reading of the cases.
To close this section I make a simple estimate of the rate of false allegations of
rape of adult women. The estimate is alarming, but is difficult to fault as all the
figures which are used are official figures from the MOJ or the ONS. We have
seen in section 19.2 that the CSEW central estimate was 51,200 rapes of adult
women in the latest survey year (year ending March 2016), derived from (Office
for National Statistics, 2017t) as 0.32 times 160,000 (see also Figure 19.3). This
rate appears steady over the last few years. But in (Office for National Statistics,
2018u) we read that the CSEW also identifies the following,
'Those who had experienced rape or assault by penetration (including attempts)
since the age of 16 were asked who they had personally told…. Around one in six
(17%) had told the police.'
Hence, these two CSEW-derived figures together imply that the number of
genuine rapes of adult women reported to the police is expected to be 17% of
51,200, or 8,700 cases. But we have also seen in section 19.2 that the actual
number of reports to the police of rape of adult women in the latest reported year
(year ending September 2018) was 37,369, (Office for National Statistics, 2019b),
see also Figure 19.5. These data imply that only 8,760 of the 37,369 cases of adult
rape of women reported to the police were genuine, i.e., a false allegation rate of
77%. Since all three figures used in the estimate are MOJ or CSEW figures it is
difficult to dismiss this result, despite its alarming nature.
To return to Laura Bates's preposterous claim, the above argument suggests there
are 28,609 false rape allegations annually, some 11 times greater than the number
of reports of adult male rape to the police, or nearly 6 times the estimated
incidence of adult male rape based on the CSEW. It is fairly clear that false
allegations represent a greater risk to men than rape. To express that differently:
women are a greater sexual hazard to men than other men (and that only counts
false allegations, not women's actual sexual assault of men).
It is worth emphasising that the number of police reports of rape of adult women
was far smaller, around 10,000, in 2013 and earlier (Figure 19.5), and the CSEW
estimate of the rape incidence rate was substantially larger. Consequently, in these
earlier years the same method would not provide evidence for a false allegation
rate. This suggests that the alarmingly high false allegation rate of 77% or
thereabouts is a recent phenomenon. The huge increase in reports of rape to the
police since 2013, evident in Figure 19.5, would seem to have been the result of a
massive escalation in false allegations. Patrick Graham has opined that the ready
availability of victim compensation may be at least part of the reason, especially as
compensation payment is not even dependent upon securing a conviction, (Graham,
2018).
It is also worth noting that Figure 19.6 shows a similar steep increase in the
reporting of rape by adult males since 2013, suggesting that it is not only women
making false allegations, but also men who may be seeking victim payouts.
However, whatever the sex of the accuser, it is overwhelmingly men who are the
accused. It is reasonable to hypothesise that this apparent dramatic increase in the
incidence of false allegations since 2013 is a result of the post-Savile Operation
Yewtree, which started in October 2012.
These observations put the increased frequency of jury exonerations of rape
defendants (Figure 19.9) in a rather different light. The considerably increased
exoneration rate since 2013 may be simply because juries are failing to be fooled
by fraudsters, as indeed one would wish, rather than because an increasing number
of rapists are "getting away with it", as the rape activists and our political
establishment would have us believe, (Hansard, 2018). This further discredits calls
for juries to be scrapped in rape trials. Not only would this be a profound erosion of
a basic principle of justice, but it would remove the final barrier against injustice
which has not yet fallen.
19.6.1 The Harm Done by False Allegations
Rape allegations are mud that sticks indelibly. Consider a totally innocent man, he
need not even have met the accuser, (Graham, 2018). He will have his life ruined
for perhaps two or three years whilst the case comes up, and probably for ever
after as well. He is likely to be socially ostracised by his friends, relatives and
neighbours, and perhaps even subject to attacks. During that time he may be
suspended from work, or actually sacked. He may be prohibited from having any
access to children, which may mean that he is obliged to leave his own home as he
is deemed to be a risk to his own family. He may be subject to a curfew and made
to wear an electronic tag. He may be forced to pay tens of thousands of pounds in
legal defence for a case which is never heard because the prosecution announces
the day before the trial is due that they have no evidence to offer. If the trial
proceeds he might have to sell his house to pay legal bills in six figures, even for a
case where the accusation is palpably ridiculous. He may end up bankrupt,
homeless and unemployed as a result. If this description seems far fetched, take a
look at the case histories linked from my review, (Collins, W, 2018b).
In terminating the case, the prosecution will generally use a form of words such as,
'we consider there is insufficient evidence to secure a conviction', thus leaving the
impression that the man is guilty, they just cannot muster quite enough evidence to
prove it conclusively. They will not reveal that they never had any independent
evidence whatsoever and were just hoping something would turn up, a second
accuser, perhaps. And even if the accused is tried and exonerated by a jury, there
will be no shortage of voices – especially from feminist groups – that justice has
miscarried, that he is actually guilty. Newspaper reports prior to trial will refer to
him as a rapist. The same newspapers will most often report nothing when he is
found not guilty or charges are dropped. Internet searches for the rest of his life
will bring up the stories which accuse him of rape, but often without the ending of
the story – the exoneration. And even if the exoneration is clear, in the minds of
many the mud will stick. He may find that his former employers refuse to reemploy him even after he is exonerated, and when he attempts to get a new job,
the Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) may very well reveal his acquittal at a
rape trial because the police 'think he might have been guilty', (Gibb, 2017).
However, these few words do not do justice to the devastating psychological
impact of false accusation of sexual abuse. Oxford criminologists Carolyn Hoyle,
Naomi-Ellen Speechley and Ros Burnett have produced a report on the severity of
this impact, specifically covering people in positions of trust, especially teachers,
against whom allegations are common, (Hoyle et al). Of broader scope is the
anthology edited by Burnett (2016) 'Wrongful Allegations of Sexual and Child
Abuse'. These studies confirm the account I have given above. They also identify
an ongoing fear of being accused again. A few extracts are worth repeating,
'In the majority of accounts, an overwhelming sense of anger and betrayal
emerged. More often this was not directed at their accusers, but at employers who
were thought to have encouraged the allegations, at the police for what our
participants saw as treating them as guilty from the outset, and at a 'victimcentred' criminal justice system, with its provisions for complainants on one hand,
and what they felt was a failure to recognize rights or due process of the accused
on the other.'
'In our view, the cumulative impact of these interviews is both shocking and
immense….until we conducted this study we had little grasp of the extent to which
a false allegation is likely to affect every aspect of a person's life, psychological,
material and physical. Most of the participants, it should be recalled, were able to
refute the accusations made against them at a relatively early stage of the legal
process. Despite this, their lives were, to put it simply, wrecked. It need hardly be
stated that for factually innocent defendants who are wrongly convicted and
imprisoned, but who cannot legally demonstrate this, the consequences will be still
greater.'
'It is also of deep concern that the experiences described by the participants in this
study are far from rare. A 2015 survey by the Association of Teachers and
Lecturers of 685 of its members found that 22% of school and college staff had
been the subject of a false allegation of abuse by a pupil…..The survey also found
that, not surprisingly, the prevalence of false allegations and the publicity given to
them is driving experienced staff out of teaching, and, presumably, deterring others
from seeking to enter it.'
At this point the reader may wish to recall the decline in the male teacher and the
associated discussions in chapter 2. Burnett et al conclude,
'The authors of this study hope that it will provide a valuable corrective to the
somewhat uncritical discourse that has dominated media, political and policymaking discourse over the past 20 years – the discourse which states that victims
will, almost invariably, be telling the truth. It is worth here repeating the
Metropolitan Police statement on Operation Midland, 'our starting point with
allegations of child sexual abuse is to believe the victim until we identify
reasonable cause to believe otherwise.' No doubt the intentions behind that
statement were honourable: a desire to right an historic wrong, and to give victims
who had been previously ignored a voice. But this study suggests that in the
process, a whole new and growing class of victims is being created, whose suffering
is intense – all the more so for having been, until now, largely ignored. The road to
hell, it is said, is paved with good intentions. Unfortunately, that is where the
victims of false allegations of abuse are likely to find themselves – in a living hell.'
19.7 Disclosure
The exposure of allegations as false is not aided by the criminal justice process as
it has been practiced in recent years. In late 2017 and early 2018 there were a rash
of failed prosecutions of young men for rape, the common denominator being late,
or improper, disclosure – see for example (Collins W. , 2017b). It would be hard to
overstate the importance of disclosure. It is the process by which evidence is made
available to the court, and hence is a central aspect of justice. Formally, the
prosecution is in charge of disclosure, though they are obliged to pass on all
relevant material to the defence. However, it is not lawyers who do the leg work to
uncover evidence. That is the job of the police. Evidence includes witness
statements, physical evidence and electronic communications. The latter are now
extremely important in sex cases. The police are supposed to collect all evidence
pertinent to the case, whether it might assist the prosecution or the defence, and
"disclose" it, i.e., pass it on, via the prosecution team. Unfortunately, it has
emerged that the disclosure process is seriously flawed in many cases.
Bluntly put, if you have been charged with rape, the only thing standing between
you and a 10 year stretch might be whether a single policeman, or policewoman,
can be bothered to unearth the key exculpatory evidence. Unfortunately, it is not
only police laziness which may condemn you. There is also a culture which has
taken root within the police that their job is to get a prosecution. The false
allegation cases I reviewed, (Collins, W, 2018b), are full of examples of the police
sitting on evidence which would have cleared the accused man, but they did not
disclose it. Worse, the informal adoption of a mindset of "believe the victim" has
meant that the accused is put in the position of having to prove his innocence: a
reversal of the hallowed principle of "innocent until proven guilty". Having to
prove your innocence is bad enough, but disclosure failures may then deny you
access to the evidence to enable you to do so.
The celebrated case of Liam Allan, one of those which emerged at the end of 2017,
is a typical example of a disclosure failure. Fortunately, in this case, the key
evidence was revealed at the last moment, (Hartley-Parkinson, 2017). The case
against Liam Allan collapsed when former conservative MP Jerry Hayes, the
prosecution barrister – yes, the prosecution barrister – insisted that the police hand
over the evidence from the complainants 'phone. Some 50,000 messages were
finally revealed on the first day of the trial itself. The defence advocate, Julia
Smart, to her great credit, spent the rest of that day, and undoubtedly all night,
reviewing the contents of the new disclosure. Among them were messages to Mr
Allan pestering him for sex and fantasising about 'rough sex and being raped'. One
message read simply 'it wasn't against my will or anything'. The prosecution
advised the case be withdrawn. It was. It should never have come to court. In an
excellent résumé of the Liam Allan case, Matthew Scott, the Barrister Blogger,
sums it up: 'Despite the magnificent performance of Mr Hayes, a case like this
ought to shatter any remaining illusions that the English and Welsh criminal justice
system is fit for purpose', (Scott, 2017).
But the Liam Allan case was just one in a string of failed rape cases which received
publicity at that time due to similar shortcomings in process. Nor is this new. In
2006, solicitor Chris Saltese believed that there were 'certainly scores, and very
possibly hundreds of men who have been convicted of sexual crimes who are
rotting in prison with no prospect of release, but who are not guilty and should
never have been sentenced. They were convicted on their accusers' word alone.
The records that might prove their innocence have been lost or destroyed. There is
literally nothing they can do to prove that they did not do what they have been
accused of doing except reiterate that they did not do it. And that, of course, is not
enough.' (Palmer, 2006).
It is surely damning when lawyers are so critical of the system in which they
themselves are employed. Here is a coruscating piece by solicitor Matthew
Graham, following the trial failures in late 2017,
'This isn't a story of a few rogue cops gone bad, or a crumbling, underfunded
criminal justice system overwhelmed by national austerity (though both get blamed
daily in courts and the press to cover a wider, more difficult truth). This is a story
of a state funded system designed with political ends in mind to convict those
accused of crime, because once a person is charged they must be guilty, if only the
Crown can prove it.
The job of the police is to investigate whether or by whom an offence has been
committed. They have a legal duty to investigate all reasonable lines of enquiry,
whether they point towards the guilt or innocence of a particular suspect. It
sounds simple, but if you are a suspect in a criminal case you need to understand
that this isn't how it works…..
Inconvenient evidence that would undermine a prosecution or assist a suspect
doesn't achieve either of those aims, so it doesn't have any real importance. As
soon as the police think it is their job to catch the criminals, the system goes
wrong, because it is they, not a court or a jury or anyone independent, who is
deciding on who is a criminal and then setting about proving it….
Pity those, and there are many, who didn't get the disclosure they deserved. Pity
those suspects where the police hold or could hold evidence that helps their case
that they don't know about. An extra witness here. A useful 999 call there. Social
services records. School reports. Text messages. Emails and social media
content. And ever on. And more fool those who expect a court to help their quest
for fair disclosure. Expect to be met with apathy at best, more likely positive
resistance. Expect to be told you are simply fishing for a loophole. Expect to have
to justify the relevance of the material you have never seen. Expect the court to
wholly accept a bland assurance of a prosecutor in court that never comes to
fruition. Expect excuse after excuse after excuse and expect no one in authority
to care one bit. And when you reach the day of trial without having received what
the law says you should, expect the trial to carry on all the same. Because this is
what happens in cases every day, all over the country, in magistrates and crown
courts.' (Graham, M, 2018)
Lawyer Nick Freeman has called for people who make false rape and sexual
assault allegations to be stripped of their statutory anonymity and named on a
public register: 'The time has come for there to be a register where the names of
those who make these disgraceful and disgusting allegations are added. Sadly, Mr
Allan's case is not a one off. It is one of many – the tip of the iceberg. False
allegations are made on a daily basis, and those who make them can hide behind a
lifelong veil of anonymity', (Green, 2017).
On BBC Radio 4's 'Today' programme on 18/1/18, the then-DPP, Alison Saunders,
was interviewed about the rash of failures of disclosure in recent rape cases. Sarah
Montague opened with the simple direct question, 'Is it possible that there are
people in prison today because of failures of disclosure by the police and CPS?'.
Alison Saunders replied, 'I don't think so because of the safeguards which are in
place'. One can immediately assert, with confidence approaching mathematical
certainty, that the DPP's reply was false. Saunders failed to provide a politician's
response to that tricky question and that was career terminal. Most surprisingly, on
27/1/18, John Humphrys on Radio 4's 'Today' programme effectively called for
Alison Saunders' resignation by suggesting she should 'consider her position' and
that it might be 'time to step aside'. On the same day it was announced that all
rape and serious sexual assault cases in England and Wales would be reviewed to
ensure evidence had been properly disclosed, (BBC News, 2018). Shortly after,
Saunders announced she would be stepping down as DPP and did so on 31st
October 2018. But the problem was never one person but an endemic mindset and
institutionalized practices inimical to justice. Nor is the problem confined to the
CPS but is principally an issue with the police, upon whom the burden of unearthing
and disclosing evidence rests. In the matter of sexual offences, the police have
been trained by feminist lobbyists.
In June 2018 the CPS issued their review of prosecutions of 'Rape And Serious
Sexual Offence' (RASSO) cases, (CPS, 2018b). It includes the obligatory
contrition,
'We deeply regret every case where mistakes have been made. Our priority,
working closely with the police, is to put in place effective measures that bring
about a sea-change in how disclosure is managed so that complainants and suspects
alike can have confidence that every case is fair.'
However, the report is an unsatisfactory affair. It was confined to cases in
progress, not cases already with a verdict. It refers to a review of 'all rape or
serious sexual assault prosecutions being handled by the RASSO units and which
were already set for trial, or in which a plea of not guilty was anticipated…..By
February 13, a total of 3,637 cases had been assessed by RASSO lawyers. Some
cases were at an early stage, while others were close to trial'. It also states that,
'the principal reason for undertaking this assessment of RASSO cases was to
confirm that they were being progressed properly, and to address any concerns'.
And yet, incredibly, the report omits to inform us of the outcome of this review of
3,637 cases. Instead it states that after this main review had concluded, 'the CPS
conducted a further exercise to identify the extent to which disclosure issues were
a factor in the decision to stop RASSO cases during that period'. The period in
question was a mere six weeks, namely between 1 January and 13 February 2018.
The report does not tell us how many cases were stopped in that period.
The only review outcomes which were reported were confined to this sub-review
of cases which had been stopped. Even that is limited in extent. We are informed
that 47 cases stopped during the period had issues with disclosure of unused
material. But what this is as a percentage of the number of stopped cases we do
not know. We are also informed of the following results of the review of stopped
cases,
'This analysis has found examples of communications evidence that ought to have
been reviewed by the investigator and prosecutor not being examined until after
the case had been charged. In some of the cases that were stopped this evidence
was so undermining that there was no longer a realistic prospect of conviction.'
'The failure to identify relevant third parties and to obtain material from them in a
timely way was a feature in some of the cases that were stopped during the review
period.'
But the report does not tell us to how many of the stopped cases these serious
failings relate. Why not?
Even confining attention to cases which are stopped by the prosecution, since 47
disclosure failures were found in a period of six weeks, the implication might be
that about 400 stopped cases per year would have disclosure problems. The actual
number in 2017 was 916, (Graham, M, 2018). And what about cases which had not
been stopped but were continuing to proceed? We are told nothing whatsoever
about these, and yet these are the cases which matter most as regards potentially
unsafe convictions. The report does nothing to reassure and a great deal to
consolidate one's concern. Accountability lies with the Attorney General, who is
either asleep on the job or just hoping to get away with it.
However, the Commons Justice Select Committee, whose job it is to oversee such
matters independently of the Ministry of Justice line management, took a rather
more robust approach. Their inquiry report into disclosure was issued the month
after the CPS's own report, on 20th July, (HOC Justice Committee, 2018). It is
almost enough to restore one's faith in the democratic process (savour this
moment, you will not hear me praising politicians again very soon). Some of the key
findings of the Select Committee are worth reiterating at some length,
'We note that disclosure errors have been damaging for many people affected,
including for complainants who might have waited years to have their case heard
only for it to be delayed or for it to collapse. Fundamentally, however, disclosure
errors have led to miscarriages of justice and - as the Director of Public
Prosecutions told us - some people have gone to prison as a result.'
Note that Saunders appears to have changed her mind on this crucial fact since
January. The Select Committee report continues,
'It is disappointing that we have heard the same issues raised throughout this
inquiry as have been noted by inquiries as far back as 2011, and it is further
disappointing that the Attorney General in place at the time of inquiry stated to us
that he was aware of problems going back as far as 1996 but yet the problem had
persisted and apparently worsened under his watch. We are also surprised and
disappointed that the DPP, who should be closer to these problems on a day-to-day
basis, does not appear to have pressed for more urgent action to address the
worsening situation during her time in post.'
'We conclude that disclosure failures have been widely acknowledged for many
years but have gone unresolved, in part, because of insufficient focus and
leadership by Ministers and senior officials. This was not aided by data collected by
the Crown Prosecution Service which might have underestimated the number of
cases which were stopped with disclosure errors by around 90%.'
'The Code for Crown Prosecutors is clear "Prosecutors must be fair, independent
and objective… Prosecutors must always act in the interests of justice and not
solely for the purpose of obtaining a conviction". The fact that performance
metrics do not fully reflect the purpose of the CPS is compounded by a significant
underestimation of the number of cases that stopped due to disclosure errors in the
CPS' internal data.'
'It is surprising and concerning that the Director of Public Prosecutions did not
know that the case against Liam Allan had not been recorded as a disclosure error
at the point that it was stopped. The Director has not acted as quickly and
proactively as required and this, it appears to us, has permeated throughout the
organisation.'
'It is fundamentally important that all police officers recognise both that they are
searching for the truth; and that they have core disclosure duties which are central
to the criminal justice process and are not merely an administrative add-on….. It is
vital that disclosure is embedded at every stage in the process and not delegated to
the most junior person as has all too often been the case in the past.'
'It is important that those who come forward to report serious offences,
particularly those of a sexual or otherwise sensitive nature, are treated by
investigators with respect and sensitivity. Their personal information should be
handled in the same way and in accordance with their rights to privacy, where that
is consistent with the interest of justice. The law is clear in that the right to a fair
trial is an absolute right which cannot be violated to protect the right to privacy.'
'We do not agree with the DPP's assertion that disclosure in the Magistrates'
Courts is not an issue and we are concerned that disclosure errors in the
Magistrates' Courts will be left to continue if effort is not also focussed there.'
'We welcome the National Disclosure Improvement Plan, and note that it names
the people responsible for ensuring that it follows into real and lasting change. We
expect these people to be personally accountable for delivery of the plan.'
'We expect the next Director of Public Prosecutions to proactively address
disclosure throughout their tenure.'
The last point refers to Max Hill who took over as the new DPP on 1st November
2018. Unfortunately, Mr. Hill does not seem to have got the message. I refer to the
specific message in the Select Committee's guidance, above, that 'the law is clear
in that the right to a fair trial is an absolute right which cannot be violated to
protect the right to privacy'. Contrary to that guidance, in his first public speech as
DPP, Mr Hill emphasised the complainants' right to privacy above the interests of
justice and indicated clearly that searching social media records – a key issue in
disclosure – will continue to be incomplete. An article in The Times reports his
speech as follows,
'Rape complainants must have their personal privacy, including mobile phone
records, protected, the new chief prosecutor said last night as he addressed his
department's failings on disclosure of evidence.
He said that there needed to be a lasting change in culture when it came to
disclosure. However, he insisted that prosecutors were not obliged to trawl through
the mobile phone records of all rape complainants as they struggled to cope with
the rise in the volume of digital evidence.
"We are very clear that seeking to examine the mobile telephones of complainants
and witnesses is not something that should be pursued as a matter of course in
every case," he said. "It is of vital importance that the personal information of
those who report sexual offences is treated in a way that is consistent with both
their right to privacy and with the interests of justice."' (Gibb, 2018)
So, it appears that the new DPP's view is that ensuring that any exculpatory
evidence is found is rather too much trouble, and the complainants' privacy
provides a suitable excuse for not being thorough. How much trouble would the
accused man think was worthwhile to avoid ten years in prison and his reputation
ruined forever? And do recall that Liam Allan's defence barrister found the
relevant evidence overnight, in a haystack of 50,000 messages. If the police cannot
be bothered to search thoroughly, the defence should be permitted to do so for
themselves. Max Hill's attitude is appalling and inexcusable. It gives one no faith
that there is any acknowledgement of the seriousness of the failings of the
prevailing culture.
The 2017/18 CPS VAWG report contains a number of brief accounts of rape cases.
On page 9 we read this one, (CPS, Violence against Women and Girls Report,
2018a),
'A young man was convicted of rape and controlling or coercive behaviour of his 16
year old girlfriend. The early disclosure of communications evidence, including
thousands of pages of social media messages, led to the defendant pleading guilty
to the controlling or coercive offence. A trial was held for the rape offence – the
victim gave her evidence via video link after a pre-trial meeting with Counsel who
provided support and reassurance. The defendant was sentenced to a total of four
and a half years' imprisonment and made subject to a restraining order for 10
years.'
It seems, then, that 'early disclosure of communications evidence, including
thousands of pages of social media messages' is not a problem when it is
prosecution evidence being sought. Only when exculpatory evidence is in question
does searching social media become too much trouble.
19.8 The Empathy Gap in Accusations of Sexual Assault
Sexual assault is generally regarded as victimisation of women and nothing more.
Indeed, in feminist patriarchy theory, sexual abuse is said to be used as a tool by
men for their oppression and domination of women. Radical feminists even assert
that all penis-in-vagina sex is rape. But there are some issues in the context of sex
offences in which men are disadvantaged. In this chapter I have concentrated upon
the position of accused men and whether they receive fair treatment when
accused.
We have seen that the CPS VAWG reports are an exercise in obscuring male
victimisation whilst amplifying female victimisation, accomplished through a form
of Newspeak in which "Violence" does not mean violence, "Women" does not
mean women, and "Girls" does not mean girls. Claims that attrition of rape cases
where the complainant is female is particularly large are challenged by a study
which shows such attrition to be comparable to that for VAP offences. In contrast,
attrition of rape cases where the complainant is male is indeed unusually large, but
this goes unremarked by rape activists.
Feminists insist that women do not lie about rape, a claim that is palpably false.
The percentage of rape allegations which are false continues to be highly
controversial, but it is clearly not a trivial percentage. There is evidence which is
difficult to refute that, at least in recent years, the false allegation rate has
become an alarmingly large percentage, specifically that most police recorded
rapes are false allegations. There is no shortage of case histories testifying to the
egregious treatment of entirely innocent men. The psychological impact of false
allegations is devastating, often leading to suicide. Feminists are unconcerned
about this, even opining that falsely accused men might regard the experience in a
positive light. For example, Deborah Orr writing in the Guardian,
'I'd like to hear just one person, exonerated after a sexual offences trial, declare
that despite their personal suffering, they are proud to live in a society that takes
people seriously when they say they have been sexually abused, and that if
occasionally people have to undergo ordeals like theirs, in order to ensure that
others who have committed such crimes are less likely to get away with them, then
so be it.' (Orr, 2013)
I paraphrase: a man should be glad to have suffered at the hands of a woman in
order to prevent suffering to women. Well, if the man were truly saintly, then yes.
But this is an expectation of self-sacrificial behaviour by men, which is precisely
what "male disposability" means. And the attitude of a woman who expects such
self-sacrifice from men, for the benefit of women, is precisely what
"gynocentrism" means.
One of the signs of a society which is slipping into authoritarianism is a creeping
erosion of the processes of justice. This erosion will serve the interests of those in
power to the detriment of those against whom they exercise their animus. In the
context of men accused of sexual offences, there are five fundamental principles of
our justice system which either have been eroded already or are under imminent
threat of such erosion. They are,
Everyone is equal before the law, irrespective of race or creed or sex;
Everyone has the right to be regarded as innocent until proven guilty;
Everyone accused of an indictable criminal offence, and pleading not guilty, has the
right to be judged by his, or her, peers – the right to a trial by jury;
Everyone has a right to expect all available evidence and testimony to be brought
before the court;
And, arguably, the right to face one's accuser.
Equality before the law has already been demolished in respect of sex, as discussed
at length in chapter 8.
The de facto position in respect of males accused of sex offences against females is
that the principle of innocence until proven guilty has also already been
overturned. Whilst this is not a formally recognised position, in practice sex
offences often reduce to "he-said, she-said". The trial then becomes a beauty
contest between the complainant and the defendant. If the defendant is not guilty,
he is put in the position of having to prove the fact. Proving a negative is
intrinsically difficult, and all the more so when what he has to prove is some else's
state of mind (i.e., their consent).
Having to prove your innocence is already a reversal of the basic principle of
justice, but this is made even worse by disclosure failures denying the defendant
access to the material that would furnish the crucial exculpatory evidence. The
new DPP appears determined to continue to facilitate disclosure failures. In
practice the right to have all evidence brought before the court has long since been
violated by a woeful disclosure process tainted by a bias towards gaining a
conviction, rather than promoting justice.
The right to a jury trial is perhaps the most sacrosanct principle. That removal of
this right in the specific context of sex offence cases is being seriously promoted in
Parliament is deeply disturbing. An alternative strategy to increase conviction
rates which is being promoted by rape activists is to require the jury to be subject
to prior manipulation ("training"), which would negate the purpose of an untainted
random selection of jurors. But I have not exhausted the issue of sexual offences
yet. There is another side to sexual offences which has not been addressed in this
chapter: women offenders. This is addressed next.
20. Sexual Assault: The Story Less Told
We can't destroy the inequities between men and women until we destroy
marriage.
Robin Morgan, Sisterhood is Powerful (1970)
I feel what they feel: man-hating, that volatile admixture of pity, contempt, disgust,
envy, alienation, fear, and rage at men. It is hatred not only for the anonymous man
who makes sucking noises on the street, not only for the rapist or the judge who
acquits him, but for the men women share their lives with - husbands, lovers,
friends, fathers, brothers, sons, coworkers.
Judith Levine, My Enemy, My Love: Women, Masculinity, and the Dilemmas of
Gender (1992)
Men's sexuality is mean and violent, and men so powerful that they can reach
within women to fuck/construct us from the inside out. Satan-like, men possess
women, making their wicked fantasies and desires women's own. A woman who has
sex with a man, therefore, does so against her will, even if she does not feel forced.
Judith Levine, My Enemy, My Love: Women, Masculinity, and the Dilemmas of
Gender (1992)
As long as some men use physical force to subjugate females, all men need not.
The knowledge that some men do suffices to threaten all women….He can beat or
kill the woman he claims to love, he can rape women, whether mate, acquaintance,
or stranger; he can rape or sexually molest his daughters, nieces, stepchildren, or
the children of a woman he claims to love. The vast majority of men in the world do
one or more of the above.
Marilyn French, The War Against Women (1992)
We are, as a sex, infinitely superior to men.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, (1815 – 1904)
The previous chapter considered rape, which, in English law, is necessarily
committed by males whatever the sex of the victim. In this chapter I address
categories of sexual offence which were not covered in the preceding chapter.
Sexual offending by females is the main category I tackle here. In some cases this
involves full intercourse without the consent of the man or boy in question, which
only the definition adopted by English law prevents me from calling rape. It is here
we meet the full force of sex-bias in the form of the general public's incapability to
conceptualise a female coercing sex with a male. And if they can do so, they
struggle to regard it as reprehensible let alone criminal. The incredulity reaches
greater heights still if it is suggested that such a thing might deserve many years in
prison. This is, in my opinion, where inequality of the sexes is greatest in our
society. A simple sex reversal turns one of the most heinous of crimes – rape – into
an event which most people do not recognise as being especially improper, let alone
criminal, despite all other aspects being identical.
The other categories of offence considered here include rape in men's prisons, and
sexual assaults of minors in juvenile correctional facilities, by either males or
females. War rape is often assumed to be an issue for females only. It is not. Where
war rape is endemic, the victims are invariably of both sexes, as we will see. But
first I take a look at the statistics of people in prison for sex offences.
20.1 Sex Offender Prisoner Statistics (UK)
The statistics of people in prison for sex offences appears to confirm the societal
prejudice regarding the sex of such offenders. About 99% of prisoners for sex
offences are men. Hence, in the following paragraph, "people" can be interpreted
as "men" to a very good approximation.
In June 2005 there were 6,951 people in prison for sexual offences in England and
Wales, but this rose to 10,935 by June 2011, (Ministry of Justice, 2013a). By July
2014 this had risen further to 11,150 people, (Slack, 2014). By March 2015 this had
increased again to just under 11,600, (Barrett, 2015). At this time 17% of the
sentenced prison population was a sex offender, compared with just 10% in 2000. A
total of 6,402 sex offenders were convicted in the year ending March 2015, (UK
Government, 2015a). At 30 June 2017 the number of people in prison for sex
offences had climbed further to 13,324, (Ministry of Justice, 2017a). By 31
December 2018 there were more still, some 13,512 prisoners, or 19% of the
sentenced prison population, (Ministry of Justice, 2019). Hence the number of
people in prison for sexual offences has nearly doubled in 13 years. The reasons for
the increase are, (i) a larger number of men are being tried, most likely due to the
police and the CPS pursuing a policy of increasing prosecutions, (ii) a larger
proportion of those convicted are being sentenced to custody, (iii) the average
sentence length for sex offences has increased (by policy), and, (iv) there is an
influx of older men being imprisoned for historic sex offences following Operation
Yewtree (the police purge on historic sex offences following the revelations about
Jimmy Savile). Recall the discussion of false allegations in the previous chapter.
How many of these imprisoned men are innocent? Certainly at least hundreds, but
perhaps thousands.
By March 2015 the average sentence length for sex offences had become longer
than it had ever been before, reaching 5 years 3 months. This average sentence
length had increased from 3 years 4 months in 2003, an increase by 58% in 12
years. Note that the number of convictions for rape in 2015 was 1,295, compared to
the total of 6,402 convicted for any sex offence, so 80% of the men contributing to
that 5 year 3 month average sentence were convicted for a lesser offence than
rape. By 2014 there were already at least eight men's prisons housing only sex
offenders, (Slack, 2014).
There has been a slight rise in the number of women in prison for sexual offences,
but the volume of female prisoners for sexual offences remains very small. In 2009
there were just 56 female child sex abusers in custody (49 sentenced and 7 on
remand). Another 84 were under supervision in the community, (Townsend and
Syal, 2009). Fewer than 2% of people on the sex offenders register were then
women. In 2010 and 2011 there were respectively 121 and 103 female prisoners in
custody for sexual offences, (Ministry of Justice, 2013a). In June 2015, about 2.5%
of the female prison population were sex offenders, see Figure 7.08 of (Ministry of
Justice, 2016a). The female prison population in 2015 was about 3,900, so the
number of female sex offenders in prison was around 100. There will be slightly
more now as the conviction rate has increased in recent years, though the absolute
volume remains very small compared with convictions of male sex offenders.
Between the years 2007 and 2014, the number of women being convicted annually
of sexual offences rose from 31 to 63, but in years 2015, 2016 and 2017 this rose
further to 100, 120 and 108 respectively (the number of women prosecuted being
216, 211 and 186 respectively). Between years 2007 and 2014, the number of
women being sentenced to immediate custody rose from 11 to 31, but in years
2015, 2016 and 2017 this rose further to 57, 63 and 58 respectively, (UK
Government, 2018m). The average sentence length in years 2015-17 was 51
months. By the end of 2017 there would have been around 120 women in prison for
sexual offences, or roughly 3.2% of the female prison population.
It is worth noting the far larger number of women who are arrested for sex
offences than are prosecuted. In 2017, some 2,512 women required legal aid prior
to being charged, e.g., whilst in a police station, in association with sexual offences
(up from 1,632 in 2007), (UK Government, 2018n). Only a small proportion of
these proceed to prosecution. The same is true for male offenders, of course, and
the corresponding volume of identified male offenders is proportionally greater.
20.2 Examples of Women's Sexual Abuse of Minors
A question which arises is whether the above statistics on identified female sex
offending are a true reflection of its underlying prevalence: are female sexual
abusers really a hundred times rarer than male sexual abusers? Before turning to
that issue, however, there is an even more fundamental problem: many people
simply cannot believe that female sex offending is to be taken seriously, even when
against minors. Barbara Ellen, responding to the case of Madeleine Martin,
summarises this view well. She wrote in the Guardian,
'Do we seriously think that a female teacher sleeping with a male pupil is on a par
with a male teacher sleeping with a girl pupil? I don't. And neither, I'd wager,
would most 15-year-old boys….If anything, one would have thought they might be
jealous. The internet is awash with sites dealing with "older woman teacher-pupil"
fantasies. And there lies the rub – should the law be treating male and female pupil
victims equally when male and female teenagers are so different?' (Ellen, 2009).
Barbara Ellen's position, simply put, is that 'he enjoyed it and he should be grateful
for the attention'. She would readily agree that these same sentiments would be
unthinkable in the context of a male teacher's sexual exploitation of an underage
girl pupil. Equality only when it suits. As women become more powerful in all
aspects of public life, in addition to their traditional social and domestic power, and
as boys become less and less regarded, especially at school, Ellen's position sounds
increasingly like an aristocrat declaring that the lower orders should be grateful
for any acknowledgement of their existence, even if exploitative. It won't do. The
powerful deserve especial punishment when they abuse their power, and this is now
applicable to women.
Not all female sexual offending is of this teacher-on-pupil kind. Marie Black was
convicted of being at the centre of a paedophile ring which raped and sexually
abused two boys and three girls repeatedly and routinely over a ten year period.
Two men and another woman were also convicted on a range of charges, but Black
was declared the "common denominator" and ring leader, despite attempts by her
defence to deflect all the blame onto the men, (Baker, 2015). Then there was the
case of Vanessa George, a nursery worker, who took advantage of her position to
photograph herself sexually abusing small children, passing the photos to a man,
who passed them on to another woman, (BBC News, 2010).
If you missed the case of Nicola Fox it might be because it arose while the media
were obsessing about male MPs putting their hands on women's knees or
attempting to kiss them or otherwise importuning women. Fox forced a 13-year-old
boy with no previous sexual experience to have sex with her. She lured the boy into
her house, saying she wanted a chat with him. She then slammed the door shut and
barricaded it with a table so he could not escape. Fox pinned the boy down to the
bed using her weight (she's a large woman). She removed her trousers and lower
clothing then held the boy's hands over his head and forced sexual intercourse on
him. He made it absolutely clear he did not want her to do what she did, telling her
to stop and to get off. He struggled and was crying at one point, (Burns, 2017). Her
response was to tell him, in an annoyed and aggressive tone, to stop crying. He felt
upset and embarrassed but nevertheless the boy treated Fox with dignity because
of her gender, and did not want to hurt her by using violence to free himself. This is
a common reaction of males when subject to sexual assault by women (e.g., see
section 20.9). This offence cannot be legally classed as rape because in English law
rape is defined as penetration using a penis, so a biological woman cannot rape.
But, legal niceties aside, this was forcible rape. Fox has been sentenced to 4 years
in prison. At the Court of Appeal in London, prosecution counsel Louise Oakley
claimed that Fox had been treated more leniently because of her sex. Lady Justice
Hallett, presiding at the appeal, agreed that leniency had been shown but argued
that mitigation was justified due to Nicola Fox's mental health problems. She
declined to alter the sentence, (Bristow, 2017).
Not all women's sexual offending is as grievous as the above cases. I have compiled
a list of 39 more typical case studies of women in the UK who have been convicted
of sex offences against minors, (Collins, W, 2017c). All are reasonably recent (2010
to 2017). In 23 out of these 39 UK cases the female offender did not go to prison
(59%). Suspended sentences were the most common outcome. Bear in mind that
only the more serious cases are likely to feature in the press, my only source of
material. Two of the 16 women who did go to prison were originally given
suspended sentences – only to be sent to prison by the court of appeal. This
leniency is worth bearing in mind because, even in this list of typical cases, there
are some pretty serious ones. Three involve young lesbian women who fooled
underaged girls into thinking they were male and raped them with rubber or
wooden dildos. One such woman raped three different girls in this way (though
technically this would not be rape but "assault by penetration"). Then there were
the sisters who started abusing a boy sexually when he was six and continued
throughout his boyhood. And the 24-year-old woman who "assaulted by
penetration" a three-year-old girl and circulated the pictures of her doing so. And
the 39-year-old mother who regularly had sex with six different 13- to 15-year-old
boys in her house after plying them with drink and drugs. And the 35-year-old
woman who groomed two boys, aged 12 and 13, to achieve her aim of having full
sex with them. And the 44-year-old female teaching assistant who had sex with "a
string" of 15- and 16-year-old boys, sometimes in the school premises, and
continued even after she had been gaoled for it.
Then there was the delightful 44-year-old mother of two who took advantage of
being offered a bed in a friend's house after a party to sexually assault her son,
aged 14, his mother later being outraged that the woman did not go to prison. And
the 36-year-old single mother who had sex with a 12-year-old boy 191 times,
keeping a diary of the events. And the 21-year-old female babysitter whose idea of
'looking after' an 11-year-old boy included full sexual intercourse. She simply
stripped off, then stripped him, then straddled him. And the list includes two cases
of middle-aged women taking sexual advantage of vulnerable 17-year-old boys in
special needs establishments. And a nationally acclaimed head teacher who was
gaoled for historic offences involving grooming two boys and inducing them to have
sex with her over a number of years (in one case with her husband in the adjacent
tent whence she had evicted him). And on, and on.
It is of interest to compare these cases with that of Rolf Harris. If you are not
familiar with his case I suggest you look back at some newspaper reports to see
what he was accused of doing (and I shall assume for this purpose that he was
guilty as found). The complainants in the Harris case were described in the
newspapers as "brave victims" who had undergone "terrifying ordeals". The boy
victims of the women in my 39 case studies were never described in such terms in
the newspaper reports. And the words used to described their abuser's exploits
were typically "affair" or "tryst" or "fling", not "abuse" or "assault" – or, indeed,
"rape" – as would be the case if the sexes were reversed. Most of the above cases
of female sexual offenders are a good deal worse than the Rolf Harris case, even if
you believe he was guilty as found. And yet Harris was immediately declared a
non-person, all his previous work negated. No punishment was harsh enough. He
was cast into the furthermost pit of hell. Yet reverse the sexes and many members
of the public will have difficulty regarding these women's exploits as deserving
much more in the way of punishment than a bit of a ticking off. This is the
gynocentric premium which makes "male privilege" a sick joke.
The 39 case studies, (Collins, W, 2017c), demonstrate that women's offending
commonly displays the following characteristics: plying victims with drink or drugs,
persistent grooming which continues for years, offences against multiple victims,
offences against pre-pubescent victims (hence physically as well as legally
children), and threats in the event of disclosure. Counter-accusations were
sometimes deployed by the female abusers: that the boy victims raped them. The
words used by judges in their summing-up at the trials have included statements
such as, 'a disgraceful abuse of power', 'a case of gross child abuse', 'serious abuse
of trust' and 'very serious offences indeed'. And yet a leniency which would cause
public outrage in the case of male offenders is often displayed, despite these
observations, in respect of sentencing female offenders. It could not be clearer. In
sex cases you are not punished for what you have done, you are punished for what
you are. This is prejudice.
In the USA there are several hundred cases annually of women teachers being
convicted of sexual offences against underage boys in their schools, a collection of
275 examples can be found in (Collins, W, 2014).
A major study commissioned by the U.S. Department of Education, 'Educator
Sexual Misconduct', reviews various other studies. One study, from the American
Association of University Women in 2001, indicated that 57.2% of all students
reporting sexual abuse specified a male offender and 42.4% a female offender.
Another referenced study, by Cameron et al, reported nearly identical proportions:
57% male offenders vs. 43% female offenders, (US Department of Education,
2004).
Jenni Murray, the long-standing presenter of BBC radio's 'Woman's Hour', has
difficulty understanding why women do it, (Murray, 2015). She questions whether
they would be treated so leniently if they were male. I will not be straying into the
psychology of offenders here, which will certainly be both complex and varied. In
particular, it is likely that women in the role of carer, offending in the domestic
environment against young children (paedophiles), have a distinct aetiology from
that of (say) teachers offending against pubescent boys or girls in the 11 to 15 age
range (hebephiles). In regard to the latter, this is the opinion of Anthony Beech,
criminological psychology professor at the University of Birmingham,
'The teachers feel entitled. They think they can have sex with anyone they want.
It's power imbalance and manipulation. There's a narcissism – I can do what I want
because I'm the most important person going', (Sanghani, 2015).
In short, the motivation may be the same as it is for male offenders. Jenni
Murray's difficulty in understanding is because she starts from a position of
incredulity based on the old gendered mindset of female innocence, aided and
abetted by the relative rarity with which female sexual offending comes to light.
20.3 The Prevalence of Female Sexual Abuse of Minors (UK)
It is ten years since Esther Rantzen, the TV presenter, caused public shock with
this Guardian article, (Rantzen, 2009). It reported on calls to the UK's ChildLine.
Extracts are as follows,
'The figures released by ChildLine demonstrate that sexual abuse by women is not
nearly as rare as we would hope. There has been a dramatic rise in the number of
women reported by child callers to ChildLine as abusers. This rise is partly due to
the fact that many more boys are ringing us.
Suicide is the biggest single cause of death for boys in their late teens and early
20s, even outnumbering deaths in road accidents. So ChildLine counsellors believed
that far too many boys and young men were reluctant to disclose a problem until it
became so overwhelming that they felt life was not worth living. That is why we
have focused on boys – with so much success that the number counselled has
reached an all-time high of more than 58,000.
Last year, more than half the boys who rang disclosing sexual abuse reported that
they had been abused by women. The most common female perpetrator – in almost
1,000 cases – was the boy's mother. Among the boys who reported being sexually
abused by a man (almost the same number of callers), the most common
perpetrator was the father – again, in about 1,000 incidents. Both shocking
statistics.'
The accompanying article reports that '2,142 children had told ChildLine last year
they had been sexually abused by a woman', (Press Association, 2009). Yet the
phenomenon of sexual abuse by women was hardly unknown before 2009. You can
find a massive bibliography of around 650 publications related to female sexual
abusers or their victims, in alphabetical order here, (Collins W. , 2017d), or in
chronological order here, (Collins, W, 2017e). The number of publications per year
remained sparse until the mid-1980s when it started to take off considerably. It
was then that Michele Elliott started the charity Kidscape.
Evidence is beginning to accumulate that around 20% – 25% of paedophiles are
women. Michele Elliott has long been of this opinion. Elliott's book 'Female Sexual
Abuse of Children, The Ultimate Taboo' was published in 1993, over a quarter of a
century ago, (Elliott, 1993). The Man, Woman & Myth videos with Elliott are
strongly recommended viewing, links here (MWM, circa 2013, and here and here).
The story of Elliott's own awakening to the reality of sexual abuse perpetrated by
women is revealing. In the late 1980s she gave a talk at an RAF base, claiming, as
she believed at the time, that abusers were all men. But an RAF officer came up to
her privately afterwards and told her, with tears in his eyes, 'it isn't only men, you
know, my mother did it to me'. Shortly afterwards Elliott appeared on a radio
phone-in show hosted by Philip Hodgson. She raised the issue of sexual abuse by
women. She was unaware that she was opening a floodgate.
The radio station's switchboard was jammed with calls from people disburdening
themselves of their own experience of sexual abuse at the hands of women –
almost always the first time they had told anyone. Over the following week,
Elliott's office at Kidscape was inundated with letters bearing similar tales (this
was before email). This experience led to Elliott hosting the Kidscape First
National Conference on Female Sexual Abuse. The event was invaded by 30 or so
feminists intent on preventing witnesses speaking – and they largely succeeded.
There is nothing new about feminists shutting down events. Not deterred, Michele
Elliott appeared on the TV programme 'This Morning' to talk about the issue.
Again the TV station was flooded with telephone calls, over a thousand. 90% of
callers had never told anyone of their abuse at the hands of women before.
And yet nearly a quarter of a century later, the social narrative still resists
acknowledging the reality of female perpetrated sexual abuse. The public is
resistant to the notion because it transgresses against the matricentric belief that
women are invariably caring, nurturing and benign. Men and women are both
powerfully disinclined to believe that some women might deploy their social power
in harmful ways. The pernicious effect of this mindset has been stressed in 1999 by
Jacquie Hetherton in 'The idealization of women: its role in the minimization of
child sexual abuse by females', (Hetherton, 1999). She wrote,
'these theories …. become problematic when they are used to endorse a "males do
and females don't" gender dichotomy …... The literature suggests that a gender
dichotomy is exactly what some individuals, particularly those within the feminist
movement, have attempted to cultivate. This has been evidenced by sustained
efforts to suppress and derogate discussion of child sexual abuse perpetrated by
women. The world's first conference on female sexual abusers in 1992 was
scathingly described in The Guardian as misogynist in motivation.'
More recently a UK study by the Lucy Faithfull Foundation has come to the view
that up to 20% of paedophiles are women, leading to an estimate that there might
be 64,000 women in the UK who have committed sexual offences against children,
(Townsend and Syal, 2009). Studies in the USA by the National Center on Child
Abuse and Neglect have reached a similar conclusion: 'the sexual abuse of children
by women, primarily mothers, once thought to be so rare it could be ignored,
constituted 25% of the sexually abused victims (approximately 36,000 victims).
This statistic is thought to be underestimated due to the tendency of non-disclosure
by victims', (Boroughs, 2004). Like Michele Elliott's work, this knowledge goes
back over a quarter of a century. It is not news, but it is only in recent years that it
has begun to surface in public discussion. From (Boroughs, 2004),
'The crime of sexual child abuse by women seems so unnatural that it offends
moral human instinct. Generally, it is a phenomenon that society finds difficult to
accept socially and professionally. Women are viewed as sexually harmless to
children, the common thought being, 'What harm could be done without a penis?'
Simply put, it is difficult to understand how a woman is physically capable of
sexually abusing a child in the traditional concept of rape without a genital organ
for penetration. Women are more often viewed as victims rather than perpetrators
of abuse. Men have long been viewed as both capable of sexually abusing children
and as being the main perpetrators. That remains true, but there is increasing
evidence that many more women sexually abuse children than previously thought.
Women are perceived to be the gentler sex; however, half the women in a recent
survey of 50 convicted female abusers stated they derived sadistic pleasure from
inflicting pain on their victims.'
In a study of 17,337 subjects of childhood sexual abuse, 'Long-Term Consequences
of Childhood Sexual Abuse by Gender of Victim', (Dube et al, 2005), 23% had a
female-only perpetrator and 22% had both male and female perpetrators, i.e., 45%
involved women. Males were 39% of those victimized, and men reported female
perpetration nearly 40% of the time. The long-term impact of childhood sexual
abuse on multiple health and social outcomes was found to be similar for males and
females. A 2014 US study based on anonymous online self-reporting of sexual
interest in children also indicated that about 25% of people admitting to such
interest were women, (Wurtele et al, 2013)
20.4 Male Offenders' History of Childhood Sexual Abuse
Male sex offenders have an abnormally high prevalence of sexual abuse in their
own childhood. Moreover, this sexual abuse is frequently perpetrated by women.
Evidence supporting this contention follows.
The article 'Heterosexual molestation of children who later become rapists'
studied a sample of 83 adult (male) rapists in the USA and found 59% had been
heterosexually molested as children. Most of these men (77%) reported sexual
abuse on more than one occasion and that the abuse involved intercourse. Note
that the 59% statistic relates specifically to sexual abuse as children by women
perpetrators. The boys' mean age at the time of the sexual activity was 11.5 years,
(Petrovich and Templer, 1984).
The paper 'Sexual trauma in the life histories of rapists and child molesters'
,
(Groth, 1979), concluded the following,
'This study examined the life histories of 348 men convicted of sexual assault. The
subjects were mostly recidivists, men who either had previous records of sexual
assault or who admitted to similar prior offenses for which they had not been
caught. Of these subjects, 170 had sexually assaulted adult victims, while 178 had
victimized children. Evidence of some form of sexual trauma during their
developmental years (ages 1 through 15) was found in the life histories of 31% of
the offenders. In contrast, a control group (of law enforcement officers) reported
similar experiences in only 3% of cases. The predominant type of trauma
experienced by child molesters was a forcible sexual assault, whereas for rapists
the abuse had taken the form of being pressured into sexual activity by an adult. In
many cases the sexual assaults appear to replicate the offender's own
victimization….. Incidences of sexual assault perpetrated by adult women against
children appear far higher than that reflected by official crime statistics'
This point about "replicating the offender's own victimisation" was confirmed by
O'Brien (1989) who reports that sex offenders against male victims who had
themselves a history of having been abused were more likely to have been abused
by a male. Similarly, and even more emphatically, of sex offenders against female
victims who had themselves a history of having been abused in childhood, 93% had
been abused by a female. The 1993 paper 'Childhood Sexual Abuse and Subsequent
Sexual Aggression Against Adult Women', by Brière and Smiljanich, presented at
the 101st annual convention of the American Psychological Association also
suggests a very high (80%) prevalence rate of sexual abuse by females in the
background of male sex offenders, (Matthews, 1996). The paper 'Parameters of
sexual contact of boys with women', indicates a prevalence rate of femaleperpetrated abuse against male sex prisoners as children of 46%, (Condi et al,
1987)
Table 2 of (Matthews, 1996) gives the prevalence rates of sexual abuse of males,
both in general populations and in populations of sex offenders. Male US
undergraduates were reported to have an anomalously high prevalence of sexual
victimisation (the average of two samples being 28%). Ignoring this, the
prevalence rate of sexual victimisation of males was 13% averaged over 8 samples
of general population. In contrast, the prevalence rate of sexual abuse of males
was 47% averaged over the 4 samples of sex offenders (and greater than 50%
when confined to cases of abuse by women).
An extract from the Abstract of 'Sexual victimization in the history of sexual
abusers: A review', by Hanson and Slater, (1988), reads, 'The present paper
reviews the empirical literature on the proportion of child sexual abusers who were
themselves sexually victimized as children. While findings in individual studies
ranged between 0% and 67%, on average about 28% of the offenders reported
being sexually victimized as children. This rate is higher than the base rate for
community samples of non-offending males (about 10%)'. A more recent paper
'Characteristics of Perpetrators of Child Sexual Abuse Who Have Been Sexually
Victimized as Children' reports on a study of all convicted child sexual abusers in
S.E. London. They conclude that 'almost half the offenders reported experiences
of sexual victimization in childhood', (Craissati et al, 2002). This paper, and the
previous one, are not specific regarding the sex of the offender.
The paper 'Cycle of child sexual abuse: links between being a victim and becoming
a perpetrator', (Glasser et al, 2001), studied 843 subjects attending a specialist
forensic psychotherapy centre. They concluded,
'A high percentage of male subjects abused in childhood by a female relative
became perpetrators. Having been a victim was a strong predictor of becoming a
perpetrator, as was an index of parental loss in childhood'. However, abuse in
childhood was not found to be a significant indicator of future perpetration by
females, only by males. Detailed results were as follows. Of the 41 females
attending the forensic psychotherapy service who were victims of sexual abuse,
only one was also a perpetrator. However, of the 135 male victims, 79 were
perpetrators (59%). Twenty-four male subjects reported having been sexually
abused by females, 23 of whom were identified as female relatives. Seven of the 24
were also abused by male relatives. Of these 24 males, 19 went on to become
perpetrators of sexual abuse (79%). Of the 111 male subjects abused by males, 60
became perpetrators (54%). This indicates that abuse of males by female relatives
may be more likely to contribute to the male victim becoming an abuser than abuse
by male relatives or persons outside the family.'
In summary, multiple studies show that the incidence of childhood sexual abuse in
the history of adult sex offenders is significantly higher than that in the general
population. Not surprisingly there is a spread of estimates, ranging from 28% to
80%. There is a particularly marked correspondence between male sex offenders
against women and the offender's history of childhood sexual abuse specifically by
a woman. The best estimate at present is that around half of male sex offenders
against women have a childhood history of sexual abuse by a woman.
Naomi Murphy is a psychotherapist working at HM Prison Whitemoor, a top
security prison housing serious violent and sexual offenders (men, obviously). She
has 17 years experience working with some of the most disturbed and most serious
sex offenders. She reports that 70% of these men were sexually abused as
children, and 54% of these specifically by a woman. Moreover, this was generally
women acting alone, not typically in conjunction with a man, as is sometimes
claimed. Mothers feature large in this abuse, but other female relatives,
neighbours, baby sitters, etc., also feature, (Murphy, 2017), (Murphy, 2019).
Let the implications of that sink in. As always, we must be careful about the
distinction between correlation and causality. But it would be perverse not to
suspect a causal connection in this case (though not deterministic, no one is
condemned to become an abuser due to having an abusive history). Women in a
caring capacity are naturally the arbiters of right and wrong to children in their
care. So what effect will sexual behaviour with a mother, or other carer, have upon
a child? It is hardly surprising that the victim may become confused as to what is
acceptable. And if the victim comes to understand that he has been inappropriately
treated, resentment at the breach of trust may set in. Either way, it is reasonable
to expect that the resulting psychological state might predispose the former victim
to become an offender. To emphasise: this is not deterministic. Victims are not
doomed to become offenders. We are all responsible for our behaviour. But some,
due to their history, may be prone to predispositions that others are not.
We constantly hear calls to "teach boys not to rape" as a means of reducing the
rape of females. But society already does this very effectively, which is why rape is
universally regarded as a particularly heinous crime. What society does not do so
effectively is to acknowledge that women may sexually abuse children – girls or
boys. It appears that boys abused by women have a significantly enhanced
likelihood of later becoming sex offenders against women. Consequently, even if
one's sole concern were the protection of women, a strategy which is more likely
to be effective in reducing rape than "teach boys not to rape" might be to
acknowledge more widely women's own sexual offending against boys and its
harmful effects. The current refusal to accept female culpability for sex offences
against boys may well be significant in increasing sex offences against women.
20.5 Perceptions of Female Perpetration and the Damage Done
The Guardian article by Barbara Ellen, referred to above, (Ellen, 2009),
demonstrates the attitude of many members of the public to female perpetration of
sexual abuse against male minors. Regrettably the same bias is common amongst
professionals in the therapeutic community, the very people who should provide
assistance to the abused. What harm is done by female sexual abuse of male
minors? Its apparent link to later sexual offences against females is one answer.
The abused are not doomed to be permanently damaged by their abuse, and that is
equally true for female victims. But there are indications that male sexual abuse
victims do suffer long-term psychological effects in some cases. The Abstract of
the review article 'Female-perpetrated sexual abuse: a review of victim and
professional perspectives', (Clements et al, 2013), reads,
'Professional attitudes towards female-perpetrated sexual abuse (FPSA)
reportedly reflect the gender-role expectations found in broader society, which
cast males almost exclusively as sexual aggressors or willing sexual recipients,
females as sexually non-coercive or victims and male-perpetrated sexual abuse as
particularly significant or injurious. Such views, however, appear to stand in
contrast to the perspectives of individuals who have experienced FPSA. This paper
details a systematic review of peer-reviewed quantitative and qualitative literature
examining these different (professional and victim) perspectives. Although the
methodological shortcomings of primary papers limit the conclusions that can be
drawn, the findings suggest that victim and professional perspectives of FPSA
remain discrepant; professionals generally considered FPSA as less serious, less
harmful and less deserving of investigation than male-perpetrated abuse; while
victims of FPSA felt their experiences influenced significantly their psychological
wellbeing and abilities to form and maintain interpersonal relationships.'
Extracts from the conclusions of the review paper 'Female perpetrators of sexual
abuse of minors: What are the consequences for the victims?', (Tsopelas et al,
2012), are,
'Although sexual abuse by female perpetrators, according to the data available, is
less frequent than that of sexual abuse by males we really do not know if the
smaller number of cases reflects the reality….The majority of such cases are not
reported. Sometimes sexual abuse by female perpetrators is considered more
acceptable than sexual abuse by males…. More disturbingly, literature suggests
that victims of female abusers are very rarely taken seriously when they make
their allegations. The vast majority (86%) of the victims that reported abuse were
not believed…. Victims of sexual abuse by female perpetrators are usually friends
or relatives of the abuser and find themselves sometimes under persuasion and
psychological coercion to participate in sexual acts. The percentage of male victims
is growing. There are severe and longstanding psychological consequences for the
victims.'
'The research reviewed up to date suggests that in adult life there are similar
psychiatric problems in the victims of sex abuse irrespective of the perpetrator's
sex. These problems are commonly alcohol and substance abuse and addiction, self
harm, anorexia, bulimia and agoraphobia. The development of borderline
personality disorder has also been implicated….The similarity in the consequences
of child sexual abuse perpetrated by both female and male offenders suggests that
the former should not be taken lightly. There is no research suggesting that sexual
abuse perpetrated by females causes less harm in any of the domains studied. This
is the main message this review has for the general public.'
The study 'The Long-Term Effects of Child Sexual Abuse by Female Perpetrators:
A Qualitative Study of Male and Female Victims', (Denov, 2004), was based on
interviews with 14 victims of childhood sexual abuse by women, seven female and
seven male. The 14 female abusers comprised: six mothers, two mothers together
with grandmothers, one mother with sister, one sister with a female neighbour,
three female babysitters, and one nun. 12 of the 14 victims reported that the
frequency of the abuse was between once per month and more than once per week.
The average age when the abuse started was five, and its average duration was six
years. All 14 victims, i.e., all seven males and all seven females, reported the
psychological effect of their abuse was rage, mistrust of women and discomfort
with sex. 11 reported suicidal ideation and six had made suicide attempts. 12
reported they had a fear of abusing children whilst four (two of each sex) admitted
to actual sexual victimisation of children. Other identified adverse outcomes were
comparable between the two sexes. Denov noted that,
'Although many of the effects of female sexual abuse appear to be similar to those
of victims of male sexual abuse, the current study highlights the long-term effects
that are unique to being sexually victimized by a woman. For example, victims in
the current study who experienced sexual abuse by men and women maintained
that the sexual abuse by women was more damaging and led to a deeper sense of
betrayal than similar abuse by men.'
Finally, a paper from Australia which highlights the media's role in reinforcing
stereotypical views of the sex of offenders, and minimisation of the significance of
female perpetration: 'Coming Clean on Duty of Care: Australian Print Media's
Representation of Male Versus Female Sex Offenders in Institutional Contexts'
,
(Landor and Eisenchlas, 2012). The Abstract tallies with the remarks I made
previously regarding the UK media's reporting,
'Public opinion about sexual abuse of minors is greatly shaped by mass media and
the way individual cases are reported. This paper examines Australian print
media's representation of sex offenders, focussing particularly on the sex of the
offenders and aiming to shed light on some of the misconceptions and deep-rooted
prejudices within the population at large. Given the multi-faceted nature of sexual
offences, this paper focuses on sexual offences committed by both males and
females against minors in the context of a companion breach of duty of care. In
order to explore the effect that linguistic tools can have in the Australian print
media's way of reporting sexual abuse cases, twenty-nine newspaper articles
published in Australian dailies were selected for analysis. The analysis of these
articles reveals a marked bias in the manner in which sexual offences perpetrated
by males, as opposed to females, are reported, suggesting a male monopoly on
sexual abuse. We argue that this biased representation, which hinders adequate
profiling of sexual offences against minors, may stem from an androcentric view of
sexuality and from the systematic denial of female agency when it comes to sex.'
20.6 The Sex of the Victim
It is not only in respect of the sex of the perpetrator that perceptual bias arises,
but also in respect of the sex of the victim. We saw in chapter 19 that the attrition
rate for reports of male rape is consistently higher than for female victims, at all
ages.
Another indication of this bias in relation to the sex of the victim is that the public
are largely unaware that not all the victims of the Rotherham and Oxfordshire
grooming and rape gangs were girls: at least 50 and 80 respectively were boys.
The report by the independent inquiry into the Rotherham abuses noted that none
of the boy victims had been flagged by social workers as "risky business" and
stressed the importance of 'making sure that judgments about child sexual
exploitation are consistent and gender neutral, for example by asking if the same
level of risk would be acceptable if the child was the opposite gender', (Jay, 2014).
This bias in the perception of sexual abuse according to the sex of the victim
reappears in the context of sexual trafficking and exploitation of minors. In the
USA, a 2008 report from New York City revealed that about 50% of the victims of
commercial sexual exploitation of children were boys, (Curtis et al, 2008). In 2013
a report by the organisation 'End Child Pornography and Trafficking' extended
this conclusion to the USA as a whole in a report 'Boys: The Under-mentioned
Victims of Child Sex Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation', (Keziah, 2013). A
corresponding exposé in the UK came in 2014 from the charity Barnardo's which
criticised the stereotypical belief that boys are less vulnerable to child sexual
exploitation, observing that this has led to boys receiving insufficient protection
from front-line services. Barnardo's stated that new findings indicate up to a third
of child victims in the UK are male, (Malik, 2017).
I give just one example from the academic literature which identifies this bias
against boy victims of sexual abuse in the US legal arena, 'Differences in Legal
Outcomes for Male and Female Children Who Have Been Sexually Abused'
,
(Edelson and Joa, 2010). The Abstract reads,
'The goal of the present study was to determine whether or not there were sex
differences in legal outcomes for children who were sexually abused. Using the
methodology of Joa and Edelson (2004), the results indicated that males who were
sexually abused had poorer legal outcomes than females. Specifically, it was found
that cases involving male victims were less likely to be filed with the District
Attorney (DA) than cases involving female victims and had fewer criminal counts
charged. For those children seen at a Child Abuse Assessment Center, cases
involving female victims were significantly more likely to be filed by the DA's
office than were cases involving male victims.'
20.7 Female Offender Sentencing
Criminal sentencing should be based only upon what you did, not upon who or what
you are. In practice in the UK, and all Western countries, men are treated far more
harshly in the criminal justice system (see chapter 8). In the context of sex
offences we have already seen the female mitigation-bonus applied to Nicola Fox.
Many instances of the same phenomenon can be seen in my 39 UK examples of
female sex offenders, (Collins, W, 2017c). Here I take a look at a couple of
academic publications which confirm this bias. The Abstract of the paper 'SexBased Sentencing: Sentencing Discrepancies Between Male and Female Sex
Offenders', published in 'Feminist Criminology', (Embry and Lyons, 2012), reads,
'The current research examines the utility of the evil woman hypothesis by
examining sentencing discrepancies between male and female sex offenders.
National Corrections Reporting Program data are used to identify sex offenders
for the years 1994 to 2004 and the sentences they received for specific sex
offenses. Statistical analyses reveal a significant difference in sentence length
between men and women, but not in the expected direction. The evil woman
hypothesis would assume women are sentenced more harshly, but data show men
receive longer sentences for sex offenses than women. Support is provided for the
chivalry hypothesis to explain immediate sentencing disparity.'
Leaving aside the fact that 'Feminist Criminology' sounds to my ears rather like
'Aryan Criminology' – not something to be encouraged - the authors' puzzlement
regarding the "expected direction" is remarkable. Anyone with even a passing
acquaintance with sentencing data knows that men are sentenced more harshly
than women for the same offence category. There is no reason to expect sexual
offences to differ in this respect, indeed every reason to expect the bias against
men might be even greater. The authors' findings are entirely expected. For
"chivalry hypothesis" we can, of course, read "gynocentrism". Yes, feminists seem
to have discovered gynocentrism – but, of course, it appears in the guise of benign
sexism against women. It must be exhausting constantly having to contort one's
brain into such configurations. Who was it called it 'pretzel logic'? Deering and
Mellor, (2009), came to the same conclusion in 'Sentencing of Male and Female
Child Sex Offenders: Australian Study'. Their Abstract,
'Research suggests that, in line with the chivalry hypothesis of female offending, a
range of mitigatory factors such as mental health problems, substance abuse, and
personal experiences of abuse are brought into play when women who offend
against children are brought to trial. This is reflected in sentencing comments made
by judges and in the sanctions imposed on the offenders, and as a result female
offenders are treated differently to male offenders. The current study investigated
this in an Australian context. Seven cases of female-perpetrated child sexual abuse
were identified over a 6-year period through the Austlii database. Seven cases of
male-perpetrated child sex abuse matched as far as possible to these were
identified. Court transcripts were then located, and sentencing comments and
sanctions imposed were analysed. All offenders were sentenced to imprisonment,
but in general the women were more likely than the men to receive less jail time
and lower non-parole periods because their personal backgrounds or situation at
the time of the offending (i.e., difficulties with intimate relationship, male
dependence issues, depression, loneliness and anger) were perceived as worthy of
sympathy, and they were considered as likely to be rehabilitated. Further
investigations are needed to support these findings.'
These observations are very much in line with the qualitative indications from my
39 UK examples of female sexual offenders. It is striking how judges manage to
find mitigations for female sexual abusers to justify suspended sentences. Here's
another which involved assault by penetration and abuse of three girls aged
between five and eight, (Higgins, 2019).
20.8 Female Sexual Offending in Correctional Facilities in the USA
Without doubt, male-on-male sexual assault occurs all too frequently in prisons
(see section 20.10). What is less well known is that female-on-male sexual abuse
also occurs with alarming frequency in juvenile detention facilities, at least so
reports from the USA indicate. In recent years, abuse of detained male juveniles
by female guards has been revealed as a major problem in the USA. Information
from the UK is lacking. Women's advocates will often cite "power differential" as
being an aspect of culpability. This applies, of course, in cases where women
teachers commit sexual offences against underage boys in their schools. But as an
example of taking advantage of a power differential it is difficult to imagine
anything more extreme than a guard abusing her prisoner. The key findings from a
USA-wide survey of juvenile inmates, (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2013), were,
An estimated 9.5% of youths in state juvenile correctional facilities reported
experiencing one or more incidents of sexual victimization by another youth or by
staff in the last 12 months, or since admission if less than 12 months;
Sexual abuse by staff was three times more common than that by another inmate.
About 2.5% of youth reported an incident involving another youth, and 7.7%
reported an incident involving facility staff;
Among the youths who reported victimization by staff, 89.1% were males
reporting sexual activity with female staff and 3.0% were males reporting sexual
activity with both male and female staff. In comparison, males comprised 91% of
youths in the survey and female staff accounted for 44% of staff in the sampled
facilities;
8.2% of males and 2.8% of females reported sexual activity with staff. 5.4% of
females and 2.2% of males reported forced sexual activity with another youth at a
facility;
Overwhelmingly the most common form of sexual offending in juvenile facilities in
the USA is male juveniles being sexually abused by female staff;
Most victims of staff sexual misconduct reported more than one incident (85.9%).
Among these youths, nearly 1 in 5 (20.4%) reported 11 or more incidents.
About 20% of the victims of staff sexual misconduct reported experiencing
physical force or threat of force, 12.3% were offered protection, and 21.5% were
given drugs or alcohol to engage in sexual contact.
An account of a typical case is,
'One former inmate said in an interview that a nurse gave him perks, such as soda and
candy, and flirted with him. That led to sex on several occasions in the medical clinic,
he said. She gave him money, then threatened to turn him in for having contraband – the
money – if he refused her advances, he said. He was 18 at the time and the nurse, who is
accused of having sex with other juveniles at Nampa, was in her mid-30s. "You're an
easy target," said the college student, now 24."', (Reynolds, 2015)
As one mother of an abused son put it, you hear about male offenders in the Boy
Scouts or the Catholic Church, where the boys are at least free to walk away. We
don't hear so much about female offenders where the youths in question cannot
walk away.
A recent study of the factors which increase a juvenile's risk of being sexually
victimised, (Ehlin, 2018), indicated that prior victimisation was the strongest
indicator, but also highly, and roughly equally, significant were being a gang
member, being non-heterosexual, and being male. As an example of the cognitive
contortions in which some people are willing to engage, consider the following
extracts from the Abstract of a paper by Professor of Law, Brenda Smith,
'Uncomfortable places, close spaces: Female correctional workers' sexual
interactions with men and boys in custody', (Smith, 2012). The first part
acknowledges the problem,
'It is well known that sexual abuse occurs within the correctional system. That
female correctional staff commit a significant proportion of that sexual abuse is
met with discomfort bordering on disbelief. This discomfort has limited the
discourse about female correctional workers who abuse men or boys under their
care. Scant scholarship exists that addresses the appropriate response to sexual
abuse by women; even less addresses sexual abuse by female correctional workers.
Likewise, feminist jurisprudence on sexuality and desire does little to illuminate
the motivations of women who engage in sexual misconduct or abuse, much less
women who abuse men or boys in custodial settings. What the literature does
acknowledge is that female sex offenders receive less-harsh sanctions overall than
male sex offenders; they are even less likely to be prosecuted or punished when
the victim is male and in custody.'
Remarkably, though, Smith then neutralises any suggestion of female staff
culpability with the following reversal,
'…although female correctional workers have access to significant power by virtue
of their roles, that power may be diminished by a confluence of gender, race, and
class. The literature also acknowledges that female correctional staff's entry into
the correctional system was a great success for reformist feminists and that
women have become power players within the correctional system because of their
ability to supervise both women and men. Despite this status, however, women still
experience sexual discrimination and harassment, both from male staff members
and from male inmates. For black female correctional workers, gender
discrimination is compounded by race and class discrimination.'
One wonders in what sense women have the "ability to supervise both women and
men"? Male staff would have every bit as much ability to supervise both sexes, if
one were equally willing to ignore sexual abuse. This is a fine illustration of the
inability of mere statistical facts to cut through the gynocentric imperative to
rearrange reality in the shape of female innocence.
20.9 Sexual Assault of Adult Men by Women
If many people have trouble believing that female sexual offending against male
minors is of any great significance, how much more incredulous they become when
one introduces the idea that women can commit sexual offences against adult men.
And yet sexual offences are defined by lack of consent, not physical force. A
problem with English law, however, is that the emphasis is placed on the consent of
the penetrated party. Thus, whether your consent is regarded as relevant depends
upon the convex or concave geometry of your genitalia.
Leaving aside the legal nicety that defines away the possibility of female rapists,
let us consider for the purposes of this section an egalitarian definition of rape
which includes non-consensual "envelopment", or being made to penetrate, as well
as non-consensual penetration. There are two myths that suggest men are not able
to be raped by women: men always want sex, so consent can be assumed, and men
must be aroused to have an erection, so he clearly wanted it and so it's not rape, is
it? But men do not always want sex. That is just the image of men promulgated in
our society. In any case, sexual desire is not the same as consent. And, much like
female genital response, male erectile response is involuntary, meaning that a man
need not be consenting for his penis to become erect and be placed in a woman's
vagina; mechanical stimulation is all that is necessary. In fact, men can be scared
or intimidated into an erection, especially if the person is older or an authority
figure. Arousal and stimulation are not the same thing, and, in any case, neither
imply consent. If a woman were to become lubricated during a rape, would it be a
valid defense for the rapist to claim she was aroused and therefore wanted sex?
No, it would not. For precisely the same reason, a man's erection is not an
indication of consent. What it is, though, is a convenient rationalisation of
widespread prejudice.
If a man is forced or coerced into sex without his consent, this should be regarded
as rape. Any other view is sexist since grossly different standards are being applied
to men and women. Unfortunately, both our law and our society are sexist in
exactly this respect. People who know perfectly well that sex offences hinge upon
consent, not force, will attempt to rationalise their prejudice regarding females
offending against adult men by scoffing at the notion of a big, strong man being
raped by a petite woman. They will also refuse to believe that any such man – or
boy – could come to any harm at the hands of a female. The rape of men by
women, i.e., non-consensual intercourse, is simply not recognised as a possibility by
either the public or the de facto law. Whilst there is a gender-neutral offence of
'causing someone to engage in a sexual act without their consent', I suggest that
any adult man making such a complaint against a woman is unlikely to be believed
unless there was evidence of physical injury. Of the hundred or so women in prison
for sexual offences in the UK, how many of the victims were adult men? I do not
know, but I suspect the fingers of one hand would suffice for the counting, perhaps
after an accident in a sawmill. This asymmetry in the de facto law has become
acute since the standards being adopted in respect of the rape of women have
become increasingly stringent (e.g., affirmative consent). How many men would be
rape victims if the same standards were applied? The answer appears to be
comparable with the number of women, as we will see.
The steadfast refusal to acknowledge female perpetrated sexual abuse, especially
upon adult men, in contrast to the readiness with which minor infringements of
sexual etiquette are now interpreted as abuse by men, are prime examples of the
tenacity of stereotypical gender norms. Men are agentic, women are passive. Men
are sexually predatory, women are harmless. Women cannot be abusers because
they are nurturing and submissive. To claim that some women can be sexually
manipulative and even violent is to invite accusations of misogyny. Anyone making
such a claim is clearly just trying to minimise male sexual abuse, some might opine.
Not so. The last chapter presented the bald statistics on rape in the UK, and the
studies in this chapter reveal perpetrators of both sexes. There is no hiding of male
perpetration going on here, only exposure of female perpetration. We will see that
evidence is accumulating that female perpetrated sexual abuse is not only
comparably as widespread as male perpetrated abuse, but can be just as severe,
including non-consensual penetrations of any of the bodily orifices with finger or
object, as well as coerced or forced intercourse, including violence which leaves
injury.
The interested reader could start with the book 'When Women Sexually Abuse
Men', (Cook and Hodo, 2013), or with Martin Fiebert's compilation of references
to 40 empirical studies and 2 reviews that demonstrate that men also experience
sexual coercion, Martin Fiebert (2012), or with the massive bibliography of about
650 references relating to female perpetration, (Collins, W, 2017e). However, I
shall use the more recent analysis by Stemple, Flores and Meyer, (Sexual
victimization perpetrated by women: Federal data reveal surprising prevalence,
2017). This review built on earlier work, (Stemple and Meyer, 2014), and is
summarised for the general reader in a Scientific American article, (Stemple and
Meyer, 2017). The main review analysed data from four major surveys in the USA
carried out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) in the period 2008 to 2013. Their findings are a remarkable
debunking of the popular notion that female perpetrated sexual abuse is rare. The
National Intimate and Sexual Violence Survey (NISVS) found that men and women
had a similar incidence of non-consensual sex, the survey implying an estimated 1.6
million women and 1.7 million men in the USA were raped or made to penetrate in
2011. Being "made to penetrate", the form of non-consensual sex that is
particularly applicable to men, was found to be perpetrated by women in 79% of
cases.
Another source used by Stemple et al, the National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS), is more limited in that it does not include forms of abuse involving
coercion rather than force. Bearing this limitation in mind, this survey found that
female perpetrators acting alone accounted for 28% of rape/sexual assault
incidents involving male victims. Incidents of rape/assault involving at least one
female perpetrator were reported in 34.7% incidents involving male victims and
4.2% of incidents involving female victims. For cases of rape/sexual assault by a
female perpetrator, 57.6% of male victims and 41.4% of female victims reported
that the incident involved an attack, meaning the offender hit, knocked down, or
otherwise attacked the victim physically. Of those who were attacked, 95.7% of
male victims of female offenders and 47.0% of female victims of female offenders
were physically injured in the incident.
Stemple, Flores and Meyer (2017) also quote a large range of other studies. I
include some extracts, below. Note how many of these female perpetrated abuses
would, if the sexes were reversed, earn the perpetrator perhaps ten years or so in
prison.
'…a 2003 study of coercive and forced opposite-sex sexual experiences among 268
male and 355 female college students solicited written descriptions of tactics from
male and female victims and perpetrators. Female perpetrators reportedly bit,
slapped, and hit male victims. In some cases female college students got on top of
aroused men and forced the men to penetrate them. One male victim wrote,
"Alcohol was involved. She undressed me, tried to arouse me by touching my
genitals, oral sex, and trying to force me inside of her". One female perpetrator
described her actions as follows, "I locked the room door that we were in. I kissed
and touched him. I removed his shirt and unzipped his pants. He asked me to stop. I
didn't. Then, I sat on top of him".'
'Another recent study of college and high-school aged men and boys also detected
a high prevalence of female perpetration. The 2011 survey of 302 male college
students found that 51.2% reported experiencing at least one sexual victimization
experience since age 16. Of those victimized, 48.4% reported female
perpetrators.'
'A 2014 study of 284 men and boys in college and high school found that 43%
reported being sexually coerced, with the majority of coercive incidents resulting
in unwanted sexual intercourse. Of them, 95% reported only female perpetrators.
The authors defined sexual coercion broadly, including verbal pressure such as
nagging and begging, which, the authors acknowledge, increases prevalence
dramatically. Male respondents described incidents that included statutory rape,
e.g., "I was coerced into sleeping with an older woman because I was told it would
make me a big boy. I was only 12 at the time and the girl was 18 I believe", and,
"she told me she could drink a ton and was giving me double shots to 'see if I could
keep up.' After a couple hours things got blurry and I woke up next to her".'
Stemple et al also quote various sources of perpetrator self-reports, which are also
revealing, as some extracts show,
'A 2012 study using data from a sample of 43,000 adults showed little difference in
the sex of self reported sexual perpetrators. Of those who affirmed that they had
"ever forced someone to have sex against their will", 43.6% were female and
56.4% were male.'
'One 2008 literature review looked at five studies of female perpetrated sexual
victimization within relationships. The review found that between 1.2% and 19.5%
of adolescent girls and 2.1% to 46.2% of college women self-reported that they
perpetrated some form of sexual victimization.'
'A 2013 survey of 1058 male and female youth ages 14 to 21 found that 9% selfreported perpetrating sexual victimization in their lifetime; 4% of youth reported
perpetrating attempted or completed rape, which, again is defined to include any
unwanted intercourse regardless of directionality (i.e., respondent reported that
he/she "made someone have sex with me when I knew they did not want
to").While 98% of perpetrators who committed their first offence at age 15 or
younger were male, by age 18-19 self-reports of perpetration differed little by sex:
females comprised 48% of self-reported perpetrators of attempted or completed
rape.'
In the UK there is far less information about "made to penetrate" as the national
surveys do not ask questions related to this issue. The first UK study of the
phenomenon is that by Weare, Porter and Evans, (Forced to Penetrate Cases:
Lived Experiences of Men, June 2017). This was based on an online survey which
resulted in 153 usable completions from men across the UK. 87% of respondents
were heterosexual, 11% bisexual and 2% gay. Respondents were of ages between
18 and 77. Some 90% of respondents indicated their abuse occurred when they
were adult (age 16 or over), the most common age being 16 to 25 (44% of
respondents). The percentages of respondents answering in the affirmative to a
range of questions were as follows,
Forcing you to penetrate her after you had been drinking alcohol and were
conscious but too intoxicated (drunk) to give her your consent to or stop what was
happening, or when you were asleep or unconscious from consensually drinking
alcohol or taking drugs, and when you came to (regained consciousness) you could
not give consent to, or stop, what was happening, (26.8%);
Telling lies, threatening to end the relationship, threatening to spread rumours
about you, making promises you knew were untrue, or continually verbally
pressuring you after you said you didn't want to, (22.2%);
Using force, for example holding you down with their body weight, pinning your
arms, restraining you, or having a weapon, (14.4%);
Showing displeasure, criticizing your sexuality or attractiveness. getting angry
after you said you didn't want to, (11.1%);
Acting together with two or more people to force you to penetrate her where you
had made it clear that you did not give your consent to what was happening or
were unable, or threatening to physically harm you or someone close to you,
(7.8%).
It is well known in rapes of women that the perpetrator is most often someone they
know. The same is true in made-to-penetrate cases. Only four percent of men
reported that the perpetrator was unknown to them. The majority (69%) were
friends, acquaintances, girlfriends, fiancées, wives or ex-wives. 95% of respondents
reported some degree of emotional/psychological harm resulting from the nonconsensual penetration event. They were asked to respond on a scale of severity,
from one (no harm ) to ten (severe harm). Replies were spread across this whole
spectrum of severities (average six), but the commonest was level 10, severe harm.
81% of men who responded had told no one about the event. Only two men out of
the 115 men who answered the question said they had reported the incident to the
police. Neither resulted in a prosecution.
The men were asked to pick a single word or phrase which best described the
incident. The phrases "non-consensual sex" and "forced sex" were commonly
chosen, but easily the most commonly chosen was "rape". The unqualified word
"sex" was chosen by only two of the men. 48% of respondents reported that they
had experienced more than one such incident of sexual assault perpetrated by
women. You can read a first-hand account of a man's experience of made-topenetrate here, (Kulze, 2013). An aspect of his account which rings very true to me
is his concern for his abuser, even while she is abusing him,
'Charlie woke up to a blank-faced girl straddling him. He had been disrobed, was
erect, and as her hips began to shift in short, quick movements, he realized he was
inside of her. Frozen with disbelief, Charlie laid still. He faked climaxing, hoping it
would prompt her to dismount and leave the room. Eventually she did, but only
after he rolled to his side and pretended to sleep. The next morning Charlie wasn't
sure what to think. Had an underclassman he knew only by name really entered his
dorm room and had her way with him as he slept? It all seemed so absurd, like the
makings of an awkward wet dream. Except Charlie had zero interest in this girl.
He had never spoken to her, kissed her or even tried to catch her eye. He felt
neither lucky nor flattered, just extremely perturbed. "The most traumatic part
was the complete assumption of consent," he said. "I was physically revolted by
the experience. It just felt so shockingly wrong. It was just a really invasive
experience. All I could think was, How can I get this to end? How can I get this to
end without hurting her?"'
This is what gynocentrism and male disposability looks like: the primacy of
Charlie's concern for the girl, rather than himself, even during her act of sexual
assault against him.
20.10 Adult Prison Sexual Assault
Data on sexual assaults in prison are sparse. Official statistics are almost certainly
woefully underestimated. People who are sexually assaulted or raped in prison are
very unlikely to say anything because they are too scared, have been traumatised
and will be bullied and victimised further if they make a report. The report
'Coercive Sex in Prison', (Howard League, 2014), laments the lack of large-scale
research on coercive sex in prison. It quotes a 2003 UK study which reported that
'less than two percent of the 590 men they interviewed reported that they had
been sexually assaulted while in prison, while three percent had been threatened
sexually and two percent had witnessed an assault'. On the other hand, the study
observed that 'three quarters of their interviewees thought that, in the British
penal system at least, sexual assaults either did not occur at all or were very rare'.
A further study in 2004 'found that of 208 former male and female prisoners, one
percent had been anally or vaginally raped and 5.3 percent were victims of coerced
sex'. In the USA, a survey of inmates by the Bureau of Justice Statistics in 2013
found that 'four percent of prisoners had experienced one or more incidents of
sexual victimisation by another prisoner or by staff in the past year, and two
percent of prisoners had been a victim of a non-consensual sexual act with another
prisoner or unwanted sexual contact with prison staff". Stemple, Flores and Meyer,
(2017), quote a range of US sources to conclude that,
'For women prisoners and girls in detention, the staff perpetrators are
overwhelmingly male, and for men and boys the staff perpetrators are
overwhelmingly female. Because men and boys are vastly disproportionately
incarcerated they are overrepresented among victims; women are therefore
disproportionately represented among all staff abusers. Among all adult prisoners
reporting any type of staff sexual victimization, 80.0% reported only female
perpetrators. An additional 5.1% reported both male and female perpetrators.
Among all juveniles reporting staff sexual victimization, 89.3% reported only
female perpetrators. An additional 3.1% reported both male and female
perpetrators…..The disproportionate abuse by female staff members does not
occur because women are more often staffing facilities. Men outnumber women by
a ratio of three to one in positions requiring direct contact with inmates.'
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Prisons conducts an annual survey of a sample of
prisoners, including asking whether they have been sexually abused by another
prisoner or by prison staff. Across most security categories of prisons, one percent
of UK prisoners respond that they have been sexually abused in prison. This is
larger than the prevalence of sexual assaults on free men and larger than the
prevalence of rape of free women. The Howard League report estimates that in
2014 this corresponded to between 850 and 1,650 "people" being sexually abused
in UK prisons (although the number of incidents could be much larger as some
victims will be assaulted multiple times). "People" here means overwhelmingly
men. In 2012 and 2013, of the official reported cases, only 6% and 2% respectively
related to women's prisons.
Since the 2014 Howard League report, the incidence of reporting of sexual
assaults in UK prisons has increased steeply. The number of sexual assaults
officially registered by the prison service will remain a small fraction of the
underlying incidence. But even the officially reported figures have been growing
rapidly. Between 2011 and 2015 the annual number of reports in the UK increased
from 137 to 300, (Fenton, 2016). Almost all these will be assaults on men.
Finally, in respect of female prisoners' experience of sexual victimisation, Stemple,
Flores and Meyer, (2017), observe,
'Despite the common assumption that, for women prisoners, male staff members
pose the greatest sexual threat, BJS studies have consistently shown instead that
women are much more likely to be abused by other women inmates than by male
staff. For instance, in contrast to the 4.4% of former women prisoners who
reported custodial sexual misconduct, 13.7% reported sexual victimization by
inmates. A large, statistically significant difference between the threat posed by
female inmates versus male staff has been found across BJS surveys on this topic.'
20.11 War Rape
You may think there is nothing much to say about men as victims of war rape?
Quite the contrary, though I can cut it short. War rape is sometimes called a
"weapon of war". That is inaccurate. War rape occurs once a military victory has
been achieved. The purpose of war rape is to humiliate the vanquished. This can be
accomplished just as well by raping the defeated men as by raping their
womenfolk. In areas where female war rape is endemic, especially in Africa, the
rape of men is also endemic. To avoid undue length I refer you to (Collins, W,
2015a). The most important function of that article is to point the reader to sources
which expose the truth about the war rape of men, in particular the work of the
Refugee Law Project (RLP). I will reproduce these sources here though I can
hardly hope to do justice to the issue without excessive length. Will Storr's article
in the Observer, 'The rape of men: the darkest secret of war', (Storr, 2011), is
essential reading, but you will need a strong stomach. Here's an extract as a taster,
'Later on I speak with Dr Angella Ntinda, who treats referrals from the RLP. She
tells me: "Eight out of 10 patients from RLP will be talking about some sort of
sexual abuse."
"Eight out of 10 men?" I clarify.
"No. Men and women," she says.
"What about men?"
"I think all the men."
I am aghast.
"All of them?" I say.
"Yes," she says. "All the men."'
The accompanying BBC documentary, An Unspeakable Act, (BBC World Service,
2012) is also essential viewing. Conflicts in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo have been reported to involve very high rates of war rape,
'Of the 1005 households surveyed 998 households participated, yielding a response
rate of 98.9%. Rates of reported sexual violence were 39.7% among women and
23.6% among men. Women reported to have perpetrated conflict-related sexual
violence in 41.1% of female cases and 10.0% of male cases.', (Johnson and Scott,
2010)
One of the few academics to have looked into the issue in any detail is Lara
Stemple, of the University of California's Health and Human Rights Law Project.
Her study 'Male Rape and Human Rights' notes incidents of male sexual violence
as a weapon of wartime or political aggression in countries such as Chile, Greece,
Croatia, Iran, Kuwait, the former Soviet Union and the former Yugoslavia. Of Sri
Lankan males who were seen at a London torture treatment centre, 21% reported
sexual abuse while in detention. In El Salvador, 76% of male political prisoners
surveyed in the 1980s described at least one incidence of sexual torture. A study of
6,000 concentration-camp inmates in Sarajevo found that 80% of men reported
having been raped, (Stemple, 2008/9). During the conflict the Western media were
full of reports of the war rapes of women. Still today Googling "Sarajevo rape
victims" will bring up any number of reports of the rape of women, but you will
have to work harder to find mention of male victims.
The research by Lara Stemple at the University of California not only shows that
male sexual violence is a component of wars all over the world, it also suggests that
international aid organisations are failing male victims. Her study cites a review of
4,076 NGOs that have addressed wartime sexual violence. Only 3% of them
mentioned the experience of men in their literature. "Typically," Stemple says, "as
a passing reference."
Stemple's findings on the failure of aid agencies is no surprise to Chris Dolan of
RLP, who you can see delivering a lecture on the subject here, (Dolan, 2014). He
was quoted in Will Storr's article as saying, 'The organisations working on sexual
and gender-based violence don't talk about it (men's sexual victimisation), he says.
"It's systematically silenced. If you're very, very lucky they'll give it a tangential
mention at the end of a report. You might get five seconds of: Oh and men can also
be the victims of sexual violence." But there's no data, no discussion.'
As part of an attempt to correct this, the RLP produced a documentary in 2010
called 'Gender Against Men', (Refugee Law Project, 2012). Dolan says that
attempts were made to stop him screening it. Quoting the Observer article,
'"Were these attempts by people in well-known, international aid agencies?" I ask.
"Yes," he replies. "There's a fear among them that this is a zero-sum game; that
there's a pre-defined cake and if you start talking about men, you're going to
somehow eat a chunk of this cake that's taken them a long time to bake." Dolan
points to a November 2006 UN report that followed an international conference on
sexual violence in this area of East Africa. "I know for a fact that the people
behind the report insisted the definition of rape be restricted to women," he says,
adding that one of the RLP's donors, Dutch Oxfam, refused to provide any more
funding unless he'd promise that 70% of his client base was female. He also recalls
a man whose case was "particularly bad" and was referred to the UN's refugee
agency, the UNHCR. "They told him: 'We have a programme for vulnerable
women, but not men.'"
Just as with domestic violence, it is really all about money. The NGOs keep men's
victimisation suppressed because they don't want their funding reduced. And who,
if you dig deep, do you find at the back of it all? Hilary Clinton. This is the same
Hilary Clinton who opined that women had always been the primary victims of war,
(Clinton, 1998). In the Observer article, Lara Stemple was quoted as describing a
'constant drum beat that women are the rape victims and a milieu in which men are
treated as a monolithic perpetrator class'. She continued,
'International human rights law leaves out men in nearly all instruments designed
to address sexual violence. The UN Security Council Resolution 1325 in 2000
treats wartime sexual violence as something that only impacts on women and
girls… Secretary of State Hillary Clinton recently announced $44M to implement
this resolution. Because of its entirely exclusive focus on female victims, it seems
unlikely that any of these new funds will reach the thousands of men and boys who
suffer from this kind of abuse. Ignoring male rape not only neglects men, it also
harms women by reinforcing a viewpoint that equates "female" with "victim", thus
hampering our ability to see women as strong and empowered. In the same way,
silence about male victims reinforces unhealthy expectations about men and their
supposed invulnerability.' (Storr, 2011)
The latest video I know of from the Refugee Law Project is (They Slept With Me,
2015). The war rape of men continues, unremarked by the public.
20.12 The Empathy Gap in Sexual Assault
Sexual assault is the pre-eminent area which feminists claim as their own province,
the centre of patriarchal oppression of women by men. This chapter has told a
different story. Whilst sexual abuse of females by males is not denied or minimised,
either by society in general or by the present author, the sexual abuse of males by
females certainly is denied and minimised. The empirical evidence stands in stark
contrast to the deeply resistant societal prejudice.
The evolutionary origins of this asymmetry are obvious: the severe consequences
of pregnancy by rape for a woman, as contrasted with the relatively insignificant
physical consequences for a male victim of a woman's sexual abuse. The historical
origin is also clear: when sexual assault was defined by physical force, this
naturally tends to focus upon male culpability (though this hardly works in respect
of the abuse of male minors). But both of these are now largely anachronisms. As
soon as sexual offences became defined by lack of consent the distinct treatment
of the two sexes lost any coherence it ever had. And the increasing recognition of
the significance of psychological harms, and their influence on future behaviours,
reduces the emphasis on purely physical harms.
The empirical evidence of coercive sex, or unwanted sexual touching, being
perpetrated upon adult men by adult women is clear and not much less in
magnitude than the reverse. But this bald fact is unlikely to reduce the incredulity
of the bulk of the public regarding such experiences being potentially harmful to a
man. The story of Charlie, above, is more likely to provoke amusement than
outrage. Yet reverse the sexes and the event would be a particularly serious rape
scenario which would certainly see the perpetrator go to prison for a very long
time. Empathy gap, anyone? And Charlie's reaction in being less concerned about
himself and more concerned about not hurting his rapist is very telling in respect of
men's internalisation of their own disposability.
Women's sexual offending against male minors is somewhat more likely to provoke
public calls for punishment, though even here it may depend upon the exact age of
the boy. Many people are still of the opinion that a 35-year-old teacher grooming a
15-year-old boy pupil for sex does not deserve a harsh punishment: more of a
ticking off. The distinct perception of the sexes in respect of both perpetrator and
victim is ancient in origin but feminism has done nothing to diminish it. On the
contrary, feminism in the form of MeToo and similar sentiments have inflamed
intolerance of male words and actions to an extreme degree. We are nearing the
point at which simply looking at a woman in a way she does not like might become
a criminal offence. A venerable male professor being so unwise as to tell a female
colleague that she is beautiful can result in his being excommunicated by his
university, declared a sex abuser and rendered a non-person, his name being
expunged as an undesirable. I, on the other hand, must tolerate women I barely
know hugging or kissing me in public. I cannot recoil and reject their advances
(which are sometimes, if not always, unwelcome) without being regarded as
unforgivably rude. Who is privileged under these conditions? And who was
originally possessed of the power required to bring this abjection of men about?
There are more than a hundred times more men in prison for sexual offences than
there are women in prison for sexual offences. But there is a gross mismatch
between this ratio and the known high incidence of male sex offenders who have a
background of being sexually abused by a woman themselves as children (perhaps
about one-third to one-half of all such men in prison). So, given the 13,500 men in
prison in the UK for sex offences, why are there only about 100 women? Where
are the several thousand missing women who have sexually offended against male
minors? (Not to mention the women offending against female minors). The answer
is that they go undetected, because women are trusted with children, it happens
behind closed doors, and children generally do not tell. Esther Rantzen's Childline
experience, and Michele Elliott's experiences, started to reveal the extent of the
problem of female sexual abusers. But society does not want to know. It appears
that at least 20% of sexual offending against minors is perpetrated by women, and
perhaps almost 50%.
The starkest warning about adult women's potential for sexual exploitation of male
minors comes from juvenile detention facilities in the USA where female staff
perpetrating sexual abuse on male inmates is the commonest form of sexual
assault. The power differential in this case is at its most extreme. But there is also
substantial power differential between a teacher and her pupils, and one wonders
at the true extent of sexual abuses in this scenario. More teacher-on-pupil sexual
abuses have come to light in recent years than the public might have thought
possible. Even war rape is not a female victim monopoly, as is generally supposed –
a presumption encouraged by governmental policies and NGOs wishing to retain
control of funding.
The societal view of sexual victimisation being a female monopoly, rather than
being true, is actually a pre-eminent example of male disposability and the empathy
gap which are so extreme in the scenario of female perpetrators of sexual abuse
against males that few in society can conceptualise it as abuse at all.
21. Reprise: The Case for the Empathy Gap
With us, heretical opinions do not perceptibly gain, or even lose, ground in each
decade or generation; they never blaze out far and wide, but continue to smoulder
in the narrow circles of thinking and studious persons among whom they originate,
without ever lighting up the general affairs of mankind with either a true or a
deceptive light. And thus is kept up a state of things very satisfactory to some
minds, because, without the unpleasant process of fining or imprisoning anybody, it
maintains all prevailing opinions outwardly undisturbed, while it does not absolutely
interdict the exercise of reason by dissentients afflicted with the malady of
thought. A convenient plan for having peace in the intellectual world, and keeping
all things going on therein very much as they do already. But the price paid for this
sort of intellectual pacification, is the sacrifice of the entire moral courage of the
human mind.
John Stuart Mill (1806 – 1873), On Liberty
In this final chapter I summarise the case for the empathy gap and its correlates,
male disposability and gynocentrism. But first let's reprise the two schools of
thought. Stripped down to their barest outline, the two oppositional positions are
crudely as follows.
The feminist position is that men are powerful and privileged, and that women are
oppressed by men because men are taught to do so by a cultural norm called
"patriarchy" and because it is to men's (perceived) advantage to conform to this
patriarchal system. Women are disadvantaged in multiple ways by the system of
patriarchy, including being the particular victims of violence and sexual assault,
which serve to reinforced women's subservience to men - by force when necessary,
and by fear otherwise. Women are also disadvantaged in the workplace, facing
discrimination in hiring and progression due to entrenched discrimination and 'glass
ceilings'. This is especially egregious to women in feminist thought because
financial freedom from men is the key to women escaping from their patriarchal
oppressors.
Under patriarchy, men are misogynistic and this stems from a deep seated hatred
of women and a conviction of women's inferiority. Men are commonly unaware of
their privilege, and this is said to be because privilege is invisible to the privileged.
Whilst some feminists may accept that some men suffer some disadvantages, they
only recognise this as possible as a product of patriarchy itself, i.e., "patriarch
hurts men too". Men's power means that men can be disadvantaged only by men,
either by other men or by themselves through self-destructive behaviours, both of
which emanate from patriarchy and the nature of masculinity. Women cannot be
sexist, and endemic harms to men arising from the organisation and operation of
society as a whole can only occur via patriarchy, i.e., only the male hegemony can
harm or disadvantage individual men – and only then when it benefits the
patriarchy as a whole. In contrast, the idea that female influences on society can
cause endemic disadvantages to men is an impossibility in feminist philosophy.
Under feminist patriarchy theory, women are powerless and innocent and can be
culpable for no harms suffered by males. Feminism denies women's agency whilst
paradoxically also asserting that women are strong and capable of being fully
independent.
The perspective presented in this book, in contrast, is that women are indeed
strong and capable of being independent, and that they also enjoy very
considerable agency. In this perspective the key to understanding gender issues in
society is not oppression of women by men (now or historically), but a deep seated
preferencing of women, by both sexes. In its original form, matricentrism, this
preferencing of women is of evolutionary origin, the functioning of which is to
enhance reproductive success by flows of resource from men to women, where the
latter are proxies for children. The logical corollary of matricentrism is relative
disadvantaging of men, and hence "male disposability", a term which refers to a
preference, by both sexes, to have dangerous or harmful activities carried out by
men. Unlike feminism, in which the mindsets of the two sexes are oppositional, in
this matricentric view the mindsets of the two sexes are aligned and consistent.
Women expect to receive, men have a predilection to provide, and men are happy
to acquiesce to their own "disposability" in return for the societal reward of
respect which accompanies conformance to this expectation.
Matricentrism imbues women with considerable power as a birthright. But in
traditional societies, systems of respect are in place to reward men for
conformance to a norm in which they behave altruistically, namely stable pairbonding and provisioning to family. This social respect provides a form of male
power which balances intrinsic female power and constitutes the truth of
"patriarchy". The system of patriarchy, the conferring of respect and status upon
males for socially beneficial, family-centric behaviour, arose to even out the burden
on the sexes. This is a consistent and harmonious system, as opposed to the
oppressive patriarchal system envisaged under feminism.
However, evolved matricentrism has given way to cultural gynocentrism, by
various historical processes including the rise of feminism. Whilst matricentrism
originated for the benefit of children (reproductive success), under gynocentric
feminism the focus shifts to woman, qua woman, and the child disappears from the
picture. The danger of an intensified gynocentrism is that it grants women the
power to define the moral right unopposed, a true hegemony.
Feminism is profoundly disrespectful of men. The feminist attack on masculinity
has taken root in many men as well as women, and not just those who identify as
feminists. The success of this attack is due to gynocentrism gifting women the
power to define the moral right, together with men's ancient acquiescence to their
own disposability and acceptance of women's moral authority. The latter is
manifest in men's intense discomfort with female disapproval.
The disenfranchising of men from societal respect has caused men also to lose the
social power which stemmed from it, a power that was necessary to balance
women's intrinsic matricentric power. And this has been brought about at just the
time that matricentrism has morphed into its intensified form, gynocentrism. The
result is a rampant and limitless disadvantaging of men which goes unrecognised
because it has been brought about by a mindset which reconceptualises
gynocentrism as female oppression and disadvantage. In reality, the purpose of the
illusion of female disadvantage is to rationalise female preferencing without it
being perceived as such. As a result, female preferencing can never be sated whilst
suffering under this delusion. This phenomenon is amplified by the wider
deployment of identity politics and political correctness.
In this anti-feminist perspective, men can be, and are being, endemically
disadvantaged by female influences within society. In this perspective, women can
be, and are being, sexist. Women are now possessed of both an intensified
gynocentric power and also, increasingly, political and economic powers previously
the province primarily of men. The powers are unbalanced as men have been
depowered in both spheres, deliberately. Feminism is incapable of recognising this,
and will forever remain convinced that women "still have a long way to go",
because the phenomenon of gynocentrism will always present women as deserving.
Gynocentrism therefore conceals itself: gynocentric invisibility. The result is that
the ancient empathy gap is now maturing into an outright prejudice against men as
a class.
The question is: which of these two perspectives – the feminist or the anti-feminist
- performs best as explanations of the empirical evidence presented in chapters 2
to 20? The discriminating factors are, (i) which sex is disadvantaged in each
sphere?, and, (ii) are females being presented as disadvantaged when the evidence
suggests the opposite (consistent with gynocentric invisibility)? To address the
question I reprise each of the major topic areas covered in the book.
21.1 Education
The Parliamentary Select Committee on 'Women and Equalities' has a remit which
explicitly focuses on one sex only. This focus on equality issues for women and girls
but not men and boys could be consistent with the Equality Act if females were
truly disadvantaged compared with males, and in every sphere. This book shows
that this is not the case in most areas. In the specific case of education, the
common practice that the Minister (or Shadow Minister) for Education is also, or
has recently been, the Minister (or Shadow Minister) for Women and Equalities,
betrays a flagrant disregard for the serious, and worsening, educational
disadvantage of males. This is reinforced by government policy documents which
continue to focus on female education, when gender is raised at all, rather than
upon the sex which is indubitably that disadvantaged. In what way can "patriarchy
hurts men too" account for Government policies, now driven mainly by women
Ministers, which ignores the education of males?
The relentless striving to achieve more "women in STEMM" continues, whilst
senior politicians appear to be unaware that women now dominate in STEMM as
undergraduates, as indeed women dominate as university staff in STEMM at all
but the highest levels. In contrast, there is no political will to address boys'
educational disadvantage, beyond telling them to "pull their socks up" (the
obligation of male utility). These are clear illustrations of female preferencing
contrasted with the disposability of males who fail to assist themselves. The latter
is, of course, the presumption of male agency and autonomy. This situation is
emphatically reflected by the contrast between the concerns of the professional
institutes and the teaching unions. The professional institutes for engineering and
physics, for example, spare no efforts to promote women's and girls' interests. In
contrast, the teaching unions are entirely unconcerned about the disappearing male
teacher and actively promote only "women's equality" issues. If the failure of boys
in education is due to their toxic "laddishness", how exactly does boys' laddishness
explain the behaviour of representative, and female dominated, professional
bodies?
21.2 Health and Longevity
Across all causes there is a 43% excess of premature deaths of men over that of
women in England and Wales. The probability of a man dying before age 45 is 78%
greater than for a woman. More men than women die prematurely from all the
non-sex-specific cancers. When it comes to disadvantage, being dead takes some
beating. Yet this glaringly obvious disadvantage to men excites little public
concern. What does the "Women and Equalities Committee" say about it? What
does the Equality and Human Rights Commission say about it? Globally, many
NGOs focus exclusively on the health of women and girls; none focus on men and
boys. When the matter of men's health disadvantage is raised, the response will
generally be that men should look after themselves better. In other words, "it's
their own fault", the essence of male agency and autonomy. Is this not a clear lack
of empathy?
There is a willingness to attribute men's indisputable health disadvantages to men's
lesser use of healthcare services, and to attribute this to men's destructive
masculine characteristics. However, this hypothesis does not survive inspection.
Not only is men's reduced access to healthcare not as marked as is often supposed,
but the part of this reduced access which is not explained by valid sex differences
in need may be explicable by working patterns. Whilst it might be argued that
men's working patterns are an individual choice, it would be disingenuous not to
concede a societal – and practical/financial - obligation which acts in this respect.
This is an example of the obligation for male utility driving male disposability.
Moreover, healthcare spending on women exceeds that on men, even after
allowance for issues related to contraception, pregnancy and childbirth. Femalespecific medical research funding exceeds that on male-specific medical research
substantially, well over twice as much in the USA for example. In the UK, breast
cancer and prostate cancer kill similar numbers of people, but breast cancer
receives three times as much research funding. Public funding events, e.g., funruns, attract far more support for breast cancer than for prostate cancer (I speak
from experience). How is this skewed focus explained given that it does not align
with the evidence on mortality? But it is consistent with gynocentrism. It is not
consistent with "it's men's own fault". Funding reflects societal concern, not the
behaviour of the afflicted themselves.
Of course there are psychosocial factors which significantly impact male longevity,
not least substance abuse, but innate biological sex differences also play a part,
such as the immunosuppressant characteristics of testosterone (an instance of
biologically instantiated male disposability perhaps). Biological effects are evident
in the death rate for male babies and young boys which exceeds that of females of
the same age by about 10% to 30%.
Both sexes suffer reduced longevity as a result of socioeconomic deprivation, but
the empirical evidence shows that the demographic effect is significantly more
marked for men. The intersection of deprivation and being male leads to the
greatest health disadvantage. This is again an instance of reduced male utility, as
manifest by being poor, driving male disposability. Crudely put: for men, it's
perform or die.
Perhaps the most glaringly obvious example of male disposability in healthcare is
the saga of the HPV vaccination. HPV infections are responsible for similar
numbers of premature cancer deaths in both sexes. This was well known and not in
dispute. Yet the authorities saw fit to instigate a vaccination programme for girls
only. The disturbing aspect of the HPV vaccination saga is the amount of pressure,
from a range of authoritative bodies - and ultimately the spectre of legal action -
which was necessary to overturn a transparently sexist policy. Empathy gap, at all?
Let those who are convinced that males are privileged, and incredulous at the idea
of male disposability and gynocentrism, explain why the vaccine was not rolled out
to boys only – and the spurious rationalisation of "herd immunity" claimed to be
sufficient for girls. Let them explain why no one would ever have dreamed of
suggesting such a policy.
Let them also explain why the Chief Medical Officer for England saw fit to
produce the report "The Health of the 51%: Women" but refused to produce an
equivalent for men. Let them explain how this can be consistent with the empirical
evidence of men's health disadvantages other than simply female preferencing.
Men in the UK account for 97% of fatal accidents in the workplace. Non-fatal
accidents at work are also dominated by men, especially those resulting in serious
injury. This is because the occupations in which the most serious accidents happen
are virtually all-male. Women are not queuing up to work in these DAD jobs (Dirty
And Dangerous jobs), which are often not well paid and yet they are the jobs that
most need doing if society is to function. This is male utility and male disposability
at its most explicit. This is contribution, not privilege or oppression of women, to
anyone not blinded by ideology.
The feminist professor who might be very willing to detect hegemonic masculinity
in the attitude of such working men has an existence which is sustained by them. It
is long overdue to recognise that these well-heeled feminists are the new
bourgeoisie, parasitic upon the labours of the working class, as ever they were. At
least the traditional bourgeoisie created the means of production and hence
contributed to the economy, exploitative though it may have been. The new
bourgeoisie contribute nothing but bitterness and division, sitting in their tenured
chairs.
21.3 Male Genital Mutilation
It is hateful to mutilate the genitals of girls for no valid medical purpose. In the
West very few people would demur, and certainly not those who call themselves
intactivists and campaign against male genital mutilation. But our culture – in fact
almost all cultures worldwide – accept mutilation of boys' genitals as if there were
something natural about it. Claims of medical benefit are rationalisations which do
not bear scrutiny. But, for some men if not all, circumcision causes very clear,
persistent, harms, particularly as regards sexual function. Indeed, the amelioration
of male sexual function is the original purpose of circumcision. In what way can this
be contorted into oppression of women?
In the UK, MGM is almost certainly illegal under assault laws, yet it is being
tolerated. It is an object lesson in how the public can be brought to accept anything
so long as everyone else they know regards it as OK – even cutting body parts off
babies, providing they are boy babies. How much clearer an example of a sexbased empathy gap do you want?
Lord Justice Munby, former head of the Family Division, has ruled that MGM is a
harm. The medical evidence concurs. It is remarkable, then, that a non-consensual
violation of the bodily integrity of a child, which has been judicially ruled to
constitute a harm, nevertheless is still to be treated as legal. This position is
arrived at by rationalisations which do not bear scrutiny and which are actually for
the purpose of protecting the status quo rather than the child. What facilitates this
peculiar illogic is a society which will readily accept such harms to males, of
however tender an age, which are (rightly) socially and legally intolerable if
perpetrated upon females.
Whilst intactivists are equally opposed to FGM, those people who are most
vociferously opposed to FGM are often angered by campaigning against MGM.
This curious inconsistency is made more curious by the impassioned anger of their
response to intactivist campaigners. It is difficult to understand this reaction other
than as a deep-seated prejudice that the spotlight of concern should never be
shone upon males. Males are not the proper recipients of concern. Females must
retain their monopoly on victimhood and its attendant benefits. This is feminist
intensified gynocentrism and its correlate, male disposability: the empathy gap.
The situation in African countries is especially distressing, though I have no wish to
instruct other cultures how they should behave. However, even if we must refrain
from comment on coming-of-age rituals in traditional African cultures, there is still
no excuse for Westerners treating these brutal spectacles as a tourist attraction.
There is no chance that these same people would regard female genital mutilation
as a suitable tourist attraction even if the locals did (which they certainly do not).
These MGM rituals, and the circumcision mobs that forcibly cut men in the street
in these countries, cannot be simply dismissed as phenomena of the patriarchy.
Anyone making such a claim will have to explain why it is that, in these cultures, it
is just as often the women who insist that men are cut – so as to render them "fit
to be our husbands". Male disposability is not specific to the West.
21.4 Work, Pay, Tax and Pensions
It is remarkable that the pay gap is presented as a disadvantage to women when
the actual position on work, pay, tax and pensions is a transfer of money from men
to women, consistent with ancient male provisioning and the pair bond. But the
feminist objective is to make women independent of men, and the pay gap is their
propaganda strategy to this end.
Feminists may delight in presenting the gender pay gap as women "doing the same
work for less pay" but even they do not believe it. The full time, all-age median
pay rate gap is currently about 9% in favour of men, whilst the part time median
pay rate gap is about 5% in favour of women. The full time gender pay rate gap for
people under 40 years of age is essentially zero. The pay rate gap after age 40 is a
product of women having children and/or opting to work part time. Everyone
knows this, it is not contentious. But feminists want to increase women's power by
increasing their presence in the workplace, especially at senior levels. The
motivation for the pay gap propaganda is the drive to increase female power and
make women financially independent of men.
Over the UK as a whole, men work 52% more paid hours than women and work for
more continuous years. 77% more men than women work full time, whilst nearly
three times more women than men work part time, and average pay rates are
higher for full time workers (regardless of sex). As a result, men earn 91% more
than women and men pay nearly three times more income tax than women, despite
women being 47% of those employed.
But women now spend more money than men – or influence the spending of more
money than men - so there is a net flow of money from men to women for the
purposes of spending. Please explain to me why the person working to earn the
money is an oppressor whilst the person spending more of the money is oppressed?
It is not so, of course. But feminism presents it as such because the objective is to
make women financially independent of men, and hence to have the freedom to
eject men from the home. That is the true goal about which feminists are careful to
avoid being forthright.
Feminists endlessly claim that men do not pull their weight as regards housework.
But surveys indicate that in terms of total work, paid work and housework, men do
rather more work in total. Men and women also do similar amounts of unpaid
voluntary work. Nor is unpaid caring the sole province of women. In fact men do
42% of unpaid caring, despite also doing 52% more paid working hours. A larger
proportion of men over 65 are unpaid carers than women over 65. More men than
women are in full time employment whilst also providing 50 hours or more of
unpaid care per week.
What would happen if men did what feminists appear to want: simply declined to
work so many paid hours in order to decrease their earnings and stay at home
more? Would women pick up the slack and work longer hours? Does anyone really
think so? Or would women simply tell men to get back to work? Who would ever
do the DAD jobs other than men?
The 2012 British Social Attitudes Survey revealed that 69% of people believe that
fathers should be the primary earner for the family, and 73% believe that fathers
should work full time. No respondents (to within rounding) thought the mother
should be the primary earner, and only 9% thought that mum and dad should share
the responsibility for earning equally.
The feminist "diversity" project, ostensibly to get equal numbers of men and
women in all employment, and at all seniority levels, is disingenuous. They have no
intention of agitating for such an outcome where women are in the majority. In any
case the project is preposterous as, taken literally, it would require an enormous
proportion of people, of both sexes, to be forced into employment contrary to their
wishes or ability. This is evident from the existing gender asymmetries in
employment. 78% of occupations have an excess of one sex over the other
exceeding 30%, and 41% of these involve an excess of female employees over
male employees exceeding 30%. There has been no demonstration of any benefit
from the proposed draconian policy of equalisation, and it is clear that it cannot
happen. But the feminists are really interested only in using this overt policy as
leverage to get more women into positions of influence. It is about power, not
equality.
In respect of pensions, how can one interpret the WASPIs who claim that the
equalisation of the State pension age for the two sexes is inequality? Did they
campaign against injustice for all those years when men's retirement age was 5
years later? In 1951 the mean life expectancy of males at birth was only one year
greater than men's State retirement age, whilst for women it was 12 years greater.
A man who lived to 65 to start drawing his State pension in 1970 could expect to
live another 12 years. A woman who lived to 60 to start drawing her State pension
in the same year could expect to live another 21 years, hence drawing her pension
some 9 years longer than the man. Where were feminist complaints about
inequality then? And now that the gold standard of pensions, the defined benefit
pension, has all but disappeared from the private sector, but still prevails in the
public sector, note that two-thirds of public sector staff who will benefit from this
far superior pension are women – and that this will be funded from taxes, provided
overwhelmingly by men.
So we see that the ultimate fraudulence of the feminist drive for ostensible
independence from men is that they never can be - not so long as men continue to
do virtually all the DAD jobs which are required to keep society functioning, and
not so long as men continue to pump three times more tax revenue into the
Exchequer to pay for the female-dominated public sector and its pensions. In truth,
what feminists really want is not independence from men, but rather not having to
give anything back to men in return, not even acknowledgement of reality.
21.5 Imprisonment
Imprisonment provides a perfect example of male disposability, gynocentrism and
lack of male in-group preference. That men are far more readily incarcerated than
women is emphatically clear from the data (hence - male disposability). A
preferred treatment of women is now enshrined in policy at several different levels
(hence - gynocentrism). The public would probably agree that everyone should be
equal before the law. Yet there is no public outcry, even from men, when this
principle is violated in respect of sex (observe the lack of male in-group
preference).
The traditional gendered psychology regards men as agentic, powerful and
responsible, whilst women are regarded in this outmoded view as non-agentic,
vulnerable, and in need of protection. If the agentic, powerful and responsible
become criminal, clearly they deserve punishment. If the non-agentic, powerless
and vulnerable become criminal, then society is more likely to regard a
compassionate response, rather than punishment, to be appropriate. Hence, the
traditional gendered psychology drives a disparate perspective on male and female
offending. This becomes a pernicious, and unjust, phenomenon when the traditional
gender norms no longer reflect social or political reality (if they ever did).
The entitlement of women to different treatment, in order to be "equal", is
argued, at different times, on the following grounds. Firstly, that of historical
power imbalance. We need have no debate about the past. It is morally illiterate to
claim present benefit based on injustice to someone else in history. Secondly, it is
argued on the basis that women remain endemically disadvantaged in society
generally. But this is a perspective which the entirety of this book challenges. In
any case, injustice is not neutralised by more injustice. The third argument which is
deployed is that women are currently treated more harshly by the criminal justice
system. Chapter 8 has demolished this untruth. A fourth argument which is used is
that women offenders have a background of being abused, by men, and that their
offending is at the behest of, or caused by, men. This is a denial of female agency,
stemming with painful obviousness from traditional gender norms. There is nothing
progressive about it. Finally, it may simply be claimed that equal treatment is
harsher for women and therefore unequal. All these arguments are attempts to
rationalise a deep-seated bias, a prejudice, whose origin is gynocentrism and male
disposability and their result: the empathy gap.
21.6 Violence and Abuse
On the subject of violence and abuse, are we not obliged to admit that the
feminists have a point? This, together with sexual assault, are feminism's trump
cards. This is manifest in the huge focus on VAWG – Violence Against Women and
Girls. But wait: violence is perpetrated against male victims roughly twice as
frequently as against female victims. And this is true as regards both men and boys.
It is also true for the most extreme cases where homicide results.
Adherents of the dominant gender narrative will generally react to this observation
with unconcern, citing (correctly) that males are also the majority of the
perpetrators of these offences. The implication appears to be that this observation
somehow neutralises any need for concern or compassion for the victims. This is
about as clear an example of victim blaming as one could have – the victim is to
blame for his own injuries, or death, because he shares genital anatomy with his
attacker. Such thinking is the product of the empathy gap, given wings by identity
politics, which allows all males to be lumped together into an undifferentiated and
undeserving mass. There is no need to distinguish between villain and victim
because both are infected with the blight of masculinity.
"Men are violent" or "we need to talk about men's violence" are sentiments you
can express publicly without fear of censure or disagreement. You would not be
treated so kindly if you opined that Muslims are terrorists or that we need to talk
about black men's drug dealing. All these are examples of castigating the whole for
the behaviour of a few. They are of the same type. The acceptability of one and
the political incorrectness of the others is determined only by their respective
identity group status: oppressor or oppressed. But this status is prejudice dressed
up as politics. It relegates the individual to irrelevance, replacing them with an
identity label. You are undeserving by virtue of an accident of your birth. Consider
a 65-year-old man who has never exercised violence upon anyone in his life and
who has been steadfast in supporting his family over that long life. Is it his own
fault that society regards him as dangerous and toxic? Or is it a prejudice which
has been imposed upon him without due reason?
How are we to react to VAWG when "Violence" does not mean violence,
"Women" does not mean women, and "Girls" does not mean girls? What does it
imply when crimes against men and boys are hidden by being referred to as
VAWG? Is the VAWG perspective about compassion for women and girls, or is it
about withholding compassion from men and boys?
Despite the strong media focus on domestic violence, the volume of domestic
violence offending is significantly less than stranger or acquaintance violence
outside the home. Nevertheless, one in three victims of domestic abuse or partner
abuse are male. Where physical injury occurs, men may be rather more than one in
three victims. One in three victims of domestic homicide are also male (and about
one in four victims of partner homicide are male). But this prevalence of male
victims of domestic abuse is subject to successive attritions, resulting ultimately in
a tiny level of service provision to male victims. The percentages of men through
the criminal justice system diminish as follows: 34% from crime surveys; 24% from
police reports; 17% of victims in prosecutions; but only about 1% - 3% of the
service provision.
As an illustration of the double standards in operation in the context of partner
violence, consider the cases of MPs David Ruffley, Sarah Champion and Layla
Moran. All were arrested for assaulting their partners. But where a man is sacked
and disgraced, a woman is lauded and held up as a role model. What part of
gynocentrism and male disposability do you not grasp?
The aspect of domestic violence which is least well appreciated by the public or by
social and political narratives, is the extent to which mothers are responsible for
child deaths. Statistics on this issue are incomplete (and one wonders why). The
largest international studies indicate that mothers are responsible for more child
deaths than men. Evidence from Serious Case Reviews in the UK support this
contention. Yet the danger represented by men is the mantra which leads to fathers
being sundered from their children in society-destroying numbers by the family
courts.
The mindset which legitimises VAWG is also responsible for the introduction of
terms such as "femicide": a levering of the empathy gap to suggest that the killing
of females is a more serious issue than the killing of mere males. The instantiation
of the empathy gap as VAWG clearly demonstrates the operation of gynocentrism
and male disposability. Violence suffered by females is perceived differently from
violence suffered by males, and violence perpetrated by females is perceived
differently from violence perpetrated by males. Yet women can be both strong and
violent, men can be weak and vulnerable, and immature boys have no physical
advantage over girls – and still less over adult women. This minimisation of male
victimisation is necessary to protect the dominant gender narrative; widespread
male victimisation by women conflicts with its basic tenets. The empathy gap
facilitates belief in an ideology which cannot countenance female perpetration and
is indifferent to male victimisation.
Criticism of the presentation of domestic abuse as overwhelmingly men abusing
women is invariably interpreted by those advocating this perspective as an attempt
by reactionary forces to re-establish patriarchal power over women. My
perspective is that the "gendered" interpretation of domestic abuse is another
example of the empathy gap in operation. Here we see why the empathy gap must
be kept in place. To allow that domestic violence is gender symmetric fatally
undermines feminist patriarchy theory. To allow equal empathy for men would thus
lead to the collapse of the whole feminist narrative. The empathy gap is the
fulcrum of the feminist lever.
21.7 Family Courts
Even today most people will refuse to believe that one of feminism's main aims is,
and always was, to give women the power to rid their families of men. There is a
terrible arrogance here that sees only the female parent as significant. In the
family courts we see this played out explicitly. Allegations of domestic abuse
provide a convenient mechanism. Protestations that only genuinely abusive men
are treated in this way are untrue, as the bald statistics illustrate. Unfortunately,
the denigration of men over the last 50 years has been so successful that the public
no longer balk at the preposterous notion that half of all fathers are abusers.
The dominant narrative, buoyed by powerful lobbying, that it is men alone who
pose a risk to children, is not borne out by the evidence. Allegations of domestic
violence have a significant bearing on the outcomes of child contact applications,
but the relationship of such allegations to actual risk is in doubt, partly because of
the prevalence of false allegations and partly because other people, including the
mother, may pose a greater risk. The most disconcerting aspect of this is that the
child safeguarding authorities display the same mindset, namely that domestic
abuse is only ever a threat posed by a man to the mother and child. The result is
that safeguarding guidance completely ignores the threat to the children which
may be posed by the mother. The evidence suggests that this ignores an equal or
greater risk to the child in many cases.
In the matter of child arrangements after parental separation we see most clearly
how far culturally intensified gynocentrism has departed from evolved
matricentrism. The child's best interests are elided with the mother's wishes, whilst
the latter are truly made paramount.
Gynocentrism ensures that even a male dominated legislature and judiciary will
acquiesce to the demands of the feminist lobby, because lack of in-group
preference means the empathy gap operates between man and man as much as
between woman and man. These combined psychosocial forces mean that the
extent to which a man is permitted to be a father is defined by the mother.
In respect of childcare and contact arrangements post-separation, there is no legal
obligation on parents to involve the courts. They can agree informally between
them. But recourse to the family courts for child contact arrangements are made in
about 38% of cases, a very high level of inability of parents to agree. About 92% of
non-resident patents are fathers in the UK.
The courts order staying contact in less than half of cases on which they rule. The
totality of cases, and by implication therefore also arrangements agreed privately
without court involvement, have the same outcome: less than half involve staying
contact. Typical staying orders are for one or two overnights per fortnight, perhaps
with one additional visiting day per fortnight. This is the extent of contact which
the luckier 40% or so of non-resident parents may hope to achieve.
Courts order unsupervised visits, but without overnight stays, in about 20% of
cases. The average ordered contact time under these conditions is 10 hours per
fortnight. Surveys of outcomes suggest that contact less than weekly but at least
monthly occurs in about 20% of cases. These are the McDads.
The courts order no contact of any sort in 14% of cases. The courts order either no
contact or only indirect or supervised contact in 31% of cases. These figures
compare with surveyed outcomes which suggest that no contact at all results in
about one in three cases. One could add to this a further 9% where contact occurs
only a few times per year.
It appears that the actual outcome is "no contact" in a greater percentage of cases
than the courts order, but this may be because orders for indirect or supervised
contact ultimately lead to no contact longer term. A meaningful relationship is
unlikely to be sustainable on such a basis. The actual prevalence of no contact, or
contact only a few times per year, may be as high as about 40%, especially after
the first year or two.
All these figures are extremely uncertain, but as far as can be judged on present
information, the courts order contact roughly in line with what transpires in
practice, i.e., including the 62% of cases which do not go through the courts.
However, there is no guarantee that contact ordered by the courts is what actually
happens. The extent to which the family courts enforce their own orders is
virtually zero. The chief criticism one can, with justification, bring against the
family courts is not so much their bias as their ineffectuality. At the start of the
process the resident parent holds all the cards. At the end, the resident parent still
holds all the cards. A belligerent resident parent, the mother in 92% of cases, can
flout court orders with complete impunity.
Claims are sometimes made that fathers seeking contact via the family courts are
overwhelmingly successful. However such claims are disingenuous: any contact at
all, even if indirect or supervised, is counted as a "success" in such claims. The
reality is that, despite the often modest applications by fathers who accept that
equal shared care is unlikely, about half of fathers fail to achieve what they
request. Either they fail to achieve the type of contact sought or they fail to
achieve the quantum of time sought. And even this relates to what the courts order,
not what actually happens.
The dominant factor in fathers' success in seeking meaningful child contact is
whether the mother agrees. Whilst there will be individual cases which depart from
the norm, in the typical case the mother calls the shots and the courts do not alter
that reality. Fatherhood is a status which mothers have the power to nullify. This is
not male privilege, male power, or toxic masculinity. It is gynocentric feminism
undermining the basis for an ongoing civilisation.
In some cases fathers may, in fact, be content with the extent of their contact. But
in a large percentage of cases, not only are fathers far from content, the outcomes
have the long term effect of severing the father-child relationship. That "male
disposability" is an apposite term can hardly be disputed when around 40% of
fathers are indeed disposed of virtually completely after separation, and many of
the rest partially. We see the operation of the empathy gap yet again in the
equanimity of society with these conditions.
This can no longer be presented as merely a fathers' rights issue (and hence
unimportant to a society operating under the empathy gap). The influence of the
breakdown of the paternal relationship upon the next generation is no longer
contentious. The impact of the loss of a parent is emerging as a dominant issue of
social disadvantage to the child. In this we see how culturally intensified
gynocentric feminism has left family-positive evolutionary matricentrism a long
way behind: child arrangements are too often the result of making the mothers'
wishes paramount, not the best interests of the child.
21.8 Alienation, ACES and Shared Care
The phenomena underlying the imposition of ACEs take us beyond the empathy
gap and into a broader range of sociological childcare issues. It is becoming ever
clearer that the loss of one parent decreases a child's resilience to withstand the
challenges of life. In the phenomenon of alienation we see the interests of one
parent triumphing over the interests of the child. Whilst either parent may be
alienated, the child is robbed of one parent most conclusively when the alienated
parent is also the non-resident parent, which is the father in 92% of cases. The
rarity of truly shared care, and the prevalence of effective fatherlessness, is being
permitted in our culture, reckless of the effects on the next generation. Alienation
and the elimination of the father are primarily childcare and child welfare issues.
But gynocentric feminism overlays this reality with "women's rights".
21.9 Drivers of Fatherlessness
Fatherlessness results from two things: divorce and the decline of marriage. For
teenagers not living with both their parents, divorce is responsible in only one-third
of cases. In two-thirds of cases the parents were never married (to each other).
About half of children born now are born outside marriage. At any time, about 15%
of dependent children live in cohabiting families and about 23% in single parent
families. However, cohabitees are far more likely to split than married couples.
The result is that barely more than half (55%) of children aged 15 are still living
with both their parents. The decline of marriage is the greater cause, rather than
divorce, though both are substantial.
On current trends, only about 50% of today's 20-year-olds will ever marry, and
these will be strongly skewed to the relatively well-off. The decline of marriage,
and hence fatherlessness, is strongly related to demographic. Only 24% of new
mothers in the lowest family income range are married. In contrast, 87% of new
mothers in the highest family income range are married. This is the marriage gap:
the wealthy get married, the poor do not. The children of unmarried parents are
thus at greater risk of disadvantage by a double whammy of poverty and
fatherlessness.
The result is a lose-lose scenario consisting of an epidemic of poor lone-mothers
and socially isolated fathers. It is the well educated, well heeled middle class
feminists with professional jobs and high earning husbands, whose policies of
family-destruction have brought about this disadvantage to the less well off.
Feminists are, as noted above, the neo-bourgeoisie.
21.10 Effects of Fatherlessness on Children
There are thousands of professional articles on the effect of fathers on child
development. The balance of evidence is clear: the majority of studies find
statistically significant disbeneficial effects of father absence, variously on
education, mental health, externalizing behaviours, delinquency, substance abuse
and early childbearing. Many studies, using a variety of methodologies and
longitudinal data, contribute to an increasingly clear picture of a causal connection
between father absence and these adverse effects. Nor is this a new finding. It has
been known for over a quarter of a century, though further evidence has continued
to accumulate.
Tens of thousands of fathers annually in the UK attempt, but fail, to remain
involved in their children's lives. Blaming men will not wash. The individual
working class man did not create the socio-political conditions which have led to
the collapse of marriage, the key driver of fatherlessness. It is not toxic
masculinity which has been assiduously working towards the destruction of
marriage for 50 years; it is feminism. Feminism had the destruction of fatherhood,
subject to the wishes of the mother, as its goal from the start. Feminism must now
be squarely blamed for the resulting disadvantage to children, of both sexes.
Nor will it wash to blame men's violence. The statistics are preposterous. The
individual working man did not create the misandric culture which brands men as
violent and predisposes judicial forces to separate him from his children. The badmouthing of men, and their resulting disenfranchisement from equal status as
parents has been constructed deliberately by feminists, and they continue to do so,
e.g., (Barnett, 2014). What truly underlies this wholesale disadvantaging of
children is a form of arrogance, a toxic femininity which sees fathers as
unnecessary.
21.11 Men's Fertility and Paternity Fraud
Men have little control over their own fertility, a situation which is accepted by
men with bovine forbearance. A woman's right to choose after conception means
that men have an opportunity to choose only prior to conception. But because of
the absence of a convenient, persistent and reversible male contraceptive, men
have little control over conception in practice.
The frequency with which women might secretly plan to conceive, expressly
against their partners' wishes, is unknown. But those ambivalent cases of notquite-so-accidental accidental pregnancies are common, as evidenced by the fact
that most unplanned pregnancies occur, not due to contraception failure, but
following deliberately ceasing contraception.
There are advantages to both sexes in having a convenient, persistent, reversible
male contraceptive on the market. The barriers to this are not primarily
technological. But it will happen only if driven by women or for women, because a
benefit to men is no motivation at all.
A man in the UK has no legal entitlement to know if a child is biologically his. This
fact alone is enough to motivate the smashing of windows, knocking off
policemen's helmets, chaining ourselves to railings, and being imprisoned. But men
have no in-group preference, so it does not happen.
The dominant narrative attempts to minimise the significance of biological
paternity, a position that would be acceptable to no one if applied to mothers. The
empathy gap facilitates a glaring inequality in biological parenthood which I have
shown to be unethical, despite claims to the contrary by those calling themselves
ethicists.
Historically men have been disadvantaged compared to women in respect of their
lack of certainty that a given child is indeed theirs. This situation persists despite
cheap, convenient and highly reliable DNA testing technology having been readily
available for over twenty years. Widespread application of the technology is
frustrated partly by legislation and partly by medical, legal and government
agencies protecting existing custom and practice, and rationalising these policies
with terms like "protecting family stability" and "the interests of the child". But
this attitude is actually created by gynocentrism, in which the mothers' wishes are
law. In truth, the child's interests are ignored every bit as much as the father's.
Whether reports of steeply declining sperm counts in Western countries are
correct is unclear, though scientifically credible. If they are correct, however,
nominal male infertility could be the norm in a few decades' time. Whilst alarmism
is to be avoided, and the situation is less certain than the popular press may
sometimes suggest, nevertheless there is a remarkable mismatch between the
apocalyptic nature of this feasible prediction and the complete lack of concern at
the level of the political-medical establishment. The empathy gap for men may be
facilitating ignoring an existential threat to our whole culture.
21.12 Homelessness and Loneliness
There are three levels of homelessness: the statutory homeless, the "single
homeless" who have failed to attain a designation as statutorily homeless, and a
sub-set of the latter, the rough sleepers. The number of the statutory homeless
considerably exceeds the number of rough sleepers. Details are incomplete for all
UK nations but the number of men applying for housing assistance is at least
comparable with the number of women. The Scottish and Northern Irish data show
that single male applicants are strongly dominant at the point of application.
Despite this reverse gender ratio at application, those actually housed, or placed on
the priority register, tend to be skewed towards women. This is predominantly due
to prioritisation where children are involved, and the fact that single parents are
92% mothers. The overwhelmingly dominant demographic in the Main Homeless
Duty in England are families headed by a single mother (47%). Single men or
women without children are far less likely to achieve Main Homeless Duty, and
hence assistance, and there are far more men than women in this category.
However, there may be a gender bias in addition to this effect. In Wales, similar
total numbers of men and women were assessed, but substantially fewer men than
women were housed, despite substantially more men than women being deemed
'eligible, homeless, and subject to a duty to help to secure housing'. Even for
people deemed 'eligible, unintentionally homeless and in priority need', men were
less likely to be housed than women.
The numerical dominance of men among rough sleepers may be one of the
outcomes of the above process. The result is that 84% to 86% of rough sleepers
are men. The same sex ratio applies to those who die as rough sleepers. This is the
ultimate "bottom line" of homelessness, and it is overwhelmingly male.
21.13 Mental Health
The APA's guidelines for mental health practice with boys and men, and the
similarly inspired Power Threat Meaning Framework from the BPS, fail the most
elementary tests against prevalence data. If social constructionism were correct,
as APA and feminism assume, there would be no difference between the
prevalence of mental ill-health in very young boys and girls. In fact, there is a
difference. Boys exhibit a significantly greater prevalence of mental disorders at
pre-school age (2-4) and up to age 10.
If masculinity were entirely socially constructed and also largely to blame for
men's and boys' mental ill-health, as APA propose, then the ratio of men's to
women's prevalence of such mental ill-health should increase with age through
childhood because the masculine cultural conditioning will not have occurred in
very young children but will become far more marked towards puberty and
throughout adolescence. In fact we see the opposite. Whilst boys show greater
prevalence of mental disorders before the age of 10, after age 16 it is women who
have the greater prevalence, and this is especially marked in the age range 17 to
24. If traditional masculinity is so prejudicial to mental ill-health, why are mental
disorders substantially more prevalent in young women?
If traditional masculinity were a major cause of mental disorders in boys and men,
as APA suggest, then over recent decades the prevalence of disorders in men and
boys would be expected to have declined because boys and young men have
become less 'macho' acculturated and more accepting of a softer, more emotive,
nature, including markedly reduced homophobia. But actually the prevalence of
mental disorders in men and boys has increased.
Over the last several decades, young women have become markedly more
assertive, confident and often dominant in many social, educational and workplace
settings. Violence in society generally has reduced, and domestic abuse in
particular has reduced. If lack of power and the prevalence of abuse were the
central causes of mental disorders in girls and young women, as APA have
proposed, then mental illness would be expected to have declined. In fact, the
incidence of mental disorders in young women has increased markedly,
substantially more than for young men.
Feminist theories, as embodied in the APA guidelines, resoundingly fail to be
consistent with the most obvious features of the epidemiological data.
The APA themselves have noted that men report experiencing gender bias in
therapy. Remarkably, the APA do not interpret this as a salutary lesson for their
own practice. Instead of aiming to provide a therapeutic service aligned to the
needs of the patient, the APA consider it more appropriate to demand that the
patient change to align with their feminist-based diagnostic preconceptions.
The APA criticise men, in general, in respect of their tendency to feel shamed by a
failure to achieve success in their perceived gender role. Like feminism more
broadly, the APA fail to appreciate that this shame, and the associated obligations,
may be imposed by society rather than a pathology of "traditional masculinity".
The ultimate irony is that the APA's attitude, indeed the feminist position, is
profoundly traditional itself, being based upon assumptions of men's agentic nature,
and hence that no ills may befall them that are not of their own making. In truth,
there will be no mental or social health for anyone until female agency and its
attendant responsibilities is acknowledged.
21.14 Suicide
We have seen that exogenous factors play a significant role in suicide, especially
male suicide. It is not just about mental health. These exogenous factors include
separation, the associated child contact issues, domestic abuse, low socioeconomic
social class, and unskilled manual labour.
There is plentiful evidence that separation/divorce significantly increases suicide
rates for both sexes, but more so for men than for women. Since men have a base
suicide rate 3.3 times that of women in England, after separation/divorce men's
suicide rate is 8 times that of a non-separated women (based on the median, or 12
times based on the mean). In Wales these figures would be higher still.
Remarkably, despite a large number of studies which analyse such suicide data,
almost none have considered the significance of children or child contact. Anyone
with experience of supporting fathers undergoing separation where there is a child
contact dispute will confirm that this is the pre-eminent issue, to the exclusion of all
else.
We have also seen that there is clear evidence of an association between suicide
and domestic abuse, for the suicides of both victims and perpetrators. In many
cases a man designated as a perpetrator may also be the victim of abuse, because
rather more than half of partner abuse is mutual but the man is more likely to be
identified as the abuser.
Suicide is also strongly associated with the lower socioeconomic classes. This
relationship is probably not linear but disproportionately affects the lowest
socioeconomic group (social class V). Men in this class are frequently unskilled
labourers. Remarkably, none of the studies I reviewed considered the nature of
men's employment as implicated in suicidality. There were many studies which
addressed income, unemployment and socioeconomic class – and a few did
explicitly identify the lowest class of manual worker to be especially vulnerable.
But none made the obvious connection with the sheer unpleasantness of a man's
daily work.
One hardly needs an academic study to spot the gendered nature of manual work
in the outdoors: we all see it every time we go out. Whether it is an urban
environment, where it is exclusively men digging holes in the road, removing
garbage, working on scaffolding, etc., or in the countryside. More women than men
study agriculture at college and Radio 4's Farming Today finds no shortage of
women to interview. But I walk around the countryside frequently and those I see
working in the fields are all men.
How much imagination does it take to understand that doing dirty, laborious, and
potentially hazardous work outside in all weathers, and earning little from it and
even less respect, might impact adversely on one's equanimity when one reaches
middle age with no expectation from life beyond being decreasingly able to sustain
the required physical effort? And then your wife throws you out, makes an
allegation of violence against you, and refuses to let you see the kids. You are now
homeless and not the local authority's priority to assist. This is not a rare scenario.
How is it that the hordes of academics carrying out suicide studies were unable to
make the cognitive leap to the obvious: that men in the lowest socioeconomic
classes tend to kill themselves more frequently because their lives are crap. After
all, you can see them. They are not hidden. Could it be an empathy gap which
blinds us to the staringly obvious?
It is clear, then, that there are multiple exogenous factors which contribute
substantially to male suicide. Nevertheless, the persistent popular narrative,
reinforced by parts of academia, attempts to deflect the blame back onto men
themselves. This can be achieved by verbal legerdemain which recharacterizes
external factors as psychological states (for example, a child contact problem
becomes a man's "problem with identifying as a father", or a man's obligation to
support his family becomes "perfectionism"). But the shortcomings of masculinity
itself provide the most common scapegoat. Men are disconnected from their
emotions; men do not talk or seek help; men stubbornly insist on managing alone
without degrading their status by asking for support – so the popular message goes.
By relating suicide to hegemonic masculinity, culpability is laid squarely at the door
of the man himself. If only the silly thing had not been so wedded to an outdated
notion of what it means to be a man, he wouldn't have been so distressed at his
failure to achieve it. But why are the progenitors of this opinion so sure that these
expectations are not imposed on a man externally? They are. That is what
"exogenous factors" means. You see, if hegemonic masculinity were not smuggled
into the picture we might be obliged to acknowledge that it was societal
disadvantage which precipitated the suicide. But this is the conclusion which our
society ties itself into cognitive knots to avoid.
We must, at all costs, preserve the notion of men as autonomous and invulnerable
to societal harm, quintessentially agentic, because men's neediness would detract
from those whose neediness is actually sanctioned. The worldview imposed by
gynocentrism, namely male agency and power, must be protected, if necessary by
reconfiguring the world through whatever lens of verbiage is required to distort it
to fit our preconceptions. We have seen that these deceptions are exposed by the
fact that both hegemonic masculinity, and the failure to achieve hegemonic
masculinity, may equally be held to blame.
By positing that hegemonic masculinity, or its misguided pursuit, is to blame,
society as a whole – and dominant gender narratives in particular – ensure that
men continue to be perceived as autonomous, self-sufficient, agentic and in sole
control of their own lives. Feminism pretends to speak against this supposed
hegemonic masculinity, but actually it depends upon this mythology to delegitimise
men from social concern. It cannot be admitted that men could be harmed by
societal processes in which women might play a significant part. That men could be
harmed by women cannot be admitted: it would reverse gynocentrism and male
agency.
Only by his own failings can a man be harmed, not by adverse social conditions:
that is the fiction which must be maintained. By redirecting the blame back onto
the man, society is absolved from any need to assist such men. Instead, the
message to men is to improve themselves because their problem is that they are
broken. By such a device, any need to acknowledge or address exogenous factors
which disadvantage men is avoided. And any such acknowledgement must be
avoided because men are required to function within society, not to impose a
burden upon it. Men are not authorised to be needy. This is the operation of
gynocentrism and male agency and disposability. This is the empathy gap.
21.15 Rape and False Allegations
Sexual assault is generally regarded as victimisation of females, by men, and
nothing more. Indeed, in feminist patriarchy theory, sexual abuse is said to be used
as a tool by men for the oppression and domination of women. But there are a
number of ways in the context of sex offences in which males are disadvantaged.
We have seen that the CPS VAWG reports are an exercise in obscuring male
victimisation whilst amplifying female victimisation, accomplished through a form
of Newspeak in which "Violence" does not mean violence, "Women" does not
mean women, and "Girls" does not mean girls. Claims that the attrition of rape
cases where the complainant is female is particularly large are challenged by a
study which shows such attrition to be comparable to that for violence-against-theperson offences. In contrast, attrition of rape cases where the complainant is male
is indeed unusually large, but this goes unremarked by rape activists.
Feminists insist that women do not lie about rape, a claim that is palpably false.
The percentage of rape allegations which are false continues to be highly
controversial, but it is clearly not a trivial percentage, contrary to claims by the
CPS which are shockingly dishonest. There is evidence which is difficult to refute
that, in recent years, the false allegation rate has become an alarmingly large
percentage, specifically that most police recorded rapes are false allegations.
There is no shortage of case histories testifying to the egregious treatment of
entirely innocent men. The psychological impact of false allegations is devastating,
often leading to suicide.
A popular view amongst rape activists is that a man should be pleased to be falsely
accused, as evidence that he lives in a society that takes women's complaints
seriously. In other words, a man should be glad to have suffered at the hands of a
woman in order to prevent suffering to women. Well, if the man were truly saintly,
then yes. But this is an expectation of self-sacrifice by men which is precisely what
"male disposability" means. And the attitude of a woman who expects such selfsacrifice from men, for the benefit of women, is precisely what "gynocentrism"
means.
Feminist activists are driving an erosion of the most fundamental principles of
justice, namely that everyone is equal before the law, innocence until proven guilty,
the right to trial by jury, the right for all evidence to be heard, and the right to face
one's accuser. Equality before the law has already been demolished in respect of
sex. The de facto position in respect of males accused of sex offences against
females is that the principle of innocence until proven guilty has also already been
overturned. The unjust requirement for the accused to prove his innocence is made
even worse by inadequate, or corrupt, disclosure practices denying the defendant
access to crucial exculpatory evidence. The signature of encroaching totalism is
the perverting of justice to meet the ends of those who would take total power.
21.16 Sexual Assault: The Story Less Told
Sexual assault is the pre-eminent area which feminists claim as their own province,
the centre of patriarchal oppression of women by men. But there is another story,
less told. Whilst sexual abuse of females by men is not denied or minimised, either
by society in general or by the present author, the sexual abuse of males by women
certainly is denied and minimised. The empirical evidence stands in stark contrast
to society's incredulity at women's sexual offending. But as soon as sexual offences
became defined by lack of consent the distinct treatment of the two sexes lost any
coherence it ever had.
The empirical evidence of coercive sex, or unwanted sexual touching, being
perpetrated upon adult men by adult women is clear and not much less in
magnitude than the reverse. But this bald fact is unlikely to ameliorate the public
resistance to regarding such events as assault when the victim is a man. Even
situations where reversing the sexes would reveal a serious aggravated rape,
which would see the perpetrator go to prison for a very long time, the public will
still view it as more amusing than criminal. Men's internalisation of their own
disposability is especially marked in such cases. The man's priority is quite likely to
be avoiding hurt to his rapist rather than concern for himself.
Women's sexual offending against male minors is somewhat more likely to provoke
public calls for punishment, though even here it may depend upon the exact age of
the boy. Many people are still of the opinion that a 35-year-old teacher grooming a
15-year-old boy pupil for sex does not deserve a harsh punishment: more of a
ticking off. The distinct perception of the sexes in respect of both perpetrator and
victim is ancient in origin but feminism has done nothing to diminish it. On the
contrary, feminism in the form of MeToo and similar sentiments has inflamed
intolerance of male words and actions to an extreme degree.
A venerable male professor being so unwise as to tell a female colleague that she is
beautiful can find himself excommunicated by his university, declared a sex abuser
and rendered a non-person, his name being expunged from all records as an
undesirable. I, on the other hand, must tolerate women I barely know hugging or
kissing me in public. I cannot recoil and reject their advances (which are
sometimes, if not always, unwelcome) without being regarded as unforgivably rude.
If I were to behave in the same way I might be placed on the sex offenders
register. Who is privileged under these conditions? And who was possessed of the
power required to bring about this abjection of men?
There are more than a hundred times more men in prison for sexual offences than
there are women in prison for sexual offences. But there is a gross mismatch
between this ratio and the known high incidence of male sex offenders who have a
background of being sexually abused themselves as a child by a woman (perhaps
about one-third to one-half of all such men in prison). So, given the 13,500 men in
prison in the UK for sex offences, why are there only about 100 women? Where
are the 4,500 to 7,000 missing women who have sexually offended against male
minors? (Not to mention the women offending against female minors). The answer
is that they go undetected, because women are trusted with children. And society
does not want to know that caring, nurturing women can also sometimes be
abusers. It appears that at least 20% of sexual offending against minors is
perpetrated by women, and perhaps far more.
The starkest warning about adult women's potential for sexual exploitation of male
minors comes from juvenile detention facilities in the USA where female staff
perpetrating sexual abuse on male inmates is the commonest form of sexual
assault. The power differential in this case is at its most extreme. But there is also
a substantial power differential between a teacher and her pupils, and one wonders
at the true extent of sexual abuses in this scenario. More teacher-on-pupil sexual
abuses have come to light in recent years than the public might have thought
possible
Even war rape is not a female victim monopoly, as is generally supposed – a
presumption encouraged by governmental policies and NGOs wishing to retain
control of funding. On the contrary, where war rape is endemic, it is always
commonly deployed against male as well as female victims.
The societal view is that sexual predation is a male monopoly, and sexual
victimisation of adults is a female monopoly. But rather than being true, these
perceptions are actually pre-eminent examples of male disposability and the
empathy gap. These psychological biases are so extreme in the case of female
perpetrators of sexual abuse against males that few in society can conceptualise it
as abuse at all.
21.17 In Conclusion
The empirical evidence for an empathy gap against males, associated with a
widespread gynocentric orientation, is overwhelmingly strong. It is remarkable
that this remains imperceptible to the general public, and to feminists in particular.
The reason is gynocentrism itself, which promotes its own invisibility.
Key evolved traits are generally motivated in the individual by emotions. One does
not consciously eat in order to fulfil the evolutionary function of remaining a viable
organism until genetic transmittal has been accomplished. One eats because one is
hungry. But, in truth, the latter is the trick that evolution plays upon one in order to
accomplish the former objective. Hunger, and the pleasure of eating, are proximate
causes of a behaviour whose distal origin is successful genetic promulgation.
In the same way, there is a complex of emotions which promotes the pair bond. It
includes lust but also compassion and tenderness and many other elements,
traditionally summarised as love. This complex of emotions is the proximate cause
of the pair bonding behaviour whose distal origin, or function or "purpose", is
successful genetic propagation.
The genetic basis of our impetus to eat or procreate does not impose itself upon
our consciousness. It would be counterproductive to do so since the fate of strands
of DNA would hardly motivate us. Instead, those same strands of DNA have found
a means of conning us to serve their needs, enacting the con by appropriate
emotional drives and rewards. We see only the façade of the building, not its
structural elements.
Evolved matricentrism is enacted by those same emotions which drive the pair
bond. This includes, for example, the key element of the ceding of moral authority
to mothers, and by extension to women in general. One of the associated
correlates of this moral authority is men's discomfort at female disapproval. The
veil which has obscured this matricentrism is the traditional patriarchy which the
feminists are so intent on smashing. The societal respect which patriarchy
embodied hid, and hence made tolerable to men, the underlying matricentric
subservience.
As matricentrism has intensified into feminist gynocentrism, and the veil of respect
for men has been withdrawn, another mechanism of obscuration has become
necessary. This is the doctrine of female oppression and poisonous masculinity. For
most people now, this new perspective on the sexes serves very effectively to hide
gynocentrism. But it is a step too far. One cannot sweeten the pill by making it
more bitter still. Some people are now rejecting a pill so bitter that it requires
service to those who will continue to despise you.
Matricentrism was never truly invisible to the enquiring mind, more of an
invisibility of convenience. And gynocentrism can be, and is being, perceived and
resisted by many people, of both sexes. For women, resisting gynocentric
tendencies may be equated with the responsible use of their power, motivated by
the recognition of feminism's corrosive effects.
Inevitably one wonders where our present social malaise will lead. It is not a
prediction but an observation that the peoples in whom Western culture is
instantiated are failing to reproduce themselves. The relationship of this with
feminism is clear. Strangely this excites little comment or concern. The feministprogressive axis does appear to regard the death of Western peoples and their
culture with approval. It will end, it seems, with the usual Pyrrhic victory of getting
what you wished for.
Acronyms
Acronyms will generally be decoded in each chapter where they apply. However,
for convenience I collect them here. Where relevant the UK may be assumed
unless otherwise stated.
AAP American Academy of Pediatrics
ACE Adverse Childhood Experience
ADHD Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
ASD Autism Spectrum Disorders
ASHE Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings
ASPD Anti-Social Personality Disorder
AUD Alcohol Use Disorder
BAME Black Asian and Minority Ethnic
BBC British Broadcasting Corporation
BHPS British Household Panel Survey
BJS Bureau of Justice Statistics (USA)
BMA British Medical Association
BPD Borderline Personality Disorder
BSP Basic State Pension
CAFCASS Children and Family Court Advisor and Support Services
CALM Campaign Against Living Miserably
CDC (US) Centers for Disease Control (and Prevention)
CHD Coronary Heart Disease
CIS-R Clinical Interview Schedule - Revised
CJS CriminalJustice System
CMD Common Mental Disorder
CMS Child Maintenance Service
CPS
Crown Prosecution Service, or Canadian Paediatrics
Society
CSA Child Support Agency
CSEW Crime Survey for England and Wales
CVD Cardiovascular Disease
DA Domestic Abuse
DASH Domestic Abuse Stalking and Harassment (instrument)
DBS Disclosure and Barring Service
DfE Department for Education
DoH Department of Health
DPP Director of Public Prosecutions
DSM-5
Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th
ed
DV Domestic Violence
DVPN Domestic Violence Protection Notice
DVPO Domestic Violence Protection Order
DVIP Domestic Violence Intervention Project
ECU Equality Challenge Unit
EGGSI Expert Group on Gender Equality and Social Inclusion
EHRC Equality and Human Rights Commission
ERCD Elastic Radial Compression Device
EU European Union
FOI Freedom Of Information (Act enquiry)
FSM Free School Meals
GAD Generalised Anxiety Disorder
GBH Grievous Bodily Harm (one of the VAP offences)
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GP General Practitioner (doctor in primary healthcare)
HE Higher Education
HEPI Higher Education Policy Institute
HESA Higher Education Statistics Authority
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Viruses
HMCTS Her Majesty's Courts & Tribunals Service
HMRC Her Majesty's Revenue & Customs
HOC House of Commons
HPV Human Papilloma Viruses
ICD-10 International Classification of Diseases 10th Revision
IDVA Independent Domestic Violence Advisor
IPV Intimate Partner Violence
JCVI Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation
LAA Legal Aid Authority
LASPO
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders
(Act)
LGBT Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender
LIP Litigant In Person
LSCB London Safeguarding Children Board
MARAC Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference
MC Male Circumcision
MGM Male Genital Mutilation
MHRM Men's Human Rights Movement
MOJ Ministry of Justice
MP Member of Parliament
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging
mpMRI Multi-Parametric MRI
NCANDS National Child Abuse and Neglect Data System (USA)
NCRS National Crime Recording Standard (USA)
NCVS National Crime Victimization Survey (USA)
NEET Not in Employment, Education or Training
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NHS National Health Service
NI National Insurance
NIH National Institutes of Health (USA)
NMO Non-Molestation Order
NSPCC
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children
NISVS National Intimate and Sexual Violence Survey (USA)
OCD Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
ODD Oppositional Defiant Disorder
OECD
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development
ONS Office for National Statistics
OR Odds Ratio
PA Partner Abuse or Parental Alienation
PASK Partner Abuse State of Knowledge (project)
PAYE Pay As You Earn
PISA Programme for International Student Assessment
PIAAC
Programme for the International Assessment of Adult
Competencies
PR Parental Responsibility
PSA Prostate-Specific Antigen
PTSD Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
PV Partner Violence
RACP Royal Australasian College of Physicians
RAF Royal Air Force
RASSO Rape And Serious Sexual Offences
RCT Randomised Controlled Trial
RCUK Research Councils UK
RLP Refugee Law Project
SAT(s) Standard Attainment Test(s)
SCR Serious Case Review
SEN Special Educational Needs
SIDS Sudden Infant Death Syndrome ("cot death")
SPA State Pension Age
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
STEMM STEM plus Medicine and subjects allied to Medicine
STI(s) Sexually Transmitted Infection(s)
SWEP Severe Weather Emergency Protocol
TUC Trades Union Congress
UCAS Universities and Colleges Admissions Service
UCL University College London
UKHLS UK Household Longitudinal Surveys
UN United Nations
UNAIDS United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNHCR United Nations High Commission for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
U
T
I
U
r
in
a
r
y
Tr
a
c
t
I
n
fe
c
t
io
n
VA
P
Vio
le
n
c
e
A
g
a
in
s
t
th
e
P
e
r
s
o
n
VAW
G
Vio
le
n
c
e
A
g
a
in
s
t
Wo
me
n
a
n
d
Gir
ls
WA
S
P
I
Wo
me
n
A
g
a
in
s
t
S
t
a
t
e
P
e
n
s
io
n
I
n
e
qu
a
lity
W
E
F
Wo
r
ld
E
c
o
n
o
mic
F
o
rum
W
H
O
Wo
r
ld
H
e
a
lth
O
r
g
a
nis
a
t
io
n
References
Abrams. (2012, July 26). Why We Keep Accidentally Getting Pregnant. Retrieved
December 21, 2018, from The Atlantic:
https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2012/07/why-we-keep-accidentallygetting-pregnant/260370/
Adams. (2019, February 16). The Guardian. Labour would end free market in
higher education, says Rayner. Retrieved March 11, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/education/2019/feb/16/labour-would-end-freemarket-in-higher-education-says-rayner
Adams, Bengtsson and Weale. (2017, August 17). A-level results show rise in top
grades despite tougher exams. Retrieved April 16, 2018, from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/aug/17/a-level-results-show-firstrise-in-top-grades-in-six-years
Adams, S. (2018, March 10). New threat to vital HPV jab as advisers to Health
Secretary Jeremy Hunt say extending the vaccine to boys would not be 'cost
effective'. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from Mail Online:
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-5486421/Jeremy-Hunt-advisers-sayHPV-vaccine-boys-not-cost-effective.html
Agerbo. (2005). Midlife suicide risk, partner's psychiatric illness, spouse and child
bereavement by suicide or other modes of death: a gender specific study. Journal
of Epidemiology and Community Health, 59(5), 407-412. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech.2004.024950
Agerbo. (2011, December). Social integration and suicide: Denmark, 1906–2006.
The Social Science Journal, 48(4), 630-640. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soscij.2011.06.004
Ahmed et al. (2017, February 25). Diagnostic accuracy of multi-parametric MRI
and TRUS biopsy in prostate cancer (PROMIS): a paired validating confirmatory
study. The Lancet, 389(10071), 815-822. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(16)32401-1
Airaksinen. (2018, August 6). Professor Slams 'Hegemonic Masculinity' of
Homeless Men. Retrieved April 24, 2018, from pjmedia:
https://pjmedia.com/trending/professor-slams-hegemonic-masculinity-of-homelessmen/
Airaksinen, T. (2019, January 17). APA's 'Masculinity' Guidelines Now Facing
Title IX Challenge. PJ Media. Retrieved January 20, 2019, from
https://pjmedia.com/trending/apas-masculinity-guidelines-now-facing-title-ixchallenge/
Aitkenhead. (2019, February 17). The Interview: Everyday Sexism founder Laura
Bates on how teenage boys are being raised on a diet of misogyny. Sunday Times.
Retrieved March 5, 2019, from https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/the-intervieweveryday-sexism-founder-laura-bates-on-how-teenage-boys-are-being-raised-ona-diet-of-misogyny-k0mk05c0w
al-Akiti, M. A. (1996, March 24). Circumcision. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
http://www.iol.ie/~afifi/Articles/circumcision.htm
American Academy of Pediatrics. (2012, August 27). Newborn Male Circumcision.
Retrieved August 3, 2018, from https://www.aap.org/en-us/about-the-aap/aappress-room/pages/Newborn-Male-Circumcision.aspx
American Association of Blood Banks. (2010). Annual report for testing in 2010,
prepared by the relationship testing program unit. Retrieved from
https://tinyurl.com/yxe5tr33
American Psychological Association. (2007, December). Guidelines for
Psychological Practice with Girls and Women. Retrieved January 17, 2019, from
https://www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/girls-and-women.aspx
American Psychological Association. (2018, August). Guidelines for the
Psychological Practice with Boys and Men. Retrieved January 17, 2019, from
https://tinyurl.com/yysu2o9j
Anderson and Magrath. (2019). Men and Masculinities. Routledge. Retrieved from
https://www.routledge.com/Men-and-Masculinities-1st-Edition/AndersonMagrath/p/book/9781138081819
Anderson, K. (2006, June). How Well Does Paternity Confidence Match Actual
Paternity? Evidence from Worldwide Nonpaternity Rates. Current Anthropology,
47(3), 513-520. doi: https://doi.org/10.1086/504167
Andres. (2005). Income inequality, unemployment, and suicide: a panel data
analysis of 15 European countries. Applied Economics, 37(4), 439-451. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/0003684042000295304
Andres. (2010, December). Determinants of suicides in Denmark: Evidence from
time series data. Health Policy, 98(2-3), 263-269. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2010.06.023
Andrews, K. (2017, November 10). The Gender Pay Gap: A Briefing. Retrieved
June 19, 2018, from Institute of Economic Affairs: https://tinyurl.com/yax5fqjo
Athena SWAN. (2017, April). ASSET 2016: experiences of gender equality in
STEMM academia and their intersections with ethnicity, sexual orientation,
disability and age . Retrieved April 18, 2018, from Equality Challenge Unit:
http://www.ecu.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/ECU_ASSET-report_April2017.pdf
Athena SWAN Charter. (2018). Athena SWAN Charter. Retrieved April 18, 2018,
from Equality Challenge Unit: https://www.ecu.ac.uk/equality-charters/athenaswan/
Auvert et al. (2005, October 25). Randomized, Controlled Intervention Trial of
Male Circumcision for Reduction of HIV Infection Risk: The ANRS 1265 Trial.
PLOS Medicine, 2(11), e298. doi: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020298
Baby Centre. (2013, February). Circumcision. Retrieved August 2, 2018, from
https://www.babycentre.co.uk/a25005373/circumcision
Bailey et al. (2007, March 2). Male circumcision for HIV prevention in young men
in Kisumu, Kenya: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet, 369(9562), 643-656.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60312-2
Baird. (2011, September 5). Feminism in London Conference. Retrieved September
3, 2018, from http://verabaird.biz/2011/09/05/feminism-in-london-conference/
Bakalar, N. (2016, April 19). Circumcision May Not Reduce Sensitivity of Penis.
The New York Times. Retrieved July 28, 2018, from
https://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2016/04/19/circumcision-may-not-reducesensitivity-of-penis/?_r=0
Baker. (2015, July 27). Female rapist faces jail after being found guilty of running
paedophile ring which subjected five young children to horrific abuse over more
than a decade. Daily Mail. Retrieved from
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3176340/Woman-faces-jail-guiltyrunning-paedo-ring.html
Banks and Baker. (2013, September). Men and primary care: improving access and
outcomes. Trends in Urology and Men's Health, 39-41. Retrieved April 29, 2018,
from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/tre.357
Barnett. (2014, March). Contact at all Costs? Domestic Violence, Child Contact
and the Pracicess of the Family Courts and Professionals. Retrieved April 14, 2019,
from PhD Thesis, Brunel University Law School:
https://bura.brunel.ac.uk/bitstream/2438/8753/1/FulltextThesis.pdf
Baron-Cohen, S. (2012). The Essential Difference: Men, Women and the Extreme
Male Brain. Penguin. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y5hmvkoq
Barrett. (2015, April 30). Number of convicted sex offenders in jail reaches record
high. Telegraph. Retrieved April 7, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/crime/11573580/Number-of-convictedsex-offenders-in-jail-reaches-record-high.html
Barstad. (2008, May). Explaining Changing Suicide Rates in Norway 1948–2004:
The Role of Social Integration. Social Indicators Research, 87(1), 47-64. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-007-9155-x
Bates, E. (2016, September 5). Current Controversies within Intimate Partner
Violence: Overlooking Bidirectional Violence. Journal of Family Violence, 31(8),
937-940. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10896-016-9862-7
Bates, Graham-Kevan and Archer. (2014). Testing Predictions from the Male
Control Theory of Men's Partner Violence. Aggressive Behaviour, 40, 42-55.
http://216.92.202.24/battered/DixonArcherPerpTreatment.pdf
Baumeister, R. (2010). Is There Anything Good About Men? How cultures flourish
by exploiting men. Oxford University Press. Retrieved from
https://tinyurl.com/yybnv924
BBC. (2016). Diversity and Inclusion Strategy 2016-20. Retrieved March 23, 2019,
from http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/diversity/pdf/diversity-and-inclusion-strategy-
2016.pdf
BBC News. (2007, February 15). Many inmates 'have very low IQs'. Retrieved
April 2, 2019, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/6364809.stm
BBC News. (2010, November 4). Little Ted's was 'ideal' place for Vanessa George
abuse. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-devon11682161
BBC News. (2012, November 27). Manchester baby boy 'bled to death after
circumcision'. Retrieved August 2, 2012, from https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/ukengland-manchester-20503660
BBC News. (2013, January 17). Sheffield circumcision cuts spark backstreet op
fear. Retrieved August 2, 2018, from https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-englandsouth-yorkshire-21057581
BBC News. (2015, August 11). Kenyan men in hiding fearing circumcision.
Retrieved March 15, 2019, from https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa28746101
BBC News. (2015, October 12). UK military deaths in Afghanistan: Full list.
Retrieved March 22, 2019, from https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-10629358
BBC News. (2016, July 7). UK military deaths in Iraq. Retrieved March 22, 2019,
from https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-10637526
BBC News. (2018, January 27). All current rape cases to be 'urgently' reviewed
over disclosure fears. Retrieved March 5, 2019, from
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-42841346
BBC News. (2019, March 25). Lib Dem MP Layla Moran slapped partner at
conference. Retrieved from https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-oxfordshire47686844
BBC World Service. (2012, July 31). An Unspeakable Act (Part 2). Retrieved
January 20, 2019, from https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00vxx55
BBC World Service. (2012, August 4). An Unspeakable Act (Part 2). Retrieved
April 11, 2019, from https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00vxx55
Beaugé, M. (2005, April 28). Conservative Treatment of Primary Phimosis in
Adolescents. Retrieved July 28, 2018, from The Circumcision Reference Library:
http://cirp.org/library/treatment/phimosis/beauge/
Becci Newton and Joy Williams. (2013, December). Under-representation by
gender and race in Apprenticeships: Research summary (Research paper 18 ).
Retrieved March 22, 2019, from TUC:
https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/UnderRepresentationInApprenticeships.p
df
Beer, J. (2016, April 23). Liverpool v-c calls for funding link to improve gender
balance. Retrieved April 18, 2018, from Times Higher Education:
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/university-of-liverpool-vicechancellor-janet-beer-calls-for-funding-link-to-improve-gender-balance
Bellis et al. (2005). Measuring paternal discrepancy and its public health. Journal
of Epidemiology and Community Health, 59(9), 749-754. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.2005.036517
Bellis et al. (2014). National household survey of adverse childhood experiences
and their relationship with resilience to health-harming behaviors in England. BMC
Medicine, 12, 72. Retrieved from
https://bmcmedicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1741-7015-12-72
Bellis et al (2017). Does continuous trusted adult support in childhood impart lifecourse resilience against adverse childhood experiences – a retrospective study on
adult health-harming behaviours and mental well-being? BMC Psychiatry (2017)
17:110 doi: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-017-1260-z
Bensley and Boyle. (2001). Physical, Sexual, and Psychological Effects of Male
Infant Circumcision. In D. e. al, & F. M. Eds. George C. Denniston (Ed.),
Understanding Circumcision: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach to a MultiDimensional Problem (pp. 207-239). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-3351-8
Benson. (2015, April). The cost to Britain's children of the trend away from
marriage, Harry Benson, Marriage Foundation. Retrieved November 20, 2018,
from The Marriage Foundation: http://www.marriagefoundation.org.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2016/06/pdf-08.pdf
Benson and McKay. (2015, August). The Marriage Gap The rich get married (and
stay together). The poor don't. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from
http://www.marriagefoundation.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/pdf-07.pdf
Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer and Robinson. (2000, September 1). Is Anyone Doing the
Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor. Social Forces,
79(1), 191-228. Retrieved June 27, 2018, from
https://academic.oup.com/sf/article/79/1/191/2233934
Bignell. (2013, March 24). Shopping? It's all in the gender. The Independent.
Retrieved March 21, 2019, from https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/thisbritain/shopping-its-all-in-the-gender-8547059.html
Bindel. (2016, August 12). Juries have no place at rape trials – victims deserve
unprejudiced justice. The Guardian. Retrieved March 4, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/12/juries-no-place-rapetrials-victims-deserve-unprejudiced-justice-judge
Blanchard. (2019, April 25). 'We must build an NHS that works for women': Health
Secretary Matt Hancock pledges to close gender pay gap in the health service.
MailOnline. Retrieved from https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article6955957/We-build-NHS-works-women-says-Health-Secretary-Matt-Hancock.html
Bleustein et al. (2005, April). Effect of neonatal circumcision on penile neurologic
sensation. 65(4), 773-777. Retrieved April 27, 2017, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0090429504013433
Bodkin. (2018, December 9). Universities launch drive to recruit more white males
as low numbers give them 'minority group' status. The Telegraph. Retrieved
February 24, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2018/12/09/universities-launch-drive-recruitwhite-males-low-numbers-give/
Bollinger and van Howe. (2011, May). Alexithymia and Circumcision Trauma: A
Preliminary Investigation. International Journal of Men s Health, 10(2), 184-195.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3149/jmh.1002.184
Bollinger, D. (2010). Lost Boys: An Estimate of U.S. Circumcision-Related Infant
Deaths. Thymos: Journal of Boyhood Studies, 4(1), 78-90. Retrieved August 2,
2018, from
https://www.academia.edu/6394940/Lost_Boys_An_Estimate_of_U.S._Circumcisio
n-Related_Infant_Deaths
Bonde and te Velde. (2017, September 26). Declining sperm counts — the neverending story. Nature Reviews Urology, 14, 645-646. Retrieved December 22, 2018,
from https://www.nature.com/articles/nrurol.2017.153
Boroughs. (2004, May). Female sexual abusers of children. Children and Youth
Services Review, 26(5), 481-487. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0190740904000349
Bossio et al. (2016, June). Examining Penile Sensitivity in Neonatally Circumcised
and Intact Men Using Quantitative Sensory Testing. The Journal of Urology,
195(6), 1848-1853. Retrieved July 28, 2018, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022534715055354
Bossio, J. (2015). Examining Sexual Correlates of Neonatal Circumcision in Adult
Men. PhD Thesis, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada, Department of
Psychology. Retrieved July 29, 2018, from
https://qspace.library.queensu.ca/handle/1974/13627
Both Parents Matter. (2017). Welsh Dads' Survey. Retrieved October 6, 2018,
from https://bpmuk.org/research
Both Parents Matter. (2018, September 18). Senedd Assembly Wales. Retrieved
from
https://business.senedd.wales/documents/s78555/18.09.18%20Correspondence%20
-%20Petitioner%20to%20the%20Committee.pdf
Bowcott, O. (2018, October 15). Parents 'weaponising' domestic violence orders,
claims charity. Retrieved October 17, 2018, from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/law/2018/oct/15/parents-weaponising-domesticviolence-orders-claims-charity
Boyd and Richerson. (1992). Punishment Allows the Evolution of Cooperation (or
Anything Else) in Sizable Groups. Ethology and Sociobiology, 13(3), 171-195. doi:
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1992). Punishment Allows the Evolution of
Cooperation
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/016230959290032Y
Boyd and Richerson. (2009). Culture and the evolution of human cooperation. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. B, 364(1533), 3281-3288. doi:
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2009.0134
Boyle and Hill. (2011, December 1). Sub-Saharan African randomised clinical trials
into male circumcision and HIV transmission: methodological, ethical and legal
concerns. Journal of Law and Medicine, 316-334. Retrieved August 7, 2018, from
https://europepmc.org/abstract/med/22320006
Boyle and Hill. (2012, February 7). Circumcision‐generated emotions bias medical
literature. BJUI, letter to editor. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-
410X.2012.10917.x
Bradford, R. (2015, January 5). STEM versus Teaching. Retrieved April 17, 2018,
from Academia: https://www.academia.edu/37560970/STEM_versus_Teaching
Bradford, R. (2018a, October 6). 332 Child Homicides. Academia. Retrieved from
Academia: https://www.academia.edu/37539591/332_Child_Homicides
Bradford, R. (2018b, December 23). Database of Sources for Mispaternity Rates.
Retrieved from Academia:
https://www.academia.edu/38028322/Database_of_Sources_for_Mispaternity_Rat
es
Bradford, R. (2019). Group Extinction in Iterated Two Person Games with Evolved
Group-Level Mixed Strategies. J.Mathematical Sociology. doi:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0022250X.2019.1602045
Bradshaw et al. (2007, December). Achievement of 15-year-olds in England: PISA
2006 National Report. Retrieved February 23, 2019, from
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/NPC02/NPC02.pdf
Breda and Hillion. (2016, July 29). Teaching accreditation exams reveal grading
biases favor women in male-dominated disciplines in France. Science, 353(6298),
474-478. doi: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6298/474
Brent & Kilburn Times. (2012, June 22). Queen's Park baby bled to death two
days after being circumcised. Retrieved August 2, 2018, from Brent & Kilburn
Times: http://www.kilburntimes.co.uk/news/queen-s-park-baby-bled-to-death-twodays-after-being-circumcised-1-1419367
Bridger et al. (2017, September). Cambridge Journal of Evidence-Based Policing,
1(2-3), 93-104. Retrieved February 11, 2019, from
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s41887-017-0013-z
Bristol University HR Equality and Diversity Team. (2014). University of Bristol:
Annual Equality Monitoring Report 2013/14. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from
Bristol University: http://www.bristol.ac.uk/medialibrary/sites/hr/documents/equality-and-diversity/1314.pdf
Bristow. (2017, November 2). Top lawyer says Nicola Fox who forced boy, 13, to
have sex was 'treated leniently' because she's a woman. Hull Love. Retrieved
April 8, 2019, from https://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/news/hull-east-yorkshirenews/top-lawyer-says-nicola-fox-715043
British Academy. (2014, July). A Presumption Against Imprisonment, Social Order
and Social Values. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from
https://www.thebritishacademy.ac.uk/publications/presumption-againstimprisonment-social-order-social-values/
British Heart Foundation. (2018). Cardiovascular Disease Statistics 2018.
Retrieved April 21, 2018, from https://www.bhf.org.uk/research/heartstatistics/heart-statistics-publications/cardiovascular-disease-statistics-2018
British Medical Association. (2006, June). The law and ethics of male circumcision:
Guidance of doctors. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
https://www.bma.org.uk/advice/employment/ethics/children-and-youngpeople/male-circumcision
British Psychological Society. (2018, January). Power Threat Meaning Framework.
Retrieved January 18, 2019, from https://www.bps.org.uk/news-andpolicy/introducing-power-threat-meaning-framework
British Social Attitudes Survey. (2012). 30th British Social Attitudes Survey.
Retrieved June 25, 2018, from http://www.bsa.natcen.ac.uk/latest-report/britishsocial-attitudes-30/key-findings/introduction.aspx
Britton, P. (2013, October 5). Salford nurse struck off after baby died in Oldham
home circumcision. Retrieved August 2, 2018, from Manchester Evening News:
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-manchester-21374643
Brown. (2019a). Feminism set out to destroy the family and has largely succeeded.
Retrieved April 19, 2019, from Academia:
https://www.academia.edu/38380550/Feminism_set_out_to_destroy_the_family_an
d_has_largely_succeeded.docx
Brown. (2019b, April 11). From Hegemonic to Responsive Masculinity: the
Transformative Power of the Provider Role. Quillette. Retrieved April 14, 2019,
from https://quillette.com/2019/04/11/from-hegemonic-to-responsive-masculinitythe-transformative-power-of-the-provider-role/#_edn12
Bryner, M. (2016, June 9). Not-So-Accidental Pregnancies: Some accidental
pregnancies aren't so accidental—especially if the guy could be a good provider.
Psychology Today. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/articles/200509/not-so-accidentalpregnancies
Buchanan, M. (2015, July 30). Justice for Men and Boys. Retrieved April 15, 2018,
from https://j4mb.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/46/2015/07/150730-dept-foreducation-foi-response.pdf
Burda, Hamermesh and Weil. (2013, January). Total work and gender: facts and
possible explanations. Journal of Population Economics, 26(1), 239-261. Retrieved
June 27, 2018, from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00148-012-0408-x
Bureau of Investigative Journalism. (2018, December). Dying Homeless: Counting
the deaths of homeless people across the UK. Retrieved from
https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/stories/2018-04-23/dying-homeless
Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2013, June). Sexual Victimization in Juvenile
Facilities Reported by Youth, 2012. Retrieved April 11, 2019, from US Dept of
Justice: https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svjfry12.pdf
Burgoa. (1998, March 1). Mortality by cause of death and marital status in Spain.
European Journal of Public Health, 8(1), 37-42. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/8.1.37
Burnett. (2016). Wrongful Allegations of Sexual and Child Abuse. OUP Oxford.
Retrieved March 9, 2019, from https://tinyurl.com/y2njg7yd
Burnley. (1995, September). Socioeconomic and spatial differentials in mortality
and means of committing suicide in New South Wales, Australia, 1985–1991. Social
Science & Medicine, 41(5), 687-698. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0277-
9536(94)00378-7
Burns. (2017, September 9). Woman paedophile, 33, who lured 13-year-old boy to
her home and forced him to have sex with her is jailed for four years. Retrieved
April 8, 2019, from https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4868122/Womanpaedophile-33-jailed-forcing-boy-sex.html
Burns, L. (2017, May 8). Local history - Woodhead's forgotten tragedy. Retrieved
June 20, 2018, from Glossop Chronicle:
https://glossopchronicle.com/2017/05/local-history-woodheads-forgotten-tragedy/
Burton et al. (2012, July). Understanding the progression of serious cases through
the Criminal Justice System Evidence drawn from a selection of casefiles.
Retrieved March 4, 2019, from Ministry of Justice Research Series 11/12:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/217471/understanding-progression-serious-cases.pdf
CAFCASS. (2017/18). Private law data. Retrieved April 15, 2019, from
https://www.cafcass.gov.uk/about-cafcass/research-and-data/private-law-data/
CAFCASS. (2018, October). The Child Impact Assessment Framework and its
development. Retrieved October 20, 2018, from
https://www.cafcass.gov.uk/grown-ups/parents-and-carers/divorce-andseparation/the-child-impact-assessment-framework-and-its-development/
CAFCASS and Women's Aid. (2017, July 25). Allegations of domestic abuse in
child contact cases. Retrieved October 18, 2018, from
https://www.cafcass.gov.uk/2017/07/25/cafcass-womens-aid-collaborate-domesticabuse-research/
CALM. (n.d.). Campaign Against Living Miserably. Retrieved from
https://www.thecalmzone.net/
Canadian Jewish News. (2013, September 30). Circumcision ban introduced in
Sweden. Retrieved March 14, 2019, from
https://www.cjnews.com/news/international/circumcision-ban-introduced-sweden
Canadian Medical Association. (1996). Neonatal circumcision revisited. Canadian
Medical Association Journal, 154(6), 769-780. Retrieved Augsut 3, 2018, from
https://tinyurl.com/y5ykdqrl
Cancer Research UK. (2014a). Anal cancer mortality. Retrieved April 22, 2018,
from Anal cancer statistics: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/healthprofessional/cancer-statistics/statistics-by-cancer-type/anal-cancer#heading-One
Cancer Research UK. (2014b). Lung cancer incidence over time. Retrieved from
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics/statisticsby-cancer-type/lung-cancer/incidence#heading-Two
Cancer Research UK. (2014c). Lung Cancer (C33-C34), European AgeStandardised Mortality Rates, UK, 1971-2014. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from
Lung cancer mortality trends over time: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/healthprofessional/cancer-statistics/statistics-by-cancer-type/lungcancer/mortality#heading-Two
Cancer Research UK. (2014d). Lung Cancer (C33-C34), European AgeStandardised Incidence Rates, UK, 1993-2015. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from
Lung cancer incidence trends over time: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/healthprofessional/cancer-statistics/statistics-by-cancer-type/lungcancer/incidence#heading-Seven
Cancer Research UK. (2015). Prostate cancer statistics. Retrieved from
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics/statisticsby-cancer-type/prostate-cancer#heading-Zero
Cancer Research UK. (2016a, September 2). HPV and Cancer. Retrieved April 22,
2018, from http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/causes-ofcancer/infections-hpv-and-cancer/hpv-and-cancer
Cannold, L. (2008, December 1). Who's the Father? Retrieved December 18, 2018,
from http://www.ethics.org.au/on-ethics/blog/february-2008/who's-the-father
Cantor. (1995). Marital Breakdown, Parenthood, and Suicide. Journal of Family
Studies, 1(2), 91-102. doi: https://doi.org/10.5172/jfs.1.2.91
Carlin, E. (2016, June 13). HPV vaccination for adolescent boys. Retrieved April
22, 2018, from The HPV and Anal Cancer Foundation:
https://www.analcancerfoundation.org/press/the-times-hpv-vaccination-foradolescent-boys/
Carvel. (2005, April 22). Women 'will own 60% of UK's wealth within two
decades'. The Guardian. Retrieved March 21, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2005/apr/22/money.genderissues
Casalicchio, E. (2018, April 4). Theresa May decries 'burning injustice' of gender
pay gap as deadline to reveal figures looms. Retrieved June 19, 2018, from
https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/socialaffairs/discrimination/news/94109/theresa-may-decries-burning-injustice-genderpay
Ceci et al. (2014). Women in Academic Science: A Changing Landscape.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 15(3), 75-141. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/152910061454123
Centers for Disease Control. (2012, September 14). Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report (MMWR): Surveillance for Violent Deaths — National Violent
Death Reporting System, 16 States, 2009. Retrieved February 8, 2019, from
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6106a1.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Recommendations for
Providers Counseling Male Patients and Parents Regarding Male Circumcision and
the Prevention of HIV Infection, STIs, and other Health Outcomes . Retrieved
from https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=CDC-2014-0012-0003
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). HIV Surveillance Report:
Statistics Overview. Retrieved August 6, 2018, from
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/overview/index.html
Centre for Social Justice. (2013, June). Fractured Families: Why Stability Matters.
Retrieved July 4, 2018, from http://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/core/wpcontent/uploads/2016/08/CSJ_Fractured_Families_Report_WEB_13.06.13.pdf
Centres for Disease Control & Prevention. (2017, March 17). Marriage &
Divorce. Retrieved December 17, 2018, from
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/marriage-divorce.htm
Cero et al. (2015, June 11). Perceived burdensomeness, thwarted belongingness,
and suicide ideation: Re-examination of the Interpersonal-Psychological Theory in
two samples. Psychiatry Research, 228(3), 544-550. doi:
0.1016/j.psychres.2015.05.055
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0165178115003431?
via%3Dihub
CHAIN. (2018, March). CHAIN Annual Report Greater London April 2017 to
March 2018. Retrieved 1 1, 2019, from https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/chainreports
Chang et al. (2003). Harsh parenting in relation to child emotion regulation and
aggression. Journal of Family Psychology, 17, 598-606. Retrieved October 29,
2018, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2754179/
Chapman, B. (2018, April 5). Gender pay gap: 78% of large UK companies and
public sector bodies pay men more than women, figures reveal. Retrieved June 19,
2018, from The Independent:
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/gender-pay-gap-deadlinelatest-reporting-uk-companies-pay-men-more-than-women-a8289606.html
Chaturvedi et al. (2011, Nov 10). Human papillomavirus and rising oropharyngeal
cancer incidence in the United States. J Clin Oncol, 29(32), 4294-301. Retrieved
April 22, 2018, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21969503
Child Maintenance Service. (2018). Disagreements about parentage. Retrieved
December 18, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/child-maintenance/disagreementsabout-parentage
Child Support Agency. (2005, August 16). letter to Barry Pearson. Retrieved
December 18, 2018, from Child Support Analysis:
http://www.childsupportanalysis.co.uk/guest_contributions/csa_paternity_1.htm
Children's Bureau. (2018, February 1). Retrieved September 7, 2018, from
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/report/child-maltreatment-2016
Chinegwundoh, F. (2018, April 10). Prostate cancer: Four in 10 cases diagnosed
late, charity says. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-43669439
Christina Hoff Sommers. (1994). Who Stole Feminism?: How Women Have
Betrayed Women. Simon & Schuster. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y49vbwec
Circinfo. (2013, January). Incidence and prevalence of circumcision in Australia.
Retrieved August 3, 2018, from https://www.circinfo.org/statistics.html
Circinfo.org. (2014). Phimosis and paraphimosis. Retrieved August 5, 2018, from
Curcinfo.org: https://www.circinfo.org/phimosis.html
Circumcision News. (2010, May 8). Fatally flawed: Bollinger's circumcision death
calculations. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
http://circumcisionnews.blogspot.com/2010/05/fatally-flawed-bollingerscircumcision.html
Circumcision Reference Library. (2012, January 14). United States Circumcision
Incidence. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
http://www.cirp.org/library/statistics/USA/
Circumcision Resource Centre. (2018). Circumcision Resource Centre. Retrieved
from http://circumcision.org/studies-on-circumcision/
CIRP. (2006, August 8). United Kingdom: Incidence of Male Circumcision.
Retrieved August 3, 2018, from http://www.cirp.org/library/statistics/UK/
CIRP. (2013, February 22). Complications of circumcision. Retrieved August 2,
2013, from CIRP: http://www.cirp.org/library/complications/
CIRP. (2016, March 21). Circumcision: Medical Organization Official Policy
Statements. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
http://www.cirp.org/library/statements/
Clark. (2008, June 4). Top university is first in Britain to make students sit
entrance exams - because A levels are 'worthless'. Retrieved February 24, 2019,
from https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1023992/Top-university-Britainmake-students-sit-entrance-exams--A-levels-worthless.html
Clarke-Stewart. (2007). Divorce: Causes and Consequences. Yale University
Press.
Cleary. (2012). Suicidal action, emotional expression, and the performance of
masculinities. Social Science & Medicine, 74, 498-505.
https://xyonline.net/sites/xyonline.net/files/Cleary%2C%20Suicidal%20action%2C
%20emotional%20expression%2C%20and%20the%20performance%20of%20mas
culinities%202012.pdf
Clements et al. (2013, May 17). Female-perpetrated sexual abuse: a review of
victim and professional perspectives. Journal of Sexual Aggression, 20(2), 197-215.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/13552600.2013.798690
Clinton. (1998, November 17). Hillary Clinton and the Victims of War. Retrieved
from https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/hillary-clinton-victims-of-war/
Cobley. (2018). The Tribe: The Liberal Left and the System of Diversity. Societas.
Cold and Taylor. (1999). The prepuce. British Journal of Urology, 83(1), 34-44.
Retrieved July 27, 2017, from
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1046/j.1464-410x.1999.0830s1034.x
Collins, N. (2013, Feb 12). Boys do worse at school due to stereotypes. Retrieved
May 3, 2018, from The Telegraph:
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/9862473/Boys-worse-atschool-due-to-stereotypes.html
Collins, W. (2015a, September 18). Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict. Retrieved April 11, 2019, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap:
http://empathygap.uk/?p=604
Collins, W. (2015b, February 10). Feminisation and Decline of Physics A Level.
Retrieved February 24, 2019, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap:
http://empathygap.uk/?p=379
Collins, W. (2016, May 17). The EHRC. Retrieved April 14, 2018, from The
Illustrated Empathy Gap: http://empathygap.uk/?p=906
Collins, W. (2017a, November 17). Gender Pay Gap. Retrieved June 29, 2018,
from http://empathygap.uk/?p=2010
Collins, W. (2017b, December 22). Rape – Part 1 (Statistics). Retrieved March 5,
2019, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap: http://empathygap.uk/?p=2073
Collins, W. (2017c, November). Women sexual offending against minors in the UK:
39 case studies, 2010 to 2017. Retrieved from EmpathyGap.uk
http://empathygap.uk/?p=1993
Collins, W. (2017f, March 25). MGM: Claimed Medical Benefits – Part 1.
Retrieved August 5, 2018, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap:
http://empathygap.uk/?p=1604
Collins, W. (2017g, April 12). MGM: Claimed Medical Benefits – Part 2. Retrieved
August 8, 2018, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap: http://empathygap.uk/?
p=1655#_Toc479773952
Collins, W. (2018a, October 24). Sex Bias in Criminal Justice. Retrieved from The
Illustrated Empathy Gap: http://empathygap.uk/?p=2561
Collins, W. (2018b, January 28). Rape – Part 2 (Case Histories of False
Allegations). Retrieved March 5, 2019, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap:
http://empathygap.uk/?p=2176
Collins, W. (2018c, February 12). Rape – Part 3 (Politicians). Retrieved March 5,
2019, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap: http://empathygap.uk/?p=2232
Collins, W. (2018d, February 28). Rape – Part 4 (Celebrities). Retrieved March 5,
2019, from The Illustrated Empathy Gap: http://empathygap.uk/?p=2274
Collins, W. (2018e, February 6). Teachers' Bias in Key Stage 2 SATS. Retrieved
from http://empathygap.uk/?p=2206
Complete Man. (2018, July 27). Circumstitions. Retrieved from
http://www.circumstitions.com/completeman/sidegif.gif
ComRes. (2015, August). BBC Woman's Hour – Household Chores Survey.
Retrieved June 27, 2018, from http://www.comresglobal.com/wpcontent/uploads/2015/04/BBC_Womans_Hour_Housework_Survey_October_2014.
pdf
Condi et al. (1987, October). Parameters of sexual contact of boys with women.
Archives of Sexual Behaviour, 16(5), 379-394. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF0154142
Connolly, K. (2012, June 27). Circumcision ruling condemned by Germany's Muslim
and Jewish leaders. Retrieved August 8, 2018, from
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/27/circumcision-ruling-germanymuslim-jewish
Cook and Hodo. (2013). When Women Sexually Abuse Men. Praeger, Santa
Barbara, California.
Coppola, F. (2016, July 31). The WASPI campaign's unreasonable demand.
Retrieved March 28, 2019, from http://www.coppolacomment.com/2016/07/thewaspi-campaigns-unreasonable-demand.html
Corcoran. (2010, August). Suicide and marital status in Northern Ireland. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 45(8), 795-800. Retrieved February 8,
2019, from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00127-009-0120-7
Cornwell et al. (2013). Noncognitive Skills and the Gender Disparities in Test
Scores and Teacher Assessments: Evidence from Primary School. The Journal of
Human Resources, 48, 236-264. Retrieved May 3, 2018, from
http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/48/1/236.abstract
Corston. (2016, August 14). Philip Davies' claim that courts favour women 'not
backed by evidence'. Retrieved April 1, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/philip-davies-claim-courtsfavour-women-no-evidence-jean-corston
Corston, B. J. (2007). The Corston Report. Retrieved April 15, 2018, from
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130206102659/http://www.justice.gov
.uk/publications/docs/corston-report-march-2007.pdf
Council of Europe. (2011). The Istanbul Convention: Action against violence
against women and domestic violence. Retrieved March 31, 2019, from
https://www.coe.int/en/web/istanbul-convention/
CPS. (2016). Violence against Women and Girls Report. Retrieved March 2, 2019,
from
https://www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/publications/cps_vawg_report
_2016.pdf
CPS. (2017a). Rape and Sexual Offences - Chapter 3: Consent. Retrieved March
7, 2019, from https://www.cps.gov.uk/legal-guidance/rape-and-sexual-offenceschapter-3-consent
CPS. (2017b). Violence against Women and Girls Report. Retrieved March 2,
2019, from https://www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/publications/cpsvawg-report-2017_0.pdf
CPS. (2018a). Violence against Women and Girls Report. Retrieved March 2,
2019, from https://www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/publications/cpsvawg-report-2018.pdf
CPS. (2018b, June). Rape and Serious Sexual Offence Prosecutions: Assessment
of disclosure of unused material ahead of trial. Retrieved March 6, 2019, from
https://www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/publications/RASSOprosecutions-Assessment-disclosure-unused-material-ahead-trial_0.pdf
CPS Equality and Diversity Unit. (2013, March). Charging Perverting the Course
of Justice and Wasting Police Time in Cases Involving Allegedly False Rape and
Domestic Violence Allegations. Retrieved March 5, 2019, from
https://www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/publications/perverting_cours
e_of_justice_march_2013.pdf
Craig, A. (2016, April 13). Circumcision does not reduce penile sensitivity, research
finds. Queen's gazette. Retrieved July 28, 2018, from
https://www.queensu.ca/gazette/stories/circumcision-does-not-reduce-penilesensitivity-research-finds
Craig, M. (2004, February). Perinatal risk factors for neonaticide and infant
homicide: can we identify those at risk? JRSM Journal of the Royal Society of
Medicine, 97(2), 57-61. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1079289/
Craissati et al. (2002, July 1). Characteristics of Perpetrators of Child Sexual
Abuse Who Have Been Sexually Victimized as Children. Sexual Abuse, 14(3), 225-
239. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/107906320201400303
Crown Prosecution Service. (2014). Statistics Regarding Offences and Convictions
of Infanticide; Freedom of Information Act 2000 Requests, Disclosure Ref:
13/2014.
Crown Prosecution Service. (2018, September). Violence Against Women and Girls
2017-18. Retrieved October 8, 2018, from
https://www.cps.gov.uk/publication/violence-against-women-and-girls
Culhane, A. (2018, February 2). Prostate cancer deaths overtake those from
breast cancer. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health42890405
Curnock Cook, M. (2015, December). Universities and Colleges Admissions
Service. Retrieved April 17, 2018, from End of Cyce report 2015:
https://www.ucas.com/sites/default/files/eoc-report-2015-v2.pdf
Curtis et al. (2008, December). Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in New
York City, Volume One: The CSEC Population in New York City: Size,
Characteristics, and Needs. Retrieved April 9, 2019, from
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/225083.pdf
Cutright. (2005, September). Marital status integration, psychological well-being,
and suicide acceptability as predictors of marital status differentials in suicide
rates. Social Science Research, 34(3), 570-590. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2004.05.002
Cylus et al. (2011, January 1). Pronounced Gender And Age Differences Are
Evident In Personal Health Care Spending Per Person. Health Affairs, 30(1). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0216
Darby. (2005). A Surgical Temptation: The Demonization Of The Foreskin And
The Rise Of Circumcision In Britain. University of Chicago Press.
Dave et al. (2003, December). Male circumcision in Britain: findings from a
national probability sample survey. Sex Transm Infect., 79(6), 499-500.
doi:10.1136/sti.79.6.499 https://sti.bmj.com/content/79/6/499
Davies, S. (2015, December). Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer 2014.
Retrieved April 14, 2018, from Department of Health:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/595439/CMO_annual_report_2014.pdf
Davis. (2010). Domestic violence-related deaths. Journal of Aggression, Conflict
and Peace Research, 2(2), 44-52. doi:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.5042/jacpr.2010.0141/full/html
Davis and Weller. (1999, December). The Effectiveness of Condoms in Reducing
Heterosexual Transmission of HIV. Family Planning Perspectives, 31(6), 272-279.
Retrieved August 6, 2018, from https://www.jstor.org/stable/2991537?
seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents
Debowska et al. (2015, April). Victim, perpetrator, and offense characteristics in
filicide and filicide–suicide. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 21, 113-124. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2015.01.011
Deering and Mellor. (2009, October 14). Sentencing of Male and Female Child Sex
Offenders: Australian Study. Psychiatry, Psychology and Law , 16(3), 394-412. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/13218710902930291
Dej, E. (2018). When a Man's Home Isn't a Castle: Hegemonic Masculinity Among
Men Experiencing Homelessness and Mental Illness. In J. M. Dej, Containing
Madness (pp. 215-239). Springer. Retrieved January 18, 2018, from
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-89749-3_10
Demurtas. (2018, April 26). Ban On Circumcision In Iceland To Be Dismissed In
Parliament. The Reykjavik Grapevine. Retrieved March 14, 2019, from
https://grapevine.is/news/2018/04/26/ban-on-circumcision-to-be-dismissed-inparliament/
Dench. (1996). Transforming Men. Transaction Publishers. Retrieved from
https://tinyurl.com/y37tdwp4
Dench, G. (2010). What Women Want: Evidence from British Social Attitudes.
London: Hera Trust.
Denney. (2009, October 14). Adult Suicide Mortality in the United States: Marital
Status, Family Size, Socioeconomic Status, and Differences by Sex. Social Science
Quarterly, 90(5), 1167-1185. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6237.2009.00652.x
Dennis and Erdos. (1992, 3rd ed 2000). Families Without Fatherhood. Retrieved
October 28, 2018, from Civitas: http://www.civitas.org.uk/pdf/cs03.pdf
Denniston. (2017, June 25). Doctors Opposing Circumcision. Retrieved March 15,
2019, from http://neonatalcutting.org/2017/06/25/doctors-opposing-circumcision/
Denov. (2004, October 1). The Long-Term Effects of Child Sexual Abuse by
Female Perpetrators: A Qualitative Study of Male and Female Victims. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence, 19(10), 1137-1156. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260504269093
Department for Communities. (2018, December 4). Northern Ireland Housing
Statistics 2017-18. Retrieved 1 1, 2019, from https://www.communitiesni.gov.uk/publications/northern-ireland-housing-statistics-2017-18
Department for Education. (2013, April 30). School Workforce in England:
November 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2018, from Department for Education:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/223587/SFR15_2013_Text_withPTR.pdf
Department for Education. (2016, March). Education Excellence Everywhere.
Retrieved April 17, 2018, from Department for Education:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/508447/Educational_Excellence_Everywhere.pdf
Department for Education. (2019, January 24). Apprenticeship demographic and
sector subject area PivotTable tool: starts and achievements 2014 to 2015 to Q1
2018 to 2019. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-datasets/fe-data-library-apprenticeships
Department for Education and Skills. (2007). Department for Education and Skills.
Retrieved April 17, 2018, from Gender and education: the evidence on pupils in
England:
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090108131527/http://www.dcsf.gov.u
k/research/data/uploadfiles/RTP01-07.pdf
Department of Health. (2008, February 4). Good Practice Guide on Paternity
Testing Services. Retrieved December 18, 2018, from
https://www.wales.nhs.uk/documents/DH_082624.pdf
Department of Health. (2012). Invitation to Tender, Research Initiative to Support
the Implementation of the National Suicide Prevention Strategy. Department of
Health Policy Research Programme.
Department of Health and Social Care. (2018, December 11). Abortion Statistics,
England and Wales: 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/763174/2017-abortion-statistics-for-england-and-wales-revised.pdf
Devlin, K. (2010, February 17). Medical school selection tests 'favour white,
middle-class boys'. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/7251676/Medical-school-selectiontests-favour-white-middle-class-boys.html
Diamond, Morris and Barnes. (2012, March). Individual and group IQ predict
inmate violence. Intelligence, 40(2), 115-122. Retrieved April 2, 2019, from
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2012.01.010
Dickens, C. (1843). A Christmas Carol. Chapman & Hall.
Dictionary.com. (2018, July 27). Dictionary.com. Retrieved from
https://www.dictionary.com/browse/mutilation
Dieleman et al. (2016, December 27). US Spending on Personal Health Care and
Public Health, 1996 - 2013. JAMA, 316(24), 2627-2646.
doi:10.1001/jama.2016.16885
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2594716
Diver. (2018, February 1). Oxford University extends exam times for women's
benefit. The Telegraph. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2018/02/01/oxford-university-extendsexam-times-womens-benefit/
Dolan. (2014, May 23). Investigating Conflict-Related Sexual Violence against
Men in Africa. Retrieved January 20, 2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=7ADpH7VkbbY
Dolan. (2014, May 23). Investigating Conflict-Related Sexual Violence against
Men in Africa (video). Retrieved April 11, 2019, from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ADpH7VkbbY
Donna Laframboise. (1996). The Princess at the Window: A new gender morality.
Penguin Books. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/yxohz6zu
Donnelly, L. (2014, December 16). Jeremy Hunt: Women make better leaders.
Retrieved May 9, 2018, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/11297302/Jeremy-Hunt-Women-makebetter-leaders.html
Doward, J. (2012, November 4). Men risk health by failing to seek NHS help,
survey finds. Retrieved April 30, 2018, from The Observer:
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/nov/04/men-failing-seek-nhs-help
Draper, H. (2007, August). Paternity fraud and compensation for misattributed
paternity. Journal of Medical Ethics, 33(8), 475-480. doi:10.1136/jme.2005.013268
https://jme.bmj.com/content/33/8/475
Dube and Harish. (2017, April). Queens. The National Bureau of Economic
Research. Retrieved January 20, 2019, from https://www.nber.org/papers/w23337
Dube et al. (2005, June). Long-term consequences of childhood sexual abuse by
gender of victim. Am J Prev Med. , 28(5), 430-8. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15894146
Duncker, R. (2017, September 21). Not drowning, paddling: The English Court's
slow row to genital autonomy. Retrieved March 13, 2019, from Men Do Complain:
https://www.mendocomplain.com/2017/09/21/not-drowning-paddling-the-englishcourts-slow-row-to-genital-autonomy/
Duterte, B. (2018). Mogen clamp circumcision video. Retrieved August 2, 2018,
from Stanford medicine: http://med.stanford.edu/newborns/professionaleducation/circumcision/mogen-clamp-technique.html
Dutta, K. (2015, June 2). Men are treated fairly when trying to get access to their
children in courts, study says. Retrieved October 11, 2018, from Independent:
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/men-are-treated-fairly-whentrying-to-get-access-to-their-children-in-courts-study-says-10290458.html
Dutton and Corvo. (2006). Transforming a flawed policy: A call to revive
psychology and science in domestic violence research and practice. Aggression and
Violent Behaviour, 11, 457-483. Retrieved from
http://www.mediaradar.org/docs/Dutton_Corvo-Transforming-flawed-policy.pdf
DVIP Accounts. (2007, March 31). Home Office Select Committee. Retrieved
October 6, 2018, from https://tinyurl.com/y67n6epx
Earp. (2012, May 22). A fatal irony: Why the "circumcision solution" to the AIDS
epidemic in Africa may increase transmission of HIV. Practical Ethics. Retrieved
August 7, 2018, from http://blog.practicalethics.ox.ac.uk/2012/05/when-badscience-kills-or-how-to-spread-aids/
Earp. (2016, July/August). Infant circumcision and adult penile sensitivity:
implications for sexual experience. Trends in Urology and Men's Health, pp. 17-21.
Retrieved July 28, 2018, from
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/tre.531
Earp. (2018a, November 17). Healthcare and Secularism: Gender or genital
autonomy? (Video). Speech at the National Secular Society. Retrieved March 14,
2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I1H2IO8PUNM&feature=youtu.be
Earp. (2018b, November 21). Did a US judge just make FGM legal? An explainer
(video). Retrieved March 14, 2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qc2-
NB9nWt0
Earp et al. (2018c, August 1). Factors Associated with Early Deaths Following
Neonatal Male Circumcision in the United States, 20012010. Clinical Pediatrics,
57(13), 1532-1540. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/0009922818790060
Earp, Sardi and Jellison. (2018). False beliefs predict increased circumcision
satisfaction in a sample of US American men. Culture, Health & Sexuality, 20(8),
945-959. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2017.1400104
Edelson and Joa. (2010, October 9). Differences in Legal Outcomes for Male and
Female Children Who Have Been Sexually Abused. Sexual Abuse, 22(4), 427-442.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/1079063210375973
Edsall, T. (2019, January 17). The Fight Over Men Is Shaping Our Political Future.
The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2019, from
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/17/opinion/apa-guidelines-men-boys.html
EGGSI coordinating team. (2009, October). Access to Healthcare and Long-Term
Care: Equal for Men and Women? Retrieved April 29, 2018, from
http://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=5590&langId=en
Ehlin. (2018, February 16). Risk Factors of Sexual Assault and Victimization
Among Youth in Custody. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 1-24. Retrieved April
11, 2019, from https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260518757226
Ellen. (2009, November 29). This shameful liaison does not deserve prison. The
Guardian. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/nov/29/barbara-ellenmadeleine-martin-comment
Elliott. (1993). Female Sexual Abuse of Children: The Ultimate Taboo. Longman.
Retrieved from http://tinyurl.com/y6h5jbov
Ellis and Walsh. (2003). Crime, delinquency and intelligence: A review of the
worldwide literature. In H. (ed), The scientific study of general intelligence:
Tribute to Arthur R. Jensen (pp. 343-366). Pegamon Press, NY.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080437934500544
Ellis et al. (2003, May 16). Does Father Absence Place Daughters at Special Risk
for Early Sexual Activity and Teenage Pregnancy? Child Development, 74(3), 801-
821. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.00569
Embry and Lyons. (2012, March 19). Sex-Based Sentencing: Sentencing
Discrepancies Between Male and Female Sex Offenders. Feminist Criminology,
7(2). doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/1557085111430214
Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2018, June). British Railways. Retrieved from
https://www.britannica.com/topic/British-Railways
Engelhart. (2018, December 15). Men's rights activists are attacking women's
scholarships and programs. The DOE is listening. Retrieved February 24, 2019,
from NBC News: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/men-s-rights-activistsare-attacking-women-s-scholarships-programs-n947886
Equality and Human Rights Commission. (2018). Equality and Human Rights
Commission. Retrieved April 14, 2018, from
https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en
Evans, Scourfield and Moore. (2016, December 1). Gender, Relationship
Breakdown, and Suicide Risk: A Review of Research in Western Countries.
Journal of Family Issues, 37(16), 2239-2264. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0192513X14562608
Family Law Week. (2014, February 5). Shared parenting amendment puts child
welfare before presumption of equal access. Retrieved November 14, 2018, from
https://www.familylawweek.co.uk/site.aspx?i=ed127361
Fatherhood Institute. (2013, May 22). Fatherhood Institute research summary:
Fathers' impact on their children's learning and achievement. Retrieved October
29, 2018, from The Fatherhood Institute:
http://www.fatherhoodinstitute.org/2013/fatherhood-institute-research-summaryfathers-and-their-childrens-education/
Fekete. (2005, April 1). Gender Differences in Suicide Attempters in Hungary:
Retrospective Epidemiological Study. Croatian Medical Journal, 46(2), 288-293.
Retrieved February 8, 2019, from https://europepmc.org/abstract/med/15849852
Fenton. (2016, April 28). UK prison system 'in total meltdown' as sexual assaults
and violent crimes soar in jails. Independent. Retrieved April 11, 2019, from
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/prison-system-in-totalmeltdown-as-sexual-assaults-and-violent-crimes-soar-in-jails-a7004926.html
Fernquist. (2003). Does the Level of Divorce or Religiosity Make a Difference?
Cross-National Suicide Rates in 21 Developed Countries, 1955-1994. Archives of
Suicide Research, 7, 265-277. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/13811110301554
Fiebert. (2012, June). References Examining Assaults by Women on Their Spouses
or Male Partners. Retrieved September 6, 2018, from Department of Psychology
California State University, Long Beach:
http://web.csulb.edu/~mfiebert/assault.htm
Fiebert, M. (1997). Sexuality and Culture, 1, 273-286.
Fiebert, M. (2004). Sexuality and Culture, 8(3-4), 140-177.
Fiebert, M. (2010). Sexuality and Culture, 14(1), 49-91.
Finer et al. (2005). Reasons U.S. Women Have Abortions: Quantitative and
Qualitative Perspectives. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 37(3),
110-118. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://www.guttmacher.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/journals/3711005.pdf
Fink, Carson and DeVellis. (2002, May). Adult Circumcision Outcomes Study:
Effect on Erectile Function, Penile Sensitivity, Sexual Activity and Satisfaction.
The Journal or Urology, 167(5), 2113-2116. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-
5347(05)65098-7
Fisher, A. (2016, December 31). Tribal circumcision ritual becomes Africa's latest
tourist attraction. Retrieved June 27, 2018, from
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-31/tribal-circumcision-becomes-africaslatest-tourist-attraction/8154314
Fisher, R. (1930). The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Clarendon Press.
Flood, M. (2004). Backlash: angry men's movements. In S. E. Rossi, The battle and
backlash rage on: why feminism cannot be obsolete (pp. 261–278). Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. Retrieved 5 18, 2018, from
http://xyonline.net/sites/xyonline.net/files/Flood%2C%20Backlash%20-
%20Angry%20men_1.pdf
Flouri. (2005). Fathering & Child Outcomes. John Wiley & Sons. Retrieved from
https://tinyurl.com/y6euphps
Flouri and Buchanan. (2004, June). Early father's and mother's involvement and
child's later educational outcomes. British Journal of Educational Psychology,
74(2), 141-153. doi: https://doi.org/10.1348/000709904773839806
Fogg, A. (2012, December 17). Male circumcision: Let there be no more tragedies
like baby Goodluck. Retrieved August 2, 2018, from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/17/male-circumcision-babygoodluck
Ford, R. (2018, June 27). Two new prisons get go-ahead at Glen Parva and
Wellingborough as 'more brutal' sentences on way. Retrieved July 3, 2018, from
The Times: https://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/two-new-prisons-get-goahead-at-glen-parva-and-wellingborough-as-more-brutal-sentences-on-way72r6x79ms
Fox. (2007, December 4). Circumcision does not affect HIV in US men: study.
Retrieved March 15, 2019, from Reuters: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-aidscircumcision/circumcision-does-not-affect-hiv-in-u-s-men-studyidUSN0345545120071204
Fox. (2018, May 15). University Superannuation Scheme- What has happened?
Retrieved March 25, 2019, from NW Brwon Group:
https://www.nwbrown.co.uk/news/2018/may/15/university-superannuation-schemewhat-has-happened/
Friedan, B. (1963). The Feminine Mystique. W.W.Norton.
Frisch. (2012, December 6). Circumcision and Sexual Function Difficulties.
Retrieved March 15, 2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yfGkZZKzpU
Frisch et al. (2013, March). Cultural Bias in the AAP's 2012 Technical Report and
Policy Statement on Male Circumcision. American Academy of Pediatrics, 796-
800. Retrieved August 7, 2018, from
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/early/2013/03/12/peds.2012-2896
Frisch, Lindholm and Grønbæk . (2011, October 1). Male circumcision and sexual
function in men and women: a survey-based, cross-sectional study in Denmark.
International Journal of Epidemiology, 40(5), 1367-1381. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyr104
Full Fact. (2012, October). Were a quarter of prisoners in care as children?
Retrieved October 30, 2018, from https://fullfact.org/crime/were-quarterprisoners-care-children/
Full Fact. (2015, August 15). A-levels: from grade inflation to reforms. Retrieved
February 24, 2019, from https://fullfact.org/education/-levels-grade-inflationreforms/
Furman et al. (2014, January 14). Systems analysis of sex differences reveals an
immunosuppressive role for testosterone in the response to influenza vaccination.
111(2), 869-874. Retrieved April 14, 2018, from
http://www.pnas.org/content/111/2/869
Gairdner, D. (1949). The fate of the foreskin: A study of circumcision. British
Medical Journal, 1433-1437. http://www.cirp.org/library/general/gairdner/
Galdas et al. (2005, February 28). Men and health help-seeking behaviour:
literature review. Journal of Advanced, 49(6), 616-623. Retrieved April 30, 2018,
from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2004.03331.x
Geater and Jones. (2010, June 20). Support for Suffolk MP who 'fell in front of
train'. East Anglian Daily Times. Retrieved from
https://www.eadt.co.uk/news/support-for-suffolk-mp-who-fell-in-front-of-train-1-
464800
George, M. (2002, March 1). Skimmington Revisited. The Journal of Men's
Studies, 10(2), 111-127. doi: https://doi.org/10.3149/jms.1002.111
Gibb. (2017, November 22). Teacher 'lost two jobs over rape acquittal'. The
Times. Retrieved March 9, 2019, from https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/teacherlost-two-jobs-over-rape-acquittal-v3m038655
Gibb. (2018, November 14). We shouldn't be trawling rape victims' phones, says
law chief. The Times. Retrieved March 6, 2019, from
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/we-shouldn-t-be-trawling-rape-victimsphones-says-law-chief-dqkc5gv8c
Gibb, F. (2015, June 2). Anti father court bias 'is a myth'. Retrieved October 11,
2015, from The Times: https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/anti-father-court-biasis-a-myth-52j30pqmrk7
Gibbons, F. (2001, August 14). Lay off men, Lessing tells feminists. Retrieved May
3, 2018, from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/aug/14/edinburghfestival2001.edinburghboo
kfestival2001
Gibbs. (2007). Identifying Work as a Barrier to Men's Access to Chronic Illness
(Arthritis) Self-Management Programs. International Journal of Men's Health,
6(2), 143-155. Retrieved April 30, 2018, from
https://search.proquest.com/openview/62ab8c2eea2334ebd57d983cfc191924/1?pqorigsite=gscholar&cbl=25645
Gilding. (2005, January). Rampant misattributed paternity: the creation of an
urban myth. People and Place, 13(2). Retrieved December 17, 2018, from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/241128460_Rampant_misattributed_pat
ernity_The_creation_of_an_urban_myth
Gilding. (2007). Using Sex Surveys to Calculate the Extent of Paternal
Discrepancy. Retrieved December 17, 2018, from https://tinyurl.com/yxkvtspc
Giolla and Kajonius. (2018, September 11). Sex differences in personality are
larger in gender equal countries: Replicating and extending a surprising finding.
International Journal of Psychology. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/ijop.12529
girlpowermarketing. (2018). Statistics on the purchasing power of women.
Retrieved March 21, 2019, from https://girlpowermarketing.com/statisticspurchasing-power-women/
Glasser et al. (2001, December). Cycle of child sexual abuse: Links between being
a victim and becoming a perpetrator. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 179(6),
482-494. doi: https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.179.6.482
Glick. (2005). Marked in Your Flesh: Circumcision form Ancient Judea to Modern
America. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Gloucestershire Health and Wellbeing Board. (2018). Adverse Childhood
Experiences (ACEs): Considering an 'ACEs Informed Approach' for
Gloucestershire. Retrieved October 20, 2018, from https://tinyurl.com/y3xp2j8o
Gomella. (2017, October). Where have all the sperm gone? Canadian Journal of
Urology, 24(5), 8972. Retrieved December 22, 2018, from
https://www.canjurol.com/html/freearticles/V24I5_03_Free_Editorial_October17.pdf
Gorman. (2015, April 7). Women now control more than half of US personal
wealth, which 'will only increase in years to come'. Business Insider. Retrieved
March 21, 2019, from https://www.businessinsider.com/women-now-control-morethan-half-of-us-personal-wealth-2015-4?r=US&IR=T
Gotts. (2017, February 13). Women Consumer Power. GenAnalytics. Retrieved
March 21, 2019, from http://www.genanalytics.co.uk/knowledge/women-consumerpower/
Graham. (2018, July 21). Sex offence fantasists and their police enablers (video).
ICMI18. Retrieved April 6, 2019, from http://tinyurl.com/yxc3qqqk
Graham, M. (2018, January 24). Disclosure Failures in Criminal Trials. Retrieved
March 6, 2019, from https://www.mowbraywoodwards.co.uk/mowbray-life/thesource/insight/disclosure-failures-in-criminal-trials
Gray et al. (2007, March 2). Male circumcision for HIV prevention in men in
Rakai, Uganda: a randomised trial. 369(9562), 657-666. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60313-4
Gray et al. (2012, March 13). The effectiveness of male circumcision for HIV
prevention and effects on risk behaviors in a post-trial follow up study in Rakai,
Uganda. AIDS, 26(5), 609-615. doi:10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283504a3f
https://journals.lww.com/aidsonline/Fulltext/2012/03130/The_effectiveness_of_mal
e_circumcision_for_HIV.10.aspx
Green and Halliday. (2017, June). Learning from Cafcass submissions to Serious
Case Reviews. Retrieved from CAFCASS: https://www.cafcass.gov.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2017/12/cafcass_learning_from_scr_submissions_-_2017_-
_external_version.pdf
Green, C. (2017, December 17). Lawyer Nick Freeman calls for public register to
name people who make false rape allegations. Manchester Evening News.
Retrieved March 6, 2019, from
https://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchesternews/lawyer-nick-freeman-calls-public-14050329
Greer. (2000). The Truth behind Legal Dominance Feminism's Two Percent False
Rape Claim Figure. Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review, 33(947), 947-972.
Gregory Boyle. (2014, September 1). Renowned Psychologist Condemns Child
Circumcision. Retrieved March 15, 2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?
list=UU_YdPMhQXYAJWva_34GAODQ&v=FNgerSYsHEw&feature=player_em
bedded
Groth. (1979). Sexual Trauma in the Life Histories of Rapists and Child Molesters.
Victimology, 4(1), 10-16. Retrieved from
https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/publications/Abstract.aspx?id=72986
Guido Schmiemann et al. (2010, May). The Diagnosis of Urinary Tract Infection.
Deutsches Arzteblatt International, 107(21), 361-367. Retrieved August 5, 2018,
from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2883276/
Gulland, A. (2016, June 16). Boys should receive HPV vaccination, doctors urge
government. British Medical Journal, 353, 3372. Retrieved April22 2018, from
https://www.bmj.com/content/353/bmj.i3372.full
Gunnell. (2003, August). Why are suicide rates rising in young men but falling in
the elderly?—a time-series analysis of trends in England and Wales 1950–1998.
Social Science & Medicine, 57(4), 595-612. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0277-
9536(02)00408-2
Hakim. (2007, August 1). Who works harder? Retrieved June 27, 2018, from
Prospect: http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/whoworksharder
Hakim. (2011, January). Feminist Myths and Magic Medicine. Retrieved March 22,
2019, from Centre for Policy Studies:
https://www.cps.org.uk/files/reports/original/111026184004-
FeministMythsandMagicMedicine.pdf
Hakim, L. (2018). The not-so-accidental pregnancies. Essential Baby. Retrieved
from http://www.essentialbaby.com.au/pregnancy/news-views/the-notsoaccidentalpregnancies-20140715-3bz5e#ixzz5aJwYKxQq
Hale, B. (2005, December 5). Brenda Hale: 'The Sinners and the Sinned Against,
Women in the Criminal Justice System'. Retrieved July 3, 2018, from
https://www.longfordtrust.org/longford-lecture/past-lectures/lecturesarchive/brenda-hale-the-sinners-and-the-sinned-against-women-in-the-criminaljustice-system/
Hammond. (2012, September 21). Global Survey of Circumcision Harm. Retrieved
July 29, 2018, from http://circumcisionharm.org/report_GSCH 2012 09 21.pdf
Hammond and Carmack. (2017, February 21). Long-term adverse outcomes from
neonatal circumcision reported in a survey of 1,008 men: an overview of health and
human rights implications. The International Journal of Human Rights, 21(2), 189-
218. doi:10.1080/13642987.2016.1260007
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13642987.2016.1260007
Hammond, T. (2015, July 28). Global Survey of Circumcision Harm: Presentation
of Results. Men Do Complain. Retrieved July 29, 2018, from
https://www.mendocomplain.com/2015/07/28/2910/
Hango. (2007). Parental investment in childhood and educational qualifications:
Can greater parental involvement mediate the effects of socioeconomic
disadvantage? 36(4), 1371-1390. Retrieved October 29, 2018, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0049089X07000075
Hansard. (1853, April 6). Aggravated Assaults Bill. Retrieved from Hansard record
of House of Commons proceedings: https://api.parliament.uk/historichansard/commons/1853/apr/06/aggravated-assaults-bill
Hansard. (2016, September 15). Domestic Abuse Victims in Family Law Courts .
Retrieved from https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-09-
15/debates/34FB8AA3-6931-4A38-B1E2-
2D5AE13B1F84/DomesticAbuseVictimsInFamilyLawCourts
Hansard. (2018, November 21). Rape Myths and Juries. Retrieved from
http://tinyurl.com/y4altxgy
Hansard, House of Lords. (2013a, December 17). Children and Families Bill.
Retrieved from Hansard, column 1143-4:
https://hansard.parliament.uk/Lords/2013-12-
17/debates/13121759000785/ChildrenAndFamiliesBill
Hansard, House of Lords. (2013b, December 9). Children and Families Bill.
Retrieved April 18, 2019, from Hansard (column 593):
https://hansard.parliament.uk/Lords/2013-12-
09/debates/1312093000345/ChildrenAndFamiliesBill
Hanson and Slater. (1988, December). Sexual victimization in the history of sexual
abusers: A review. Annals of sex research, 1(4), 485-499. Retrieved April 8, 2019,
from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00854712
Harding and Newnham. (2015, June). How do County Courts Share the Care of
Children between Parents? Retrieved October 9, 2018, from
http://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/sites/default/files/files/Full%20report.pdf
Harley and Sutton. (2013, Sept/Oct). A Stereotype Threat Account of Boys'
Academic Underachievement. Child Development, 84(5), 1716-1733. Retrieved
May 3, 2018, from https://www.deepdyve.com/lp/wiley/a-stereotype-threataccount-of-boys-academic-underachievement-aZbbwh0u6c
Harman, Kruk and Hines. (2018, December). Parental Alienating Behaviors: An
Unacknowledged Form of Family Violence. Psychological Bulletin, American
Psychological Association, 144(12), 1275-1299. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/bul0000175
Harman, Leder-Elder and Biringen. (2016, June). Prevalence of parental alienation
drawn from a representative poll. Prevalence of parental alienation drawn from a
representative poll, 66, 62-66. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2016.04.021
Harretz. (2018, February 25). 500 Icelandic Physicians Back Bill to Outlaw
Circumcision. Retrieved March 14, 2019, from https://www.haaretz.com/worldnews/europe/500-icelandic-physicians-back-bill-to-outlaw-circumcision-1.5847630
Harrington and Bailey. (2005). Mental Health Needs and Effectiveness of
Provision for Young Offenders in Custody. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from Youth
Justice Board for England and Wales 2005:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237806818_Mental_Health_Needs_and_
Effectiveness_of_Provision_for_Young_Offenders_in_Custody
Hartley-Parkinson, R. (2017, December 15). Student Liam Allan cleared of rape
after police 'sat on evidence' casting doubt over case. Retrieved March 5, 2019,
from https://metro.co.uk/2017/12/15/student-liam-allan-cleared-rape-police-satevidence-casting-doubt-case-7161774/
Haux, McKay, and Cain. (2017, October). Shared Care after Separation in the UK:
Limited Data, Limited Practice? Family Court Review, 55(4), 572–585.
doi:10.1111/fcre.12305 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/fcre.12305
Hawkes et al. (2018, February). The Global Health 50/50 Report 2018. Retrieved
April 14, 2018, from https://globalhealth5050.org/wpcontent/uploads/2018/03/GH5050-Report-2018_Final.pdf
Health and Safety Executive. (2010). The burden of occupational cancer in Great
Britain. Retrieved June 20, 2018, from
http://www.hse.gov.uk/research/rrhtm/rr800.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2014, December 4). 2013-14 names and details of
fatalities. Retrieved June 27, 2018, from HSE:
http://www.hse.gov.uk/foi/fatalities/2013-14.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017a, November). Hand arm vibration in Great
Britain. Retrieved June 21, 2018, from
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/vibration/index.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017b, November). LFS - Labour Force Survey -
Self-reported work-related ill health and workplace injuries: Index of LFS tables.
Retrieved from http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/lfs/index.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017c). Noise induced hearing loss in Great Britain.
Retrieved June 20, 2018, from
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/deafness/index.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017d). Non-fatal injuries at work in Great Britain.
Retrieved June 27, 2018, from http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causinj/index.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017e, November). Occupational Cancer. Retrieved
June 20, 2017, from http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/cancer/index.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017f, November). Trends in work-related ill health
and workplace injury in Great Britain, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2018, from
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/history/historical-picture.pdf
Health and Safety Executive. (2017g, November). Working days lost. Retrieved
from http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/dayslost.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017h). Work-related ill health and occupational
disease in Great Britain. Retrieved June 21, 2018, from
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/index.htm
Health and Safety Executive. (2017j, November). Work-related Musculoskeletal
Disorders (WRMSDs) Statistics in Great Britain 2017. Retrieved June 21, 2018,
from http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/musculoskeletal/msd.pdf
Health and Safety Executive. (2017k, November). Work-related Stress,
Depression or Anxiety Statistics in Great Britain 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2018,
from http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress/stress.pdf
Health and Safety Executive. (2017m, July). Fatal injuries arising from accidents
at work in Great Britain 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2018, from
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/pdf/fatalinjuries.pdf
Health Impact News. (2018, May 10). Screening Mammography Fails 99% of
Women. Retrieved from Health Impact News:
http://healthimpactnews.com/2014/screening-mammography-fails-99-of-women/
Heath and Safety Executive. (2018, November). Silicosis and coal workers'
pneumoconiosis 2017 . Retrieved from
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/pneumoconiosis/pneumoconiosis-andsilicosis.pdf
Heikkinen. (1995, June). Recent Life Events in Elderly Suicide: A Nationwide
Study in Finland. International Psychogeriatrics, 7(2), 287-300. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1041610295002043
HEqual. (2019, March). Feminist MP Layla Moran admits to being the latest
female perpetrator of domestic violence in Parliament. Retrieved from
https://hequal.wordpress.com/2019/03/24/feminist-mp-layla-moran-admits-tobeing-the-latest-female-perpetrator-of-domestic-violence-in-parliament/
Hetherton. (1999, February). The idealization of women: its role in the
minimization of child sexual abuse by females. Child Abuse Negl., 23(2), 161-174.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10075185
Higgins. (2019, February 23). Dunmurry woman Kelly Marie Meighan avoids jail
after abusing girls as a teen. Belfast Telegraph. Retrieved from
https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/dunmurry-woman-kellymarie-meighan-avoids-jail-after-abusing-girls-as-a-teen-37844191.html
Higher Education Statistics Authority. (2014/15). Yearly Overviews. Retrieved
April 18, 2018, from Higher Education Statistics Authority (HESA):
https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/staff/overviews?
breakdown%5B%5D=583&year=2
Higher Education Statistics Authority. (2016). Staff numbers and characteristics.
Retrieved from https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/staff
Hill, A. (2017, June 20). 'Buried alive': the old men stuck in Britain's prisons.
Retrieved from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jun/20/buried-alive-the-old-men-stuck-inbritains-prisons?CMP=share_btn_tw
Hiroyuki Kayaba et al. (1996, November). Analysis of Shape and Retractability of
the Prepuce in 603 Japanese Boys. The Journal of Urology, 156(5), 1813-1815.
Retrieved July 28, 2018, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022534701655447
HOC Justice Committee. (2018, July 20). Disclosure of evidence in criminal cases.
Retrieved March 6, 2019, from UK Parliament:
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/cmjust/859/85902.htm
Hoff Sommers, C. (2000). The War Against Boys. Simon & Schuster. Retrieved
from https://tinyurl.com/y5nmcuxl
Holley, G. (2008, August 7). 'Quiet conspiracy' of society against male teachers,
head of Government body claims. Retrieved May 21, 2018, from The Telegraph:
https://i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/00787/Graham_Holley_s_let_787315a
.pdf
Home Office. (2018). Freedom of Information Act Enquiry, FOI51514.
Home Office Select Committee. (2008, February 19). Examination of Witnesses
(Questions 220 - 237). Retrieved October 6, 2018, from
https://tinyurl.com/y4zxvdye
Home Office Statistical Bulletin. (2009). Homicides, Firearm Offences and
Intimate Violence 2007/08: Supplementary Volume 2 to Crime in England and
Wales 2008/09 (Third Edition).
https://gleichstellungdergeschlechter.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/hosb0110.pdf
Homeless Link. (2018, October). Severe Weather Responses 2017-18 Survey of
winter provision for people sleeping rough. Retrieved 1 1, 2019, from
https://www.homeless.org.uk/sites/default/files/site-attachments/SWEP survey
report 2017-18.pdf
Homeless Link. (2018, March). Support for single homeless people in England
Annual Review 2017. Retrieved 1 1, 2018, from
https://www.homeless.org.uk/sites/default/files/site-attachments/Annual Review
2017_0.pdf
Hopkins, Uhrig, and Colahan. (2016, November 24). Associations between being
male or female and being sentenced to prison in England and Wales in 2015.
Retrieved July 1, 2018, from Ministry of Justice Analytical Services:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/571737/associations-between-sex-and-sentencing-to-prison.pdf
Horley. (2014, August 3). Domestic violence refuge provision at crisis point, warn
charities. Retrieved September 3, 2018, from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/03/domestic-violence-refuge-crisiswomen-closure-safe-houses
Horley. (2018, May 31). Refuge calls on the Government to put victims at the
heart of its once-in-a-generation Domestic Abuse Bill. Retrieved September 3,
2018, from Refuge: https://www.refuge.org.uk/refuge-calls-government-putvictims-heart-generation-domestic-abuse-bill/
House of Commons. (2017, April 20). Briefing Paper: UK Prison Population
Statistics. Retrieved July 1, 2018, from
http://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/SN04334/SN04334.pdf
House of Commons Briefing Paper. (2018, March 9). Women and the Economy.
Retrieved June 25, 2018, from
http://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/SN06838/SN06838.pdf
House of Commons Library. (2017, November 21). UK Defence Personnel
Statistics, Briefing Paper Number CBP7930. Retrieved March 22, 2019, from
https://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/CDP-2018-0016/CBP7930.pdf
Howard League. (2014). Coercive Sex in Prison. Retrieved April 11, 2019, from
https://howardleague.org/publications/coercive-sex-in-prison/
Hoyle et al. (2017). The Impact of Being Wrongly Accused of Abuse in
Occupations of Trust: Victims' Voices. University of Oxford Centre for
Criminology. Retrieved March 9, 2019, from https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/researchand-subject-groups/impact-being-wrongly-accused-abuse-occupations-trustvictims-voice
Hudson. (2012, June 21). In Uganda, a Male Circumcision Campaign Goes Horribly
Wrong. The Atlantic. Retrieved March 15, 2019, from
https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/06/uganda-malecircumcision-campaign-goes-horribly-wrong/326625/
Hughes, K. (2014, May 15). Gender roles in the 19th century. Retrieved May 18,
2018, from Discovering Literature: Romantics and Victorians:
https://www.bl.uk/romantics-and-victorians/articles/gender-roles-in-the-19thcentury
Human Tissue Act. (2004). Human Tissue Act 2004. Retrieved December 18, 2018,
from Uk Government legislation:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/30/contents
Human Tissue Authority. (2018). DNA Consent Flowcharts. Retrieved December
19, 2018, from https://www.hta.gov.uk/dna-consent-flowcharts#b
Hunt and MacLeod. (2008, September). Outcomes of applications to court for
contact orders after parental separation or divorce. Retrieved October 8, 2018,
from http://dera.ioe.ac.uk/9145/1/outcomes-applications-contact-orders.pdf
INQUEST. (2018, June 28). Deaths in prison. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from
https://www.inquest.org.uk/deaths-in-prison
insideMAN. (2016, March 29). More than 40 advocates for men and boys sign joint
letter calling for equal focus on men's health. Retrieved from insideMAN:
http://www.inside-man.co.uk/2016/03/29/40-advocates-men-boys-sign-joint-lettercalling-equal-focus-mens-health/
Ipsos. (2014, September 14). Majority of Men Say They Would Be Likely to Take
Hormone Pill or Injection as a Means of Birth Control, Regardless of Their
Relationship Status. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://news.blog.gustavus.edu/files/2017/09/Gustavus_Male_Contraception_Surv
ey_7.17.pdf
Jackson. (2012, October 29). William Hague hails Malala Yousafzai after hospital
visit. The Guardian. Retrieved April 18, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/29/hague-visit-yousafzai-hospita
Jaggar, K. (2018, May 10). How Routine Mammography Screening Leads to
Overdiagnosis & Overtreatment. Retrieved from Breast Cancer Action:
https://www.bcaction.org/2016/10/17/how-routine-mammography-screening-failswomen/
Jay. (2014, August 21). Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Exploitation in
Rotherham (1997 – 2013). Retrieved April 9, 2019, from Rotherham Metropolitan
Borough Council:
https://www.rotherham.gov.uk/downloads/file/1407/independent_inquiry_cse_in_ro
therham
Jo Blanden. (2006). 'Bucking the trend': What enables those who are
disadvantaged in childhood to succeed later in life? Retrieved October 29, 2018,
from Department for Workand Pensions: http://dera.ioe.ac.uk/7729/1/WP31.pdf
John Barry. (2019, January 10). Is there an alternative to the new APA guidelines
for working with men and boys? Retrieved January 18, 2018, from
https://malepsychology.org.uk/2019/01/10/is-there-an-alternative-to-the-new-apaguidelines-for-working-with-men-and-boys/
Johnson. (2017, April 8). Bono, #GirlsCount Fight Girls' Education Crisis.
BORGEN magazine. Retrieved March 18, 2019, from
https://www.borgenmagazine.com/fight-girls-education-crisis/
Johnson and Scott. (2010, August 4). Association of Sexual Violence and Human
Rights Violations With Physical and Mental Health in Territories of the Eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. JAMA Network. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.1086
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/186342
Jones. (2011, November 3). The craving for a baby that drives women to the
ultimate deception. Mail On Sunday. Retrieved November 21, 2018, from
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2056875/Liz-Jones-baby-craving-drovesteal-husbands-sperm-ultimate-deception.html
Judicial College. (2018, February). Equal Treatment Bench Book. Retrieved July
3, 2018, from https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/equaltreatment-bench-book-february2018-v5-02mar18.pdf
Kan and Laurie. (2016, January). Gender, ethnicity and household labour in
married and cohabiting couples in the UK. Retrieved June 27, 2018, from Institute
for Social and Economic Research:
https://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/research/publications/working-papers/iser/2016-
01.pdf
Karmin et al. (2015, April). A recent bottleneck of Y chromosome diversity
coincides with a global change in culture. Genome Research, 25(4), 459-466.
doi:10.1101/gr.186684.114 https://genome.cshlp.org/content/25/4/459
Kay. (2011, January 24). Barbara Kay on circumcision: A painless live-saving (sic)
surgery. Retrieved July 27, 2018, from National Post: https://nationalpost.com/fullcomment/barbara-kay-on-circumcision-a-painless-live-saving-surgery/
Kay. (2019, January 10). The American Psychological Association goes to war
against boys and men. Signs Of The Times. Retrieved April 27, 2019, from
https://www.sott.net/article/404659-The-American-Psychological-Associationgoes-to-war-against-boys-and-men
Kay, B. (2016, October 18). Barbara Kay: Review puts to bed activist-inspired
case on circumcision. Retrieved July 27, 2018, from National Post:
https://nationalpost.com/opinion/barbara-kay-review-puts-to-bed-activist-inspiredcase-on-circumcision
Kellogg. (1888). Treatment for Self-Abuse and its Effects. In Plain Facts for Old
and Young (p. 295). Burlington, Iowa: F.Segner & Co.
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/19924/19924-h/19924-h.htm#p378
Kelly. (2003). Disabusing the Definition of Domestic Violence: How Women Batter
Men and the Role of the Feminist State. Florida State University Law Review,
30(4). Retrieved September 3, 2018, from https://ir.law.fsu.edu/lr/vol30/iss4/7
Kelly et al. (2013, September). Adverse childhood experiences and premature allcause mortality. European Journal of Epidemiology, 28(9), 721-734.
doi:10.1007/s10654-013-9832-9 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10654-
013-9832-9
Kendler et al. (2017, May 1). Divorce and the Onset of Alcohol Use Disorder: A
Swedish Population-Based Longitudinal Cohort and Co-Relative Study. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 174(5), 451-458. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16050589
Keziah. (2013, June 25). Boys: The Under-mentioned Victims of Child Sex
Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation. Retrieved April 9, 2019, from
http://tinyurl.com/yy6xsd3u
Kirkup et al. (2008). Relationships between A level Grades and SAT Scores in a
Sample of UK Students. Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, New York, 24-28 March 2008. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/44412/44412.pdf
Kõlves. (2010, January). Suicidal ideation and behaviour in the aftermath of marital
separation: Gender differences. Journal of Affective Disorders, 120(1-3), 48-53. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2009.04.019
Kovess-Masfety. (2011, September). High and low suicidality in Europe: A finegrained comparison of France and Spain within the ESEMeD surveys. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 133(1-2), 247-256. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.04.014
Kposowa. (2000). Marital status and suicide in the National Longitudinal Mortality
Study. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 54(4), 254-261. Retrieved
from https://jech.bmj.com/content/54/4/254?
ijkey=8fc439c8190e03194d4e6546cace23988f537e7c&keytype2=tf_ipsecsha
Kposowa. (2003). Divorce and suicide risk. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health, 57, 993-995. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech.57.12.993
Kraemer, S. (2000, December 23). The fragile male. British Medical Journal, 321,
1609. Retrieved April 14, 2018, from https://www.bmj.com/content/321/7276/1609
Krasny. (2012, February 17). INFOGRAPHIC: Women Control The Money In
America. Retrieved March 21, 2019, from
https://www.businessinsider.com/infographic-women-control-the-money-inamerica-2012-2?IR=T
Kruk. (2018). Parental Alienation as a Form of Emotional Child Abuse: Current
State of Knowledge and Future Directions for Research. Family Science Review,
22(4), 141-164. Retrieved April 16, 2019, from
http://parentalalienationresearch.com/PDF/2018kurk.pdf
Kruk, E. (1992). Psychological and Structural Factors Contributing to the
Disengagement of Noncustodial Fathers After Divorce. Family and Conciliation
Courts Review, 29(2), 81-101. Retrieved from
https://www.academia.edu/5034988/Psychological_and_Structural_Factors_Contri
buting_to_the_Disengagement_of_Noncustodial_Fathers_After_Divorce
Kruk, E. (1993). Divorce and Disengagement: Patterns of Fatherhood Within and
Beyond Marriage. Retrieved October 17, 2018, from Fathers For Life:
http://www.fathersforlife.org/divorce/kruk22.htm
Kuhn, T. (2012). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions: 50th Anniversary Edition.
University of Chicago Press. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y2fcgemw
Kulze. (2013, October 30). The Hard Truth About Girl-on-Guy Rape. Retrieved
April 10, 2019, from https://www.vocativ.com/underworld/crime/hard-truth-girlguy-rape/
Kumar, Deb and Das. (2009, April 16). reputial adhesions — A misunderstood
entity. The Indian Journal of Pediatrics, 76, 829. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-009-0120-3
Kumar, S. (2010, June 15). Circumcision video. Retrieved August 2, 2018, from
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ra5t0OsmWf0&has_verified=1
LaBounty et al. (2008, November). Mothers' and Fathers' Use of Internal State
Talk with their Young Children. Social Development, 17(4), 757-775. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9507.2007.00450.x
Lagat. (2015, April 22). Anxiety in Eldoret after NGO 'forcibly' circumcises 30
boys. Dily Nation. Retrieved from
https://www.nation.co.ke/counties/eldoret/Uasin-Gishu-NGO-30-boyscut/-/1954186/2694018/-/4fqerr/-/index.html
Lamb (editor). (2010). The Role of the Father in Child Development. John Wiley &
Sons, 5th edition. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y3js4pao
Landor and Eisenchlas. (2012, December). "Coming Clean" on Duty of Care:
Australian Print Media's Representation of Male Versus Female Sex Offenders in
Institutional Contexts. Sexuality & Culture, 16(4), 486-502. Retrieved April 9,
2019, from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs12119-012-9134-5
Langford, N. (2015, October 5). An Exercise in Absolute Futility: How feminism,
falsehood and myth changed the landscape of family law. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y6x7aqo8
Larke et al. (2011, June 22). Male circumcision and penile cancer: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Cancer Causes & Control, 22(8), 1097-1110.
doi:10.1007/s10552-011-9785-9
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10552-011-9785-9
Laville. (2016, December 22). Revealed: how family courts allow abusers to
torment their victims. Retrieved October 18, 2018, from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/revealed-how-family-courtsallow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims
Legal Aid Agency. (2018, June 28). Legal aid statistics: January to March 2018.
Retrieved October 18, 2018, from Ministry of Justice:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/legal-aid-statistics-january-to-march2018
Legal Aid Agency. (2018, January 8). The Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment
of Offenders Act (LASPO) 2012 - Evidence Requirements for Private Family Law
Matters. Retrieved October 17, 2018, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/672143/evidence-requirements-private-family-law-mattersguidance-version-8.pdf
Legislation UK Government. (1983). Mental Health Act 1983. Retrieved January
21, 2019, from http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1983/20/contents
Legislation UK Government. (2007). Mental Health St 2007. Retrieved January
21, 2019, from https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2007/12/contents
Lempert. (2018, November 22). Genital cutting and the laws of unintended
consequences. National Secular Society. Retrieved March 14, 2019, from
https://www.secularism.org.uk/opinion/2018/11/genital-cutting-and-the-laws-ofunintended-consequences
Leone et al. (2016, October 3). Development and Testing of a Conceptual Model
Regarding Men's Access to Health Care. American Journal of Men's Health,
11(2), 262-274. Retrieved from
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1557988316671637
Lester. (1992, October). Alcohol consumption and rates of personal violence in
Australia. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 31(1), 15-17. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0376-8716(92)90003-U
Lester. (1995). Remarriage Rates and Suicide and Homicide in the United States.
Journal of Divorce and remarriage, 23(1-2), 207-210. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1300/J087v23n01_14
Levant et al. (2019, February). Moderation and mediation of the relationships
between masculinity ideology and health status. Health Psychology (APA
PsychNET), 38(2), 162-171. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000709
Levine et al. (2017, July 25). Temporal trends in sperm count: a systematic review
and meta-regression analysis. Human Reproduction Update, 23(6), 646-659. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/humupd/dmx022
Levitt. (2013). Cases Involving Allegedly False Rape and Domestic Violence
Allegations. Retrieved from Crown Prosecution Service.
https://www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/publications/perverting_cours
e_of_justice_march_2013.pdf
Lewis, C.S. (1960) The Four Loves. Geoffrey Bles.
Ley. (2018, May 28). Men favoured in NHS pay, minister Caroline Dinenage
admits. The Times. Retrieved March 12, 2019, from
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/men-favoured-in-nhs-pay-minister-carolinedineage-admits-wl0t7h82d
Lightowlers, C. (2018, October 19). Drunk and Doubly Deviant? The Role of
Gender and Intoxication in Sentencing Assault Offences. The British Journal of
Criminology, azy041. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azy041
Lisak et al. (2010). False Allegations of Sexual Assault: An Analysis of Ten Years
of Reported Cases. Violence Against Women, 16(12), 1318-1334. doi:
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1077801210387747
Lloyd et al. (2003). Fathers in Sure Start. Retrieved October 29, 2018, from
University of Lancashire: http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/10975/1/3.pdf
London Safeguarding Children Board. (2017). 28. Safeguarding children affected
by domestic abuse, 5th edition. Retrieved October 19, 2018, from London Child
Protection Procedures:
http://www.londoncp.co.uk/chapters/sg_ch_dom_abuse.html
London Safeguarding Children Board. (2017a). Male Circumcision. Retrieved
August 3, 2018, from http://www.londoncp.co.uk/chapters/male_circum.html
London Safeguarding Children Board. (2017b). Section 28. Safeguarding children
affected by domestic abuse (5th edition). Retrieved from London Child Protection
Procedures: http://www.londoncp.co.uk/chapters/sg_ch_dom_abuse.html
Longfield. (2018a, March 1). Growing Up North - Look North: A generation of
children await the powerhouse promise. Retrieved April 15, 2018, from
https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/GrowingUp-North-March-2018-1.pdf
Longfield, A. (2017, April). Children's Commissioner Business Plan 2017-18.
Retrieved July 4, 2018, from https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2017/06/Childrens-Commissioner-for-England-Business-Plan2017-18-1.3-1.pdf
Longfield, A. (2018b, March). Voices from the Inside: The experiences of girls in
Secure Training Centres. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from
https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/CCOVoices-from-the-Inside-MARCH-2018-1.pdf
Lukianoff and Haidt. (2018). The Coddling of the American Mind. Penguin Random
House UK. Retrieved from https://www.thecoddling.com/
Luscombe. (2010, September 1). Workplace Salaries: At Last, Women on Top.
Retrieved March 29, 2019, from TIME magazine:
http://content.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,2015274,00.html
Lyytinen et al. (1998, September). Parental contribution to child's early language
and interest in books. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 13, 297.
Retrieved October 28, 2018, from
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF03172946
MacDermott, R. (2019, January 8). Addressing Media Misrepresentation of the
Men's Guidelines. Retrieved January 19, 2019, from
http://division51.net/homepage-slider/twitter-message-not-reflecting-theguidelines-for-boys-and-men/
MacFarlane, Sir Andrew. (2019, April). Resolution Conference 2019, Keynote
Address. https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Resolution-KeyNote-2019-final.docx-8-April-2019.pdf
Mahrer et al. (2018). Does Shared Parenting Help or Hurt Children in HighConflict Divorced Families? Journal of Divorce & Remarriage, 59(4), 324-347. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/10502556.2018.1454200
Maimonides, M. (translation 1963). Quotations from Maimonides, The Guide of the
Perplexed. In S. P. Hoffman (Ed.), Covenant of Blood. University of Chicago Press.
https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/M/bo40026618.html
Malawi24. (2015, August 4). Malawi: Circumcision Disaster - Malawi HIV
Infection Rate Doubles. Retrieved March 15, 2019, from all Africa:
https://allafrica.com/stories/201508040740.html
Malik. (2017, August 27). Barnardo's: Sexual exploitation of boys 'overlooked'.
Retrieved April 9, 2019, from BBC News: https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-28935733
Mankind Initiative. (2017). Male victims of domestic and partner abuse 35 key
facts. Retrieved September 6, 2018, from Mankind.org:
https://www.mankind.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/35-Key-Facts-MaleVictims-March-2018-1.pdf
Marotta, B. (2018). American Circumcision. Retrieved March 15, 2019, from
https://circumcisionmovie.com/see-the-film/
Marriage & Religion Research Institute. (2014, October). Effects of
Fatherlessness on Children's Development . Retrieved from
https://downloads.frc.org/EF/EF14K18.pdf
Marriage Foundation. (2018). Establishing the facts about family breakdown and
transforming the debate about marriage. Retrieved from
http://marriagefoundation.org.uk/research/
Martin Seager. (2018, October 3). The Power Threat Meaning Framework
(PTMF) takes a dim view of the male gender. Retrieved January 18, 2019, from
https://malepsychology.org.uk/2018/10/03/the-power-threat-meaning-frameworkptmf-takes-a-dim-view-of-the-male-gender/
Martino, E. (2018, April 12). Training the Masculinity Out of Children. Retrieved
from Quillette: http://quillette.com/2018/04/12/training-masculinity-children/
Masocco. (2008, December). Suicide and Marital Status in Italy. Psychiatric
Quarterly, 79(4), 275-285. Retrieved from
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11126-008-9072-4
Masocco. (2010, March). Completed Suicide and Marital Status According to the
Italian Region of Origin. Psychiatric Quarterly, 81(1), 57-71. Retrieved February
8, 2019, from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11126-009-9118-2
Mattha Busby agency. (2018, June 3). Danish parliament to consider becoming first
country to ban circumcision of boys. The Independent. Retrieved March 14, 2019,
from https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/denmark-boyhoodcircumcision-petition-danish-parliament-debate-a8381366.html
Matthews. (1996). TheInvisibleBoy: Revisioning the Victimization of Male
Children and Teens. Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada .
Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://canadiancrc.com/PDFs/The_Invisible_Boy_Report.pdf
Maugham. (2018, May 4). No, the legal system isn't biased against men – it allows
them to rape with near impunity. The New Statesman. Retrieved March 4, 2019,
from https://www.newstatesman.com/politics/feminism/2018/05/no-legal-systemisn-t-biased-against-men-it-allows-them-rape-near-impunity
Mayhew et al. (2018, March). Inequalities matter an investigation into the impact
of deprivation on demographic inequalities in adults. Retrieved from
http://www.ilcuk.org.uk/images/uploads/publication-pdfs/Inequalities_matter.pdf
McDonagh, M. (2010, October 23). Who's the daddy? Retrieved December 18,
2018, from https://www.spectator.co.uk/2010/10/whos-the-daddy/
McEvoy. (2019, April 25). video address to audience opposite Downing Street on
Parental Alienation Awareness Day. Retrieved from
https://www.facebook.com/neiljmcevoy/videos/358344378136457/?t=36
McGrath. (2011, October 3). Anatomy of the Penis: Penile and Foreskin
Neurology. Retrieved March 15, 2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?
feature=player_embedded&v=DD2yW7AaZFw
McGrath, K. (2000). The Frenular Delta: A New Preputial Structure. Ken
McGrath is author of The Frenular Delta: A New Understanding Circumcision: A
Multi-DiscipProceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Genital
Integrity: Safeguarding Fundamental Human Rights in the 21st Century. Sydney.
Retrieved from https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4757-3351-8_11
McGrath, K. (2011, October 3). Anatomy of the Penis: Penile and Foreskin
Neurology. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DD2yW7AaZFw
McGurran. (2014, July 29). Why Bury St Edmunds MP David Ruffley had to
resign. Retrieved April 4, 2019, from https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england28553382
McIntosh et al. (2010, May). Post-separation parenting arrangements and
developmental outcomes for infants and children. Collected reports. Retrieved
November 9, 2018, from Family Transitions; Report to the Australian Government
Attorney-General's Department: https://tinyurl.com/y3aalabg
McLanahan, Tach and Schneider. (2013). The Causal Effects of Father Absence.
Annual Review of Sociology, 39, 399-427. https://afesp.com/wpcontent/uploads/2018/07/causaleffectsoffatherabsence.pdf
McManus et al. (2014). Suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts, and self-harm.
Retrieved from Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey 2014 Chapter 12:
https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20180328140249/http://digital.nhs.uk/c
atalogue/PUB21748
McManus et al. (2016, September 29). Mental Health and Wellbeing in England:
Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey 2014. Retrieved January 14, 2018, from NHS
Digital:
https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20180328140249/http://digital.nhs.uk/c
atalogue/PUB21748
Medicalization of Circumcision Timeline. (2014). Retrieved from Involuntary
Foreskinectomy Awareness:
https://sites.google.com/site/completebaby/medicalization
Medscape. (2017, August 24). Balanitis Overview. Retrieved August 5, 2018, from
https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/777026-overview
Megan. (2014, June 29). neonatal Gomco Circumcision Live. Retrieved August 2,
2018, from YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=J1kSx4TkuRo&sns=fb&has_verified=1
Melendy, M. R. (1915). The ideal woman for maidens, wives, mothers. E.E.Miller.
Men and Boys Coalition. (2018, May 1). Victory for Men and Boys Coalition on
bringing the Equalities and Human Rights Commission into the HPV Vaccination
for boys campaign. Retrieved March 10, 2019, from
http://www.menandboyscoalition.org.uk/newsevents/victory-for-men-and-boys-onbringing-the-equalities-and-human-rights-commission-into-the-hpv-vaccinationcampaign/
Men's Health Forum. (2014, April 7). Balanitis FAQs. Retrieved August 5, 2018, from
https://www.menshealthforum.org.uk/balanitis-faqs
Men's Health Forum. (2014, July 17). More than four in ten of the UK's unpaid carers
are male. Retrieved June 27, 2018, from
https://www.menshealthforum.org.uk/news/more-four-ten-uks-unpaid-carers-are-male
Mertz, T. (2014, November 3). No job for a man? Meet the male midwives.
Retrieved June 19, 2018, from The Telegraph:
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/men/thinking-man/11202075/No-job-for-a-man-Meetthe-male-midwives.html
Miller et al. (2017, March). Do Perceptions of Their Partners Affect Young
Women's Pregnancy Risk? Further Study of Ambivalent Desires. Popul Stud
(Camb), 71(1), 101-116. doi:10.1080/00324728.2016.1253858
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00324728.2016.1253858
Miller, Drake & Nafziger. (2013). What works to reduce recidivism by domestic
violence offenders. Retrieved October 6, 2018, from Olympia: Washington State
Institute for Public Policy.: https://tinyurl.com/yx9mtuh6
Mining Institute. (2016, January). Mining accidents and safety. Retrieved June 20,
2018, from https://mininginstitute.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Miningaccidents-and-safety-Jan16.pdf
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. (2018a, December 13).
Statutory Homelessness, April to June (Q2) 2018: England. Retrieved December
31, 2018, from gov.uk:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/764301/Statutory_Homelessness_Statistical_Release_April_-
_June_2018.pdf
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. (2018b, February 16).
Annual statistical release evaluating the extent of rough sleeping. Retrieved 1 1,
2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/rough-sleeping-in-englandautumn-2017
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. (2018c, February 12).
Rough Sleeping Statistics Autumn 2017, England (Revised). Retrieved from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/rough-sleeping-in-england-autumn-2017
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. (2018d, December 13).
Acceptances and Decisions live tables. Retrieved December 31, 2018, from Live
tables on homelessness: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/livetables-on-homelessness
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. (2018e, December 13).
Prevention and Relief Tables. Retrieved December 31, 2018, from Live tables on
homelessness: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-onhomelessness
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. (2018f, December 13).
Initial Decision Tables. Retrieved December 31, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-homelessness
Ministry of Justice. (2010a, November). Providing anonymity to those accused of
rape: An assessment of evidence. Retrieved March 5, 2019, from Ministry of
Justice Research Series 20/10:
http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/publications/research-and-analysis/mojresearch/anonymity-rape-research-report.pdf#page=23
Ministry of Justice. (2010b). Statistics on Women and the Criminal Justice System.
Retrieved July 2, 2018, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/217824/statistics-women-cjs-2010.pdf
Ministry of Justice. (2011, November 3). Family justice review: final report.
Retrieved November 14, 2018, from gov.uk:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/family-justice-review-final-report
Ministry of Justice. (2012). Criminal Justice Statistics, Quarterly Update to March
2012, Ministry of Justice Statistics Bulletin.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/217641/criminal-justice-stats-march-2012.pdf
Ministry of Justice. (2013a, January 10). An Overview of Sexual Offending in
England and Wales. Retrieved February 28, 2019, from Ministry of Justice, Home
Office & the Office for National Statistics:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/214970/sexual-offending-overview-jan-2013.pdf
Ministry of Justice. (2014). Transforming Rehabilitation: a summary of evidence
on reducing reoffending. Retrieved October 6, 2018, from Ministry of Justice
Analytical Section:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/305319/transforming-rehabilitation-evidence-summary-2ndedition.pdf
Ministry of Justice. (2015, October 8). Female offenders and child dependents.
Retrieved July 3, 2018, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/465916/female-offenders-child-dependents-statistics.pdf
Ministry of Justice. (2016a, November 24). Statistics on Women and the Criminal
Justice System 2015: A Ministry of Justice publication under Section 95 of the
Criminal Justice Act 1991. Retrieved July 1, 2018, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/572043/women-and-the-criminal-justice-system-statistics-2015.pdf
Ministry of Justice. (2016b, November 24). Women and the criminal justice system
statistics 2015: Chapter 3 – victims tables. Retrieved August 27, 2018, from UK
Gov: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/women-and-the-criminal-justicesystem-statistics-2015
Ministry of Justice. (2016c, November 24). Women and the criminal justice system
statistics 2015: Chapter 6: offender characteristics tables. Retrieved April 30,
2019, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/women-and-the-criminaljustice-system-statistics-2015
Ministry of Justice. (2017a, July 27). Offender Management statistics quarterly,
England and Wales Quarter: January to March 2017, Prison population: 30 June
2017. Retrieved April 7, 2019, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/633154/offender-managemen-statistics-bulletin_-q1-2017.pdf
Ministry of Justice. (2017b, December 8). Practice Direction 12J - Child
Arrangement and Contact Orders: Domestic Abuse and Harm. Retrieved October
19, 2018, from UK Government Justice:
https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedurerules/family/practice_directions/pd_part_12j
Ministry of Justice. (2018a, May 17). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly:
December 2017. Retrieved July 1, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statisticsquarterly-december-2017
Ministry of Justice. (2018b, April 26). Offender Management Statistics quarterly:
October to December 2017: Prison releases 2017. Retrieved July 2, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statisticsquarterly-october-to-december-2017
Ministry of Justice. (2018c, June 8). Youth custody data. Retrieved July 4, 2018,
from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/youth-custody-data
Ministry of Justice. (2018d, July 28). Safety in custody quarterly update to March
2016. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-tojune-2016
Ministry of Justice. (2018e, August 16). Criminal Justice System Statistics
publication: Outcomes by Offence 2007 to 2017: Pivot Table Analytical Tool for
England and Wales. Retrieved March 4, 2019, from Criminal Justice System
statistics quarterly: December 2017:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statisticsquarterly-december-2017
Ministry of Justice. (2018f, June 28). Family Court Statistics Quarterly, Jan -
March 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/family-court-statistics-quarterlyjanuary-to-march-2018
Ministry of Justice. (2019, January 31). Offender Management Statistics Bulletin,
England and Wales, Quarterly July to Sept 2018 Prison population: 31 December
2018. Retrieved April 7, 2019, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/775078/offender-management-quarterly-q3-2018.pdf
Morley. (2016, March 13). Pensions apartheid? How public and private systems
compare. The Telegraph. Retrieved March 25, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/pensions-retirement/financial-planning/pensionsapartheid-how-public-and-private-systems-compare/
Morley, L. (2013, June 13). Gender survey of UK professoriate, 2013. Retrieved
April 18, 2018, from Times Higher Education:
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/gender-survey-of-uk-professoriate2013/2004766.article
Morris. (2018). About the Author - Professor Emeritus Brian J. Morris. Retrieved
August 5, 2018, from circinfo.net:
http://www.circinfo.net/about_the_author_professor_brian_j_morris.html
Morris et al. (2016, October). Canadian Pediatrics Society position statement on
newborn circumcision: a risk-benefit analysis revisited. Canadian Journal of
Urology, 23(5), 8495-8502. Retrieved August 5, 2018, from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27705739
Morris et al. (2017, February 8). Early infant male circumcision: Systematic
review, risk-benefit analysis, and progress in policy. World Journal of Clinial
Pediatrics, 6(1), 89-102. doi:10.5409/wjcp.v6.i1.89 https://www.wjgnet.com/2219-
2808/full/v6/i1/89.htm
Moss and Washbrook. (2016, July 18). Understanding the Gender Gap in Literacy
and Language Development. Retrieved May 8, 2018, from University of Bristol
Graduate School of Education: https://tinyurl.com/y288z7zk
Mumsnet. (2014, July). Chores: who does what in the modern family home?
Retrieved June 27, 2018, from https://www.mumsnet.com/surveys/chores-surveyresults
Murphy. (2017, June). Are the histories of male prisoners less traumatic than those
of female prisoners? (video). Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=ziUmxWW-0ig&t=103s
Murphy. (2019, March 15). Podcast interview with Davinci Mind. Retrieved from
https://davincimind.net/2019/03/15/25381/
Murray. (2015, October 16). Disturbing rise of the women child sex predators:
How sickening slew of babysitters and teachers are abusing young boys and girls –
but would they be punished so leniently if they were men? Daily Mail. Retrieved
April 8, 2019, from Daily Mail: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article3274956/Disturbing-rise-women-child-sex-predators-s-punished-leniently-men.html
MWM (circa 2013). Man Woman Myth, videos including Michele Elliott. Retrieved
from http://tinyurl.com/y5ytywqj, http://tinyurl.com/y36vdrbm,
http://tinyurl.com/y2tohv64
Nathanson and Young. (2001). Spreading Misandry: The Teaching of Contempt for
Men in Popular Culture. McGill-Queen's University Press. Retrieved from
https://tinyurl.com/y4n5jxzc
Nathanson and Young. (2006). Legalising Misandry: From Public Shame to
Systemic Discrimination against Men. McGill-Queen's university press.
National Assembly for Wales, Petitions Committee. (2018, September 25). Senedd
Assembly Wales. Retrieved from
http://www.senedd.assembly.wales/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=430&MId=5065
National Cancer Institute. (2015, February 19). HPV and Cancer: What are human
papillomaviruses? Retrieved April 22, 2018, from https://www.cancer.gov/aboutcancer/causes-prevention/risk/infectious-agents/hpv-fact-sheet
National Cancer Institute. (2017, October 4). Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA)
Test. Retrieved from https://www.cancer.gov/types/prostate/psa-fact-sheet
National Health Service. (2016, January 22). Circumcision in men. Retrieved
August 2, 2018, from https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/circumcision-in-men/#Risks
National Institutes of Health. (2017). Report of the Advisory Committee on
Women's Health, Fiscal Years 2015/16'. Retrieved March 10, 2019, from Offce of
Research on Women's Health :
https://orwh.od.nih.gov/sites/orwh/files/docs/ORWH_Biennial_Report_WEB_508_
FY-15-16.pdf
National Literacy Trust. (2012, July 2). Boys' Reading Commission. Retrieved May
3, 2018, from National Literacy Trust: https://literacytrust.org.uk/policy-andcampaigns/all-party-parliamentary-group-literacy/boys-reading-commission/
National Survey for Wales. (2016/17). Population Health - Lifestyle . Retrieved
from https://gov.wales/docs/statistics/2017/170629-national-survey-2016-17-
population-health-lifestyle-en.pdf
National Union of Teachers. (2001, March 6). National Union of Teachers (NUT).
Retrieved April 17, 2018, from Gender and Education: NUT Policy Statement:
https://www.teachers.org.uk/sites/default/files2014/genderandeducation.pdf
NationMaster. (2005). Education > Girls to boys ratio > Tertiary level enrolment:
Countries Compared. Retrieved March 18, 2019, from
https://www.nationmaster.com/country-info/stats/Education/Girls-to-boysratio/Tertiary-level-enrolment
NationMaster. (2006). Education > School life expectancy > Primary to tertiary >
Male: Countries Compared . Retrieved from
http://www.nationmaster.com/country-info/stats/Education/School-lifeexpectancy/Primary-to-tertiary/Male# , and similarly for Female#
NCANDS. (2016, July). Child Maltreatment 2016: Summary of Key Findings.
Retrieved September 7, 2018, from
https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubPDFs/canstats.pdf
NCANDS. (2016b, July). Child Abuse and Neglect Fatalities 2016: Statistics and
Interventions. Retrieved September 7, 2018, from
https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubPDFs/fatality.pdf#page=3&view=What%20group
s%20of%20children%20are%20most%20vulnerable?
NCANDS. (2017). Child Maltreatment 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2019, from
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/cb/cm2017.pdf
Ncayiyana, D. (2011, November). The illusive promise of circumcision to prevent
female-to-male HIV infection – not the way to go for South Africa. South African
Medical Journal, 101(11). Retrieved August 6, 2018, from
http://samj.org.za/index.php/samj/article/view/5384/3655
NCVO UK Civil Society Almanac. (2017). UK Civil Society Almanac 2017 /
Workforce. Retrieved June 20, 2017, from
https://data.ncvo.org.uk/a/almanac17/workforce-4/
Nelson, S. (2017, February 21). The Drug Trial That Went Wrong: What Happened
To The Infamous 'Elephant Men' from 2006. Retrieved from
https://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/the-drug-trial-bbc-examines-what-wentwrong-in-the-infamous-elephant-men-case_uk_58ac3bd1e4b07028b703c926
New Scientist. (2018, April 7). Don't screen out the facts. (3172), 5.
NHS. (2016, March 24). Urinary Tract Infection in Children. Retrieved August 5,
2018, from https://patient.info/doctor/urinary-tract-infection-in-children
NHS. (2017, October 31). HPV vaccine. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from
Vaccinations: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vaccinations/hpv-humanpapillomavirus-vaccine/
NHS Choices. (2016, April 13). About the National Health Service (NHS).
Retrieved June 20, 2018, from
https://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/thenhs/about/Pages/overview.aspx
NHS Digital. (2017, October 10). Mental Health Act Statistics, Annual Figures:
2016-17, Experimental statistics. Retrieved January 21, 2019, from
https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/publications/statistical/mental-healthact-statistics-annual-figures/mental-health-act-statistics-annual-figures-2016-17-
experimental-statistics
NHS Digital. (2018a, November). Mental Health of Children and Young People in
England, 2017: Summary of Key Findings. Retrieved January 16, 2019, from
https://files.digital.nhs.uk/F6/A5706C/MHCYP%202017%20Summary.pdf
NHS Digital. (2018b, November). Mental Health of Children and Young People in
England, 2017 [PAS]. Retrieved January 16, 2019, from https://digital.nhs.uk/dataand-information/publications/statistical/mental-health-of-children-and-youngpeople-in-england/2017/2017
NHS England. (2018, March 3). NHS launches 'one-stop' service to slash diagnosis
times for prostate cancer. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from
http://home.bt.com/news/uk-news/nhs-launches-one-stop-service-to-slashdiagnosis-times-for-prostate-cancer-11364255448347
Nielsen. (2014). Woozles: Their Role in Custody Law Reform, Parenting Plans,
and Family Court. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, American Psychological
Association, 20(2), 164-180. doi:10.1037/law0000004
https://doi.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Flaw0000004
Nielsen. (2017). Re-examining the Research on Parental Conflict, Coparenting,
and Custody Arrangements. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 23(2), 211–231.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/law0000109
Nielsen. (2018). Preface to the Special Issue: Shared Physical Custody: Recent
Research, Advances, and Applications. Journal of Divorce and Remarriage, 59(4),
237-246. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/10502556.2018.1455303
Nuffield Foundation. (2015, June 2). Study finds English courts not discriminating
against fathers. Retrieved October 12, 2018, from
http://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/news/study-finds-english-family-courts-notdiscriminating-against-fathers
Obama White House. (2014, May 10). Weekly Address: The First Lady Marks
Mother's Day and Speaks Out on the Tragic Kidnapping in Nigeria (video).
Retrieved March 18, 2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PAncJ3nuczI
O'Brien. (1989). Characteristics of Male Adolescent Sibling Incest Offenders. Safer
Society Press, Orwell VT. https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtuallibrary/abstracts/characteristics-male-adolescent-sibling-incest-offenders
OECD. (2015). The ABC of Gender Equality in Education: Aptitude, Behaviour,
Confidence. Retrieved April 17, 2018, from Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA): http://www.oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-resultsgender-eng.pdf
Office for National Statistics. (2011). Population by Religion Age and Sex.
Retrieved August 2, 2018, from http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guidemethod/census/2011/census-data/2011-census-ad-hoc-tables/ct0116---religion--
detailed--by-sex-by-age---england-and-wales.xls
Office for National Statistics. (2013, May 16). Full story: The gender gap in unpaid
care provision: is there an impact on health and economic position? Retrieved June
27, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/health
andwellbeing/articles/fullstorythegendergapinunpaidcareprovisionisthereanimpacto
nhealthandeconomicposition/2013-05-16
Office for National Statistics. (2014, June 11). Marriage summary statistics
(Provisional). Retrieved November 20, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
marriagecohabitationandcivilpartnerships/datasets/marriagesummarystatisticsprov
isional
Office for National Statistics. (2015a, November 18). Annual Survey of Hours and
Earnings: 2015 Provisional Results. Retrieved June 18, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandw
orkinghours/bulletins/annualsurveyofhoursandearnings/2015provisionalresults#gen
der-pay-differences
Office for National Statistics. (2015b, November 4). Life Expectancy at Birth and
at Age 65 by Local Areas in England and Wales. Retrieved April 21, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
lifeexpectancies/datasets/lifeexpectancyatbirthandatage65bylocalareasinenglanda
ndwalesreferencetable1
Office for National Statistics. (2015c, November 23). Divorces in England and
Wales: Children of Divorced Couples. Retrieved October 14, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
divorce/datasets/divorcesinenglandandwaleschildrenofdivorcedcouples
Office for National Statistics. (2015d, November 23). Divorces in England and
Wales, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from
https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160106011921/http:/www.ons.gov.uk
/ons/dcp171778_424206.pdf
Office for National Statistics. (2015e, November 5). Families and Households,
2015. Retrieved November 20, 2015, from ONS:
https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160106020640/http:/www.ons.gov.uk
/ons/dcp171778_422175.pdf
Office for National Statistics. (2015f, August 27). Births by parents' country of
birth, England and Wales: 2014. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
livebirths/bulletins/parentscountryofbirthenglandandwales/2015-08-27
Office for National Statistics. (2015g, June 17). Public Sector Employment, UK:
March 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/publicsectorpe
rsonnel/bulletins/publicsectoremployment/2015-06-17#public-sector-employmentby-industry
Office for National Statistics. (2015h, July 16). Median Contribution Rates to
Workplace Pensions by Age Group and Sector. Retrieved March 25, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfina
nces/pensionssavingsandinvestments/datasets/mediancontributionratestoworkplace
pensionsbyagegroupandsector
Office for National Statistics. (2015j, September 9). How has life expectancy
changed over time? Retrieved March 25, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
lifeexpectancies/articles/howhaslifeexpectancychangedovertime/2015-09-09
Office for National Statistics. (2016a, December 9). Find out the gender pay gap
for your job. Retrieved June 19, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandw
orkinghours/articles/findoutthegenderpaygapforyourjob/2016-12-09
Office for National Statistics. (2016b, February 11). Focus on Violent Crime and
Sexual Offences data - Appendix Tables. Retrieved September 4, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/compendi
um/focusonviolentcrimeandsexualoffences/yearendingmarch2015/bulletintablesfoc
usonviolentcrimeandsexualoffencesyearendingmarch2015
Office for National Statistics. (2016c, February 11). Findings from analyses based
on the Homicide Index recorded by the Home Office covering different aspects of
homicide. Retrieved September 7, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/compendi
um/focusonviolentcrimeandsexualoffences/yearendingmarch2015/chapter2homicid
e
Office for National Statistics. (2017a, June 15). Adult smoking habits in the UK:
2016. Retrieved June 13, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/health
andlifeexpectancies/bulletins/adultsmokinghabitsingreatbritain/2016
Office for National Statistics. (2017b, October 26). Annual Survey of Hours and
Earnings: 2017 provisional and 2016 revised results. Retrieved June 18, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandw
orkinghours/bulletins/annualsurveyofhoursandearnings/2017provisionaland2016rev
isedresults
Office for National Statistics. (2017c, October 26). Annual Survey of Hours and
Earnings: 2017 provisional and 2016 revised results. Retrieved June 19, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandw
orkinghours/bulletins/annualsurveyofhoursandearnings/2017provisionaland2016rev
isedresults#regional-earnings
Office for National Statistics. (2017d, October 26). Annual Survey of Hours and
Earnings: Age Group - ASHE: Table 6. Retrieved June 18, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandw
orkinghours/datasets/agegroupashetable6
Office for National Statistics. (2017e, July 19). Death registrations summary tables
- England and Wales - 2016 dataset. Retrieved June 20, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
deaths/datasets/deathregistrationssummarytablesenglandandwalesreferencetables
Office for National Statistics. (2017f, August 16). EMP04: Employment by
occupation. Retrieved June 19, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentan
demployeetypes/datasets/employmentbyoccupationemp04
Office for National Statistics. (2017g, November 8). Families and Households:
2017. Retrieved June 18, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
families/bulletins/familiesandhouseholds/2017#how-does-the-number-of-peoplewho-live-alone-vary-by-age-and-sex
Office for National Statistics. (2017h, July 19). Deaths by single year of age tables
- UK. Retrieved April 21, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
deaths/datasets/deathregistrationssummarytablesenglandandwalesdeathsbysingley
earofagetables
Office for National Statistics. (2017j, February 9). Appendix Tables - focus on
violent crime and sexual offences. Retrieved April 21, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/a
ppendixtablesfocusonviolentcrimeandsexualoffences
Office for National Statistics. (2017k, November 7). Alcohol-related deaths by sex,
age group and individual cause of death. Retrieved April 21, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/cause
sofdeath/datasets/alcoholrelateddeathsbysexagegroupandindividualcauseofdeath
Office for National Statistics. (2017m, August 2). Deaths Related to Drug
Poisoning, England and Wales. Retrieved April 21, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
deaths/datasets/deathsrelatedtodrugpoisoningenglandandwalesreferencetable
Office for National Statistics. (2017n, September 7). Suicide occurrences England
and Wales. Retrieved from ONS:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
deaths/datasets/suicideinenglandandwales
Office for National Statistics. (2017p, November 23). Domestic abuse in England
and Wales: year ending March 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/domesticabuseinenglandandwalesyearendingmarc
h2017
Office for National Statistics. (2017q). Divorces in England and Wales 2017.
Retrieved from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
divorce
Office for National Statistics. (2017r, November 8). Families and Households:
2017. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from ONS:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
families/bulletins/familiesandhouseholds/2017
Office for National Statistics. (2017s, November 24). Childbearing for women born
in different years. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
conceptionandfertilityrates/datasets/childbearingforwomenbornindifferentyearsref
erencetable
Office for National Statistics. (2017t, February 6). Focus on violent crime and
sexual offences, England and Wales: year ending March 2016 (Appendix Tables).
Retrieved February 28, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/violentcrimeandsexualoffencesinenglandandwales
financialyearendingmar2016
Office for National Statistics. (2017u, February 9). Bulletin Tables - Focus on
violent crime and sexual offences. Retrieved September 4, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/b
ulletintablesfocusonviolentcrimeandsexualoffences
Office for National Statistics. (2017v, February 9). Appendix Tables - focus on
violent crime and sexual offences, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/a
ppendixtablesfocusonviolentcrimeandsexualoffences
Office for National Statistics. (2018a, May 18). Prison population figures: 2018.
Retrieved from Prison population figures: 2018:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/prison-population-figures-2018
Office for National Statistics. (2018aa, July 19). Crime in England and Wales:
Appendix Tables, year ending March 2018 (Table A4). Retrieved August 27, 2018,
from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/c
rimeinenglandandwalesappendixtables
Office for National Statistics. (2018ab, July 19). Crime in England and Wales:
Police Force Area Data Tables, year ending March 2018. Retrieved August 27,
2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/p
oliceforceareadatatables
Office for National Statistics. (2018ac, July 19). Crime in England and Wales:
Annual Trend and Demographic Tables, Table D1. Retrieved August 27, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/c
rimeinenglandandwalesannualtrendanddemographictables
Office for National Statistics. (2018ad, July 19). Crime in England & Wales, year
ending March 2018 - Annual trend and demographic tables, Table D3. Retrieved
August 27, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/c
rimeinenglandandwalesannualtrendanddemographictables
Office for National Statistics. (2018ae, August 16). Criminal Justice System
statistics quarterly: December 2017 - Sentencing Data Tool. Retrieved August 26,
2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-systemstatistics-quarterly-december-2017
Office for National Statistics. (2018af, November 22). Domestic abuse: findings
from the Crime Survey for England and Wales: year ending March 2018.
Retrieved from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/d
omesticabusefindingsfromthecrimesurveyforenglandandwales/yearendingmarch201
8
Office for National Statistics. (2018ag, April 10). Loneliness - What characteristics
and circumstances are associated with feeling lonely? Retrieved January 3, 2019,
from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/wellbeing/articles/loneline
sswhatcharacteristicsandcircumstancesareassociatedwithfeelinglonely/2018-04-10
Office for National Statistics. (2018ah, December 20). Deaths of homeless people
in England and Wales: 2013 to 2017. Retrieved January 3, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
deaths/bulletins/deathsofhomelesspeopleinenglandandwales/2013to2017#qualityand-methodology
Office for National Statistics. (2018b). Crime in England and Wales: year ending
September 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/c
rimeinenglandandwales/yearendingseptember2017
Office for National Statistics. (2018c, November 22). Domestic abuse in England
and Wales: year ending March 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/d
omesticabuseinenglandandwales/yearendingmarch2018
Office for National Statistics. (2018d, January 18). Family spending in the UK:
financial year ending 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfina
nces/expenditure/bulletins/familyspendingintheuk/financialyearending2017
Office for National Statistics. (2018e, June 12). HOUR01 NSA: Actual weekly
hours worked (not seasonally adjusted). Retrieved June 25, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandw
orkinghours/datasets/actualweeklyhoursworkednotseasonallyadjustedhour01nsa
Office for National Statistics. (2018f, February 8). Appendix tables: homicide in
England and Wales. Retrieved September 7, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/a
ppendixtableshomicideinenglandandwales
Office for National Statistics. (2018g, March 1). NEET statistics quarterly brief:
October to December 2017. Retrieved June 19, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/neet-statistics-quarterly-brief-octoberto-december-2017
Office for National Statistics. (2018h, June 12). Public sector employment, UK:
March 2018. Retrieved from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/publicsectorpe
rsonnel/bulletins/publicsectoremployment/latest
Office for National Statistics. (2018j, June 12). UK labour market: June 2018.
Retrieved June 19, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentan
demployeetypes/bulletins/uklabourmarket/latest#economic-inactivity
Office for National Statistics. (2018k, June 12). Unemployment. Retrieved from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peoplenotinwork/unemploym
ent
Office for National Statistics. (2018m, March 14). Child mortality (death cohort)
tables in England and Wales. Retrieved April 3, 2019, from
http://tinyurl.com/y2p76ma9
Office for National Statistics. (2018n, April 26). Crime in England and Wales: year
ending December 2017. Retrieved July 1, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/c
rimeinenglandandwales/yearendingdecember2017
Office for National Statistics. (2018p, September 26). Divorces in England and
Wales: 2017. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
divorce/bulletins/divorcesinenglandandwales/2017
Office for National Statistics. (2018q, July 27). Population estimates by marital
status and living arrangements, England and Wales. Retrieved November 20, 2018,
from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/po
pulationestimates/datasets/populationestimatesbymaritalstatusandlivingarrangeme
nts
Office for National Statistics. (2018r, February 28). Marriages in England and
Wales. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
marriagecohabitationandcivilpartnerships/datasets/marriagesinenglandandwales20
13
Office for National Statistics. (2018s, September 14). Suicide occurrences, England
and Wales. Retrieved February 9, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
deaths/datasets/suicideinenglandandwales
Office for National Statistics. (2018t, September 4). Suicides in the UK. Retrieved
April 28, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/
deaths/datasets/suicidesintheunitedkingdomreferencetables
Office for National Statistics. (2018u, February 8). Sexual offences in England and
Wales: year ending March 2017. Retrieved April 7, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/se
xualoffencesinenglandandwales/yearendingmarch2017#reporting-of-sexualassault-by-rape-or-penetration
Office for National Statistics. (2018v, September 6). Occupational Pensions
Schemes Survey, UK: 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfina
nces/pensionssavingsandinvestments/bulletins/occupationalpensionschemessurvey/
uk2017#what-are-the-average-contribution-rates-in-private-sector-occupationalpension-schemes
Office for National Statistics. (2018w, March 2). Criminal Justice System statistics
quarterly: December 2016. Retrieved from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statisticsquarterly-december-2016
Office for National Statistics. (2018x, July 19). Crime in England and Wales:
Appendix Tables. Retrieved August 25, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/c
rimeinenglandandwalesappendixtables
Office for National Statistics. (2018y, July 19). Crime in England and Wales: year
ending March 2018. Retrieved August 26, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/c
rimeinenglandandwales/yearendingmarch2018
Office for National Statistics. (2018z, February 8). Homicide in England and
Wales: year ending March 2017. Retrieved August 27, 2018, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/h
omicideinenglandandwales/yearendingmarch2017
Office for National Statistics. (2019a, March 19). HOUR01 NSA: Actual weekly
hours worked (not seasonally adjusted). Retrieved from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandw
orkinghours/datasets/actualweeklyhoursworkednotseasonallyadjustedhour01nsa
Office for National Statistics. (2019b, January 24). Crime in England and Wales:
Appendix tables; year ending September 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2019, from
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/c
rimeinenglandandwalesappendixtables
Olson, R. (2014, June 25). Average IQ of students by college major and gender
ratio. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from
http://www.randalolson.com/2014/06/25/average-iq-of-students-by-college-majorand-gender-ratio/
O'Pie. (2012). Exposing Feminism: The Thirty Years' War Against Men. The
Men's Press. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y46qnoty
Oral Health Foundation. (2017, July 19). Action launched on HPV for boys.
Retrieved April 22, 2018, from https://www.dentalhealth.org/News/unjust-unfairand-discriminatory-decision-will-cost-lives-charity-slams-jcvi-decision-on-hpv
ORCHID. (2018, April 9). Report reveals 4 in 10 prostate cancer cases are
diagnosed late and an impending crisis in prostate cancer provision. Retrieved June
14, 2018, from https://orchid-cancer.org.uk/news/new-report-reveals-4-in-10-
prostate-cancer-cases-are-diagnosed-late-and-an-impending-crisis-in-prostatecancer-provision/
Orr. (2013, September 13). Acquittal does not make someone a victim – this is just
the system at work. Guardian. Retrieved April 6, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/13/acquittal-does-notmake-victim
Oryszczuk, S. (2018, February 28). The Jewish parents cutting out the bris.
Retrieved August 3, 2018, from https://jewishnews.timesofisrael.com/the-jewishparents-cutting-out-the-bris/
Oster, J. (1968, April). Further fate of the foreskin. Incidence of preputial
adhesions, phimosis, and smegma among Danish schoolboys. Arch.Dis.Child.,
43(228), 200–203. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2019851/?page=2
Ouazad and Page. (2012, January). Students' Perceptions of Teacher Biases:
Experimental Economics in Schools. Retrieved May 3, 2018, from Centre for the
Economics of Education, London School of Economics:
http://cee.lse.ac.uk/ceedps/ceedp133.pdf
Owings and Williams. (2010). Trends in Circumcision for Male Newborns in U.S.
Hospitals: 1979–2010. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from National Centre for Health
Statistics:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/circumcision_2013/circumcision_2013.pdf
Pabalan et al. (2015, December). Association of male circumcision with risk of
prostate cancer: a meta-analysis. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis., 18(4), 352-357.
doi:10.1038/pcan.2015.34
Pahl, J. (2000, January). The gendering of spending within households. Retrieved
June 18, 2018, from Radical Statistics Group:
http://www.radstats.org.uk/no075/pahl.htm
Palmer. (2006, October 22). If two people accuse you, then you are guilty. They get
compensation, you get jail. The Telegraph. Retrieved March 6, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/personal-view/3633405/If-two-peopleaccuse-you-then-you-are-guilty.-They-get-compensation-you-get-jail.html
Panscofar and Vernon-Feagans. (2006). Mother and father language input to young
children: contributions to later language development. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 27, 571-587. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2006.08.003
Parental Alienation Research Institute. (2019, April 25). Parental Alienation
Research Institute . Retrieved from http://parentalalienationresearch.com/
Parry and Tolhurst. (2018, May 2). Screening Scandal 270 women died after NHS
IT glitch meant 450,000 missed breast cancer screening – as Jeremy Hunt
'apologises wholeheartedly' to families involved. Retrieved from The Sun:
https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6193120/breast-cancer-screening-nhs-mistakejeremy-hunt/
Parson, L. (2016, January 18). Are STEM Syllabi Gendered? A Feminist Critical
Discourse Analysis. The Qualitative Report at NSUWorks, 21(1), Article 9.
Retrieved May 21, 2018, from http://nsuworks.nova.edu/tqr/vol21/iss1/9
Pascal, Blaise (1670), Pensées. Project Gutenberg English publication 2006,
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/18269/18269-0.txt
PASK. (2013a, May). About PASK, The Partner Abuse State of Knowledge
Project. Retrieved September 6, 2018, from Journal of Partner Abuse:
https://domesticviolenceresearch.org/
PASK. (2013b, May). The Impact and Consequences of Partner Abuse on Partners.
Retrieved September 6, 2018, from https://domesticviolenceresearch.org/impactof-abuse-on-partners/
Patai and Koertge. (1994). Professing Feminism: Cautionary Tales from the
Strange World of Women's Studies. New Republic Books (Harper Collins).
Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y4zufusk
Patel, Palmer and Sheriff. (2005). Penile Sensitivity and Sexual Satisfaction after
Circumcision: Are We Informing Men Correctly? Urologia Internationalis, 75, 62-
66. doi: https://doi.org/10.1159/000085930
Payne et al. (2007, May). Sensation and Sexual Arousal in Circumcised and
Uncircumcised Men. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 4(3), 667–674. Retrieved July 27,
2017, from https://www.jsm.jsexmed.org/article/S1743-6095(15)31551-4/fulltext
Peachey. (2018, November 30). Women's state pension changes to get legal review.
Retrieved March 28, 2019, from https://www.bbc.com/news/business-46400290
Pemberton, H. (2017, March 10). WASPI's Is (Mostly) a Campaign for Inequality.
Retrieved March 28, 2019, from
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1467-923X.12347
Pence and Paymar. (1993). Education Groups for Men Who Batter: The Duluth
Model. Springer. Retrieved from http://www.springerpub.com/education-groupsfor-men-who-batter-9780826179906.html
Penis Project. (2016, March 9). Foreskin during sex vs Circumcised. Retrieved
July 27, 2018, from https://tinyurl.com/y2au4mrz
Peter Wright. (2014). Gynocentrism: From Feudalism to the Modern Disney
Princess. Independent. Retrieved from https://www.amazon.com/GynocentrismFeudalism-Modern-Disney-Princess/dp/1520327323/ref=tmm_pap_title_0?
_encoding=UTF8&amp;qid=&amp;sr=
Peterson. (2015, March 16). New "No Boys Allowed" School Day Aims To Help
Girls With Science and Math. Retrieved February 25, 2019, from The Libertarian
Republic: http://thelibertarianrepublic.com/new-no-boys-allowed-school-day-aimsto-help-girls-with-science-and-math/
Petrovic. (2009, March 1). The influence of marital status on epidemiological
characteristics of suicides in the southeastern part of Serbia. Central European
Journal of Public Health , 17(1), 41-46. doi:10.1007/s10389-008-0209-6
https://cejph.szu.cz/artkey/cjp-200901-0011_The-Influence-of-Marital-Status-onEpidemiological-Characteristics-of-Suicides-in-the-Southeastern-Part-of-Serb.php
Petrovic and Templer. (1984, June 1). Heterosexual Molestation of Children Who
Later Became Rapists. Psychological Reports, 54(3). doi:
https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1984.54.3.810
Pew Research. (2008, September 25). Gender and Power: Women Call the Shots
at Home; Public Mixed on Gender Roles in Jobs. Retrieved March 22, 2019, from
https://tinyurl.com/y4so3a93
Phil Rumney. (2018, May 4). Retrieved March 4, 2019, from
https://twitter.com/phil_rumney/status/992535693745426433
Phillips, J. (2015, November 19). We need International Men's Day about as much
as white history month, or able body action day. Independent. Retrieved May 18,
2018, from https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/we-need-international-mensday-about-as-much-as-a-white-history-month-or-able-body-action-daya6740646.html
Phipps and Young. (2013). That's what she said: Women students' experiences of
'lad culture' in higher education. Retrieved May 21, 2018, from National Union of
Students:
https://www.nus.org.uk/Global/Campaigns/That's%20what%20she%20said%20full
%20report%20Final%20web.pdf
Pinker, S. (1997, November 2). Why They Kill Their Newborns. New York Times.
Retrieved September 7, 2018, from http://www.gargaro.com/pinker.html
Pinkerton and Abramson. (1997, May). Effectiveness of condoms in preventing
HIV transmission. Social Science & Medicine, 1303-1312. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0277-9536(96)00258-4
Pizzey, E. (2011). This Way to the Revolution: A Memoir. Peter Owen Ltd.
Pleasance. (2017, June 29). Brace yourself, this might sting a bit... Boys scream in
pain as they are circumcised with NO anaesthetic in Turkey. Daily Mail. Retrieved
March 15, 2019, from https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4650152/Turkishboys-circumcised-no-anaesthetic.html?login#readerCommentsCommand-messagefield
Poole, G. (2017). You Can Stop Male Suicide. Retrieved February 11, 2019, from
https://stopmalesuicide.com/book/
Poole, G. (2014a, September 18). Surely everyone carrying out circumcisions
should be registered? Retrieved August 2, 2018, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/men/active/mens-health/11101320/Surely-everyonecarrying-out-circumcisions-should-be-registered.html
Poole, G. (2014b, September 23). So much for sex equality, ZERO per cent of Brits
think mums should work more than dads. Retrieved June 25, 2018, from
InsideMAN: http://www.inside-man.co.uk/2014/09/23/so-much-for-sex-equalityzero-per-cent-of-brits-think-mums-should-work-more-than-dads/
Powell and Jenkins. (2016, September 25). Ex-husband of Labour's domestic abuse
Minister 'still has nightmares about her' after attack during divorce . Mail Online.
Retrieved April 4, 2019, from https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article3806018/Ex-husband-Labour-s-domestic-abuse-Minister-nightmares-attackdivorce.html
Press Association. (2009, November 9). Children's claims of sex abuse by women
double. The Guardian. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/nov/09/sex-abuse-by-women-doubles
Price. (1996, December). Male Circumcision: A Legal Affront. Retrieved August 3,
2018, from The Circumcision Reference Library:
http://www.cirp.org/library/legal/price-uklc/
Princeton. (2018). Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. Retrieved October
28, 2018, from
https://fragilefamilies.princeton.edu/sites/fragilefamilies/files/ff_fact_sheet.pdf
Priskorn et al. (2018, April 11). Average sperm count remains unchanged despite
reduction in maternal smoking: results from a large cross-sectional study with
annual investigations over 21 years . human reproduction, 33(6), 998-1008. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/dey090
Prison Reform Trust. (2010). Punishing Disadvantage: a profile of children in
custody. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from
http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/uploads/documents/PunishingDisadvantage.p
df
Prison Reform Trust. (2013). Prison: the facts Bromley Briefings Summer 2013.
Retrieved July 4, 2018, from
http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Prisonthefacts.pdf
Prostate Cancer UK. (2016a, March). Prostate Cancer UK policy position on the
PSA test. Retrieved from https://prostatecanceruk.org/media/2493257/prostatecancer-uk-policy-position-on-the-psa-test-2016.pdf
Prostate Cancer UK. (2016b, November). What if my GP won't give me a PSA
test? Retrieved April 22, 2018, from The PSA Test:
https://www.prostatecanceruk.org/prostate-information/prostate-tests/psa-test
Prostate Cancer UK. (2018a). Implementing mpMRI before biopsy: learning from
those that have succeeded. Retrieved March 10, 2019, from
https://prostatecanceruk.org/for-health-professionals/best-practice/mpmri-casestudies
Prostate Cancer UK. (2018b, June). mpMRI before biopsy: Improving diagnosis for
men with prostate cancer. Retrieved March 10, 2019, from
https://prostatecanceruk.org/for-health-professionals/our-projects/mpmri-beforebiopsy
Public Health Agency of Canada. (2007). The Maternity Experiences Survey
(MES) 2006-2007 - Data Tables. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from http://www.phacaspc.gc.ca/rhs-ssg/pdf/tab-eng.pdf
Public Health England. (2014, May 14). Change in schedule from three to two
doses in the HPV vaccination programme . Retrieved April 22, 2018, from NHS
England:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/310958/HPV_Joint_Letter_14_May.pdf
Public Health Wales. (2016, January 13). Adverse Childhood Experiences and their
impact on health-harming behaviours in the Welsh adult population. Retrieved
October 20, 2018, from https://tinyurl.com/jzza8lt
Public Health Wales Observatory. (2016, May 23). Women set to benefit from new
cervical screening test. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from NHS Wales:
http://www.publichealthwalesobservatory.wales.nhs.uk/news/41479/
Public Health Wales Observatory. (2017, July 20). Child profile - key messages
chapter 5. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from
http://www.publichealthwalesobservatory.wales.nhs.uk/child-profile-keymessages-5/
Purdy. (2016). Their Angry Creed: The shocking history of feminism and how it is
destroying our way of life. LPS publishing. Retrieved from
https://tinyurl.com/y3rtjdg6
Quranic Path. (2018). Circumcision - Does the Qur'an Approve it? Genital
Mutilation. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
http://www.quranicpath.com/misconceptions/circumcision.html
Radl, Salazar and Cebolla-Boado. (2017). Does Living in a Fatherless Household
Compromise Educational Success? A Comparative Study of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills. Eur J Population, 33, 217-242. doi:10.1007/s10680-017-9414-8
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10680-017-9414-8
Rantzen. (2009, November 9). Gender-blindness on child sexual abuse. The
Guardian. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/nov/09/boys-sexual-abusechildline
Ravanos et al. (2018, October). Declining Sperm Counts… or Rather Not? A Mini
Review. Obstetrical & Gynecological Survey, 73(10), 595-605.
doi:10.1097/OGX.0000000000000599
https://journals.lww.com/obgynsurvey/Abstract/2018/10000/Declining_Sperm_Cou
nts__or_Rather_Not__A_Mini.19.aspx
Refuge. (2018). myths of domestic violence. Retrieved September 3, 2018, from
Refuge: https://www.refuge.org.uk/our-work/forms-of-violence-andabuse/domestic-violence/myths-of-domestic-violence/
Refugee Law Project. (2012, May 21). Gender Against Men. Retrieved April 11,
2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJSl99HQYXc
Refugee Law Project. (2015, March 30). They Slept With Me. Retrieved April 11,
2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xQ2RH8kxCTI
Research Councils UK. (2013). RCUK Expectations for Equality and Diversity.
Retrieved April 18, 2018, from Research Councils UK:
https://www.ukri.org/files/legacy/skills/equalitystatement-pdf/
Resnick, P. (1970). Murder of the newborn: a psychiatric review of neonaticide.
Am J Psychiatry, 126(10), 1414-1420. doi:10.1176/ajp.126.10.1414
https://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/doi/abs/10.1176/ajp.126.3.325
Respect. (2012). Accreditation Standard. Retrieved October 6, 2018, from
Respect:
https://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/documents/s47298/Domestic%20Violence
%20Appendix%201.pdf
Reynolds. (2015, January 3). Juveniles Sexually Abused by Staffers at Corrections
Facilities: Scandal in Idaho Shines Light on Victimization of Young People by Staff.
Retrieved April 11, 2019, from Instapundit.com:
https://pjmedia.com/instapundit/200500/
Richard Warshak. (2014). Social science and parenting plans for young children: A
consensus report. American Psychological Association: Psychology, Public Policy,
and Law, 20(1), 46-67. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/law0000005
Richters et al. (2006, August 1). Circumcision in Australia: prevalence and effects
on sexual health. International Journal of STD & AIDs, 17(8), 547-554. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1258/095646206778145730
Rijken. (2013a). Ulwaluko. Retrieved July 27, 2018, from Dr Dingeman Rijkens
site: http://www.ulwaluko.co.za/Photos.html
Rijken. (2013b). Ulwaluko. Retrieved July 27, 2018, from Dr Dingeman Rijkens
site: http://www.ulwaluko.co.za/Home.html
Robinson, Jefferies and Lacaze. (2017, February). Letter to the Editor - Re:
Canadian Pediatrics Society position statement on newborn circumcision: a risk
benefit analysis revisited. Retrieved August 5, 2018, from
http://www.canjurol.com/html/freearticles/V24I1_19_FREE_Letter_Editor_Feb17.pdf
Robinson, N. H. (2016, May). Boys to Men: The underachievement of young men in
higher education – and how to start tackling it . Retrieved April 17, 2018, from
Higher Education Policy Institute: http://www.hepi.ac.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2016/05/Boys-to-Men.pdf
Rodríguez-Pulido. (1992, March). Suicide in the Canary Islands: standardized
epidemiological study by age, sex, and marital status. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 27(2), 69-74. Retrieved from
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00788508
Roger. (2018, July 24). HPV vaccine to be offered to boys - but only some.
Retrieved March 10, 2019, from Birmingham Live:
https://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/health/hpv-vaccine-offered-boys-only14946215
Rose, D. (2018, May 6). Finally - boys will be given potentially lifesaving HPV
vaccine, Health Minister hints. Retrieved from Daily Mail:
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-5695509/Finally-boys-given-potentiallylifesaving-HPV-vaccine-Health-Minister-hints.html#ixzz5EhVctBPt
Ross, L. F. (1996, April). Disclosing Misattributed Paternity. bioethics, 10(2), 114-
130. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8519.1996.tb00111.x
Rossow. (1993, December). Suicide, alcohol, and divorce; aspects of gender and
family integration. 88(12), 1659-1665. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-
0443.1993.tb02041.x
Royal Australasian College of Physicians. (2010, September). CIRCUMCISION
OF INFANT MALES. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
https://www.racp.edu.au/docs/default-source/advocacy-library/circumcision-ofinfant-males.pdf
Royal Courts of Justice. (2015, January 14). In the matter of B and G (Children)
(No 2) by Sir James Munby. Retrieved March 13, 2019, from Family Court sitting
at Leeds; Case No: LJ13C00295: https://www.judiciary.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2015/01/BandG_2_.pdf
Royal Dutch Medical Society. (2010, May 27). Non-therapeutic circumcision of
male minors. Retrieved August 3, 2018, from KNMG:
https://www.knmg.nl/actualiteit-opinie/nieuws/nieuwsbericht/nieuwsuur-overjongensbesnijdenis.htm
Rucki, A. (2014, April 11). Bogus circumcision nurse who almost killed baby jailed.
Retrieved August 2, 2018, from Evening Standard:
https://www.standard.co.uk/news/crime/bogus-circumcision-nurse-who-almostkilled-baby-jailed-9255143.html
Rumney. (2006). False allegations of rape. The Cambridge Law Journal, 65(1),
125-158. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0008197306007069
Runeson et al. (2010, July 13). Method of attempted suicide as predictor of
subsequent successful suicide: national long-term cohort study. 341:c3222 . doi:
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.c3222
Rush. (2014, August 5). A dozen men are ambushed, stripped naked and forced to
undergo circumcisions in Kenya after their wives complained that they were not as
good in bed as circumcised men. Mail Online. Retrieved March 15, 2019, from
https://tinyurl.com/y688ckz9
Ryan et al. (2006, May). Is One Good Parent Good Enough? Patterns of Mother
and Father Parenting and Child Cognitive Outcomes at 24 and 36 Months.
Parenting, 6(2/3), 211 - 228. doi:DOI: 10.1080/15295192.2006.9681306
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/15295192.2006.9681306
Sally Davies. (2018, December 21). Chief Medical Officer (CMO): annual reports.
Retrieved December 22, 2018, from gov.uk:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/chief-medical-officer-annual-reports
Samaritans. (2012, September). Men, Suicide and Society. Retrieved February 8,
2019, from https://media.samaritans.org/documents/men-suicide-societysamaritans-2012.pdf
Samaritans. (2017). Samaritans suicide report 2017. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from
https://www.samaritans.org/sites/default/files/kcfinder/files/Suicide_statistics_rep
ort_2017_Final.pdf
Sanghani. (2015, June 23). Underage sex conviction: Why older women have sex
with young boys. Telegraph. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/11694528/female-sex-offendersWhy-older-women-sleep-with-young-boys.html
Sanomat. (2006, August 7). Court rules circumcision of four-year-old boy illegal.
Retrieved from http://www.cirp.org/news/helsinginsanomat2006-08-07/
Sariola. (2012, March 7). Retrieved August 3, 2018, from The Central Union for
Child Welfare, Finland: https://www.lskl.fi/blogi/paluuta-entiseen-ei-ole/
Sarkadi et al. (2008). Fathers' involvement and children's developmental
outcomes: a systematic review of longitudinal studies. Acta Pædiatrica, 97, 153-
158. Retrieved October 29, 2018, from
http://www.effeps.it/res/site39917/res630646_fathers-involvement.pdf
Scholz. (2012, December 12). Circumcision remains legal in Germany. dw.com.
Retrieved March 14, 2019, from https://www.dw.com/en/circumcision-remainslegal-in-germany/a-16399336
Schroder, N. (2009, April). The dilemma of unintentional discovery of misattributed
paternity in living kidney donors and recipients. Current opinion in organ
transplantation, 14(2), 196-200. doi:10.1097/MOT.0b013e328327b21f
https://journals.lww.com/cotransplantation/Abstract/2009/04000/The_dilemma_of_unintentional_discovery_of.
18.aspx
Scott. (2018a, June 2). Rape juries: Jolyon Maugham hits the wrong target.
Retrieved March 4, 2019, from The Barrister Blogger:
http://barristerblogger.com/2018/06/02/rape-juries-jolyon-maugham-hits-thewrong-target/
Scott. (2018b, November 23). Scrapping juries in rape trials would be a mistake.
The Spectator. Retrieved March 4, 2019, from
https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2018/11/scrapping-juries-in-rape-trials-would-be-amistake/
Scott, M. (2017, December 15). Liam Allan's case shows why our criminal justice
system is becoming a matter of national shame. Retrieved March 6, 2019, from
The Barrister Blogger: http://barristerblogger.com/2017/12/15/liam-allans-caseshows-criminal-justice-system-becoming-matter-national-shame/
Scottish Government. (2018, June 19). Homelessness in Scotland 2017/18; Excel
Tables and Charts. Retrieved 1 1, 2019, from Scottish Homelessness Statistics:
https://www2.gov.scot/Topics/Statistics/Browse/Housing-Regeneration/RefTables
Scottish Public Health Network. (2016, May). 'Polishing the Diamonds' Addressing
Adverse Childhood Experiences in Scotland. Retrieved October 20, 2018, from
https://www.scotphn.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/2016_05_26-ACE-ReportFinal-AF.pdf
Scruton. (1999, August). Modern Manhood. City Journal, NY. Retrieved April 5,
2019, from https://www.city-journal.org/html/modern-manhood-11823.html
Sengupta et al. (2016, April 19). The Disappearing Sperms: Analysis of Reports
Published Between 1980 and 2015 . American Journal of Men's Health, 11(4),
1279-1304. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/1557988316643383
Sengupta, Borges and Dutta. (2018). Decline in sperm count in European men
during the past 50 years . Human & Experimental Toxicology, 37(3), 247-255. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0960327117703690
Senkul et al. (2004, January). Circumcision in adults: effect on sexual function.
Urology, 63(1), 155-158. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urology.2003.08.035
Shahid. (2005, March 5). Phimosis in Children. ISRN Urology, 707329.
doi:10.5402/2012/707329
she-conomy. (2013). Marketing to women quick facts. Retrieved March 21, 2019,
from http://she-conomy.com/report/marketing-to-women-quick-facts
Shepherd and Pence. (1999). Coordinating Community Responses to Domestic
Violence: Lessons from Duluth and Beyond (SAGE Series on Violence against
Women). Sage. Retrieved from https://tinyurl.com/y4wbsukk
Sherwood. (2018, February 18). Iceland law to outlaw male circumcision sparks
row over religious freedom. The Guardian. Retrieved March 14, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/feb/18/iceland-ban-male-circumcisionfirst-european-country
Silverstein and Sayre. (2009, September). The Female Economy. Harvard Business
Review. Retrieved March 21, 2019, from https://hbr.org/2009/09/the-femaleeconomy
Simmons et al. (2004). Human sperm competition: testis size, sperm production and
rates of extra pair copulations. Animal Behaviour, 68, 297-302.
doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2003.11.013
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0003347204001691?
via%3Dihub
Slack. (2014, July 31). Eight prisons have only sex offenders: Historic abuse cases
fuel rise in prison population. Retrieved April 7, 2019, from
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2711482/Eight-prisons-sex-offendersHistoric-abuse-cases-fuel-rise-prison-population.html
Smajdor, A. (2016, April 6). Mike Buchanan and a female ethicist discuss
mandatory paternity testing at birth. Retrieved December 18, 2018, from Shelagh
Fogerty's show on LBC Radio: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=0f3V7tRpSRs&t=238s
Smith. (2012). Uncomfortable Places, Close Spaces: Female Correctional Workers'
Sexual Interactions With Men and Boys in Custody. UCLA LAW Review, 1690.
Retrieved from https://www.uclalawreview.org/uncomfortable-places-closespaces-female-correctional-workers'-sexual-interactions-with-men-and-boys-incustody-2/
Smith, C. (2015, June 2). No anti-father bias in family courts, research finds.
Retrieved October 11, 2018, from The Law Society Gazette:
https://www.lawgazette.co.uk/law/no-anti-father-bias-in-family-courts-researchfinds/5049142.article
Social Exclusion Unit. (2002). Reducing re-offending by ex-prisoners. Retrieved
July 4, 2018, from
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http:/www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media
/cabinetoffice/social_exclusion_task_force/assets/publications_1997_to_2006/redu
cing_summary.pdf
Sorrells, et al. (2007, April). Fine-touch pressure thresholds in the adult penis.
British Journal of Urology International, 99(4), 864-869. Retrieved July 27, 2018,
from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1464-410X.2006.06685.x
South African Health News Service. (2014, June 25). Health-E News. Retrieved
July 27, 2018, from The South African Health News Service: https://www.healthe.org.za/2014/06/25/half-million-initiates-maimed-knife/
Spencer. (2019). Breakthrough in prostate cancer diagnosis as scientists 17 genes
that radically increase chance of carriers developing the disease. Daily Mail 3 May
2019, retrieved from https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article6965065/Scientists-discover-17-genes-increase-chance-carriers-developingprostate-cancer.html
Spencer and Hargreaves. (2018, July 17). Thousands of men are being left in agony
as NHS denies them of hernia operations unless they are in so much pain they can't
work. Daily Mail. Retrieved March 11, 2019, from https://tinyurl.com/y6ly88hk
Spiegel Online. (2013, September 27). German Court Sets New Circumcision
Rules. Spiegel Online. Retrieved March 14, 2019, from
http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/new-circumcision-ruling-requiresdoctors-to-discuss-procedure-a-924984.html
Starr, S. (2012, August 1). Estimating Gender Disparities in Federal Criminal
Cases. Retrieved July 3, 2018, from University of Michigan Law School
Scholarship Repository: https://tinyurl.com/y6bv28sr
Stats Wales. (2011). Deaths by cause. Retrieved April 21, 2018, from Stats Wales:
https://statswales.gov.wales/Catalogue/Health-and-Social-Care/Births-Deathsand-Conceptions/Deaths/Deaths-by-Cause
StatsWales. (2017). Rough Sleepers by local authority. Retrieved January 3, 2019,
from https://statswales.gov.wales/Catalogue/Housing/Homelessness/RoughSleepers/roughsleepers-by-localauthority
StatsWales. (2018, July 26). Households for which assistance has been provided by
outcome, age and gender. Retrieved September 21, 2018, from
https://statswales.gov.wales/Catalogue/Housing/Homelessness/StatutoryHomelessness-Prevention-andRelief/householdsforwhichassistancehasbeenprovided-by-outcome-age-gender
Steinmetz, S. K. (1977). The Battered Husband Syndrome. VICTIMOLOGY 2,
499-509. http://papahelp.ch/downloads/Steinmetz_The_Battered_Husband_Syndrome.pdf
Stemple. (2008/9). Male Rape and Human Rights. Hastings Law Journal, 60(3),
605. Retrieved April 11, 2019, from http://tinyurl.com/y3exwt5u
Stemple and Meyer. (2014, June). The Sexual Victimization of Men in America:
New Data Challenge Old Assumptions. Am J Public Health., 104(6), e19-e26.
Retrieved April 9, 2019, from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4062022/
Stemple and Meyer. (2017, October 10). Sexual Victimization by Women Is More
Common Than Previously Known. Scientific American. Retrieved April 9, 2019,
from https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/sexual-victimization-by-womenis-more-common-than-previously-known/
Stemple, Flores and Meyer. (2017, May). Sexual victimization perpetrated by
women: Federal data reveal surprising prevalence. Aggression and Violent
Behavior, 34, 302-311. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2016.09.007
Stevens and Haidt. (2017, September 4). The Greater Male Variability Hypothesis
– An Addendum to our post on the Google Memo. Retrieved April 27, 2019, from
Heterodoxy Academy: https://heterodoxacademy.org/the-greater-male-variabilityhypothesis/
Stockl et al. (2017, August 11). Child homicide perpetrators worldwide: a
systematic review. BMJ Paediatrics Open, 1(1), e000112. doi:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5862181/
Stoet and Geary. (2018, February 14). The Gender-Equality Paradox in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education. Psychological Science,
29(4), 581-593 . Retrieved March 22, 2019, from
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797617741719
Storr. (2011, July 17). The rape of men: the darkest secret of war. The Observer.
Retrieved April 11, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/jul/17/the-rape-of-men
Stowe Family Law. (2017, January 27). False accusations of domestic violence:
what can you do? Retrieved October 17, 2018, from Stow Family Law Blog:
https://www.stowefamilylaw.co.uk/blog/2017/01/27/false-accusations-of-domesticviolence-what-can-you-do/
Stowe, M. (2011, October 26). Is Paternity Fraud really a "ticking time bomb"?
Retrieved December 18, 2018, from Stowe Family Law Blog:
https://www.stowefamilylaw.co.uk/blog/2011/10/26/is-paternity-fraud-really-aticking-time-bomb/
Straton, J. C. (1994). The Myth of the "Battered Husband Syndrome".
Masculinities: Interdisciplinary Studies on Gender 2, 4, 79-83. Retrieved
September 3, 2018, from https://tinyurl.com/y6r3xn5h
Stubbs, B. (2017). National GCSE and A level performance figures. Retrieved
April 16, 2018, from Student Performance Analysis:
http://www.bstubbs.co.uk/natfig.htm
Sylvester and Bennett. (2018, June 26). Use of 'chemical cosh' drugs on children
doubles in a decade. The Times. Retrieved January 16, 2019, from
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/use-of-chemical-cosh-drugs-on-childrendoubles-in-a-decade-2h90r9xgf
Taft et al. (2018, March 13). Unintended and unwanted pregnancy in Australia: a
cross-sectional, national random telephone survey of prevalence and outcomes.
Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://www.mja.com.au/system/files/issues/209_09/10.5694mja17.01094.pdf
Taxpayers' Alliance. (2018, August 27). Pension Inequality. Retrieved March 25,
2019, from https://www.taxpayersalliance.com/pensions_inequality_press_release
Taylor and Lockwood. (1996, February). The prepuce: specialized mucosa of the
penis and its loss to circumcision. British Journal of Urology, 77(2), 291-295.
Retrieved July 27, 2018, from
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1046/j.1464-410X.1996.85023.x
The Equality Trust. (2016). The Scale of Economic Inequality in the UK. Retrieved
May 18, 2018, from The Equality Trust: https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/scaleeconomic-inequality-uk
The King's Fund. (2018). Overview of the health and social care workforce.
Retrieved June 20, 2018, from https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/projects/time-thinkdifferently/trends-workforce-overview
The Liz Library. (2018). Fatherless Children. Retrieved from
http://www.thelizlibrary.org/site-index/site-indexframe.html#soulhttp://www.thelizlibrary.org/fatherless/effects-offatherlessness.html
The Male Contraception Initiative. (2018, March). Contraceptives in active
development. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://www.malecontraceptive.org/male-contraception-research/prospectivemale-contraceptive-options/
The Male Contraceptive Initiative. (2017, August 31). Getting male birth control
to market. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://www.malecontraceptive.org/2017/08/31/birth-control-for-men-market/
The Marriage Foundation. (2014, June 6). Nearly half of today's 20 year olds will
never marry. Retrieved November 20, 2018, from The Marriage Foundation:
http://marriagefoundation.org.uk/nearly-half-of-todays-20-year-olds-will-nevermarry/
The Marriage Foundation. (2016). Top 10 key facts on marriage. Retrieved
November 20, 2018, from http://marriagefoundation.org.uk/research/
The Marriage Foundation. (2017, July). Establishing the facts about family
breakdown transforming the debate about marriage. Retrieved November 20,
2018, from http://marriagefoundation.org.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2017/07/Establishing-the-facts-about-family-breakdown-1.pdf
The Pensions Regulator. (2019). Contributions and funding. Retrieved from
https://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/en/employers/managing-ascheme/contributions-and-funding
The Scotsman. (2005, March 29). 'Hidden' death toll of Forth Bridge revealed.
Retrieved June 20, 2018, from https://www.scotsman.com/news/hidden-death-tollof-forth-bridge-revealed-1-1006801
This Is Africa. (2015, January 16). WATCH: Kenyan man forcibly circumcised in
public. Retrieved March 15, 2019, from https://thisisafrica.me/watch-kenyan-manforcibly-circumcised-public/
Thomas. (2010, February). Are juries fair? Retrieved March 2, 2019, from
Ministry of Justice Research Series 1/10:
https://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/publications/research-and-analysis/mojresearch/are-juries-fair-research.pdf
Thomas. (2012). Homelessness kills: An analysis of the mortality of homeless
people in early twenty-first century England Summary. Retrieved January 3, 2019,
from Crisis:
https://www.crisis.org.uk/media/236799/crisis_homelessness_kills_es2012.pdf
Thomson, A. (2017, May 17). Caring for the elderly shouldn't be a girl's job.
Retrieved June 27, 2018, from The Times:
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/caring-for-the-elderly-shouldn-t-bea-girl-s-job-hlk0vvtdf
Thurley and McInnes. (2018, November 6). As women's pension age reaches 65,
how equal are pension incomes? HOC Library.
https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/as-womens-pension-age-reaches-65-howequal-are-pension-incomes/
Tieman. (2011, March 16). The one good man. Retrieved April 27, 2019, from
AVFM: https://www.avoiceformen.com/feminism/the-one-good-man/
Times Higher Education. (2016, June 28). Improve gender balance in Irish HE or
face fines, says review. Retrieved April 18, 2018, from Times Higher Education:
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/improve-gender-balance-irish-he-orface-fines-says-review
Tobian and Gray. (2011, October 5). The Medical Benefits of Male Circumcision.
JAMA, 306(13), 1479-1480. doi:10.1001/jama.2011.1431
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/1104451
Topping. (2018, November 21). Scrap juries in rape trials, Labour MP suggests.
The Guardian. Retrieved March 4, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/nov/21/scrap-juries-in-rape-trialslabour-mp-ann-coffey
Townsend and Syal. (2009, October 4). Up to 64,000 women in UK 'are child-sex
offenders'. The Guardian. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/oct/04/uk-female-child-sex-offenders
Trading Economics. (2018, June). United Kingdom GDP. Retrieved from
https://tradingeconomics.com/united-kingdom/gdp
Trovato. (1991, December 1). Sex, marital status, and suicide in Canada:.
Sociological Perspectives, 34(4), 427-445. doi: https://doi.org/10.2307/1389401
Truss. (2017, February 12). Liz Truss to ban 'humiliating' questioning of women by
abusive exes in court. Retrieved October 18, 2018, from
https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/home-affairs/justicesystem/news/83274/liz-truss-ban-humiliating-questioning-women-abusive
Tsirigotis et al. (2011, August 1). Med Sci Monit., 17(8), PH65-70.
doi:10.12659/MSM.881887
https://www.medscimonit.com/abstract/index/idArt/881887
Tsopelas et al. (2012, July-August). Female perpetrators of sexual abuse of minors:
What are the consequences for the victims? International Journal of Law and
Psychiatry, 35(4), 305-310. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijlp.2012.04.003
Tucker. (2018, September 12). Scholarships for Women in Male-Dominated
Industries. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from TopUniversities.com:
https://www.topuniversities.com/student-info/scholarship-advice/scholarshipswomen-male-dominated-industries
Turner. (2017, June 11). Oxford University blasted for 'insulting' decision to allow
students to sit exams at home as it implies women are the 'weaker sex'. The
Telegraph. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2017/06/11/oxford-university-blastedinsulting-decision-allow-students/
Turner. (2018, March 15). Oxford University set to feminise curriculum by
requesting inclusion of women on reading lists. Retrieved February 24, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2018/03/14/oxford-university-set-feminisecurriculum-requesting-inclusion/
Turner. (2019a, February 9). Oxford University's Classics degree to be overhauled
in bid to boost number of female students getting Firsts. The Telegraph. Retrieved
February 24, 2019, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2019/02/09/oxford-universitys-classicsdegree-overhauled-bid-boost-number/
Turner. (2019b, January 11). Oxford ends women-only fellowship after university
rules that it breaches equality law. The Telegraph. Retrieved February 24, 2019,
from https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2019/01/11/oxford-ends-women-onlyfellowship-university-rules-breaches/
Turner and Kirk. (2017, August 17). A-level results 2017: Boys beat girls to top
grades for first time in 17 years amid tougher exams. Retrieved April 16, 2018,
from The Telegraph: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2017/08/17/a-levelresults-2017-first-rise-top-grades-six-years-despite/
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2012, December 20). Intended
and Unintended Births in the United States: 1982 - 2010. Retrieved December 21,
2018, from National Health Statistics Reports:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr055.pdf
U.S. Preventive Services. (2018, May). Final Recommendation Statement:
Prostate Cancer Screening. Retrieved June 14, 2018, from
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/Recommendation
StatementFinal/prostate-cancer-screening1
UCAS. (2017a, July 13). June Deadline Analysis: Sex and age. Retrieved April 16,
2018, from University and College Admissions System (UCAS):
https://www.ucas.com/file/115911/download?token=EokhytEH
UCAS. (2017b, December). Applicants and acceptances by groups of applicants
2017. Retrieved April 16, 2018, from University and Colleges Admissions System:
https://www.ucas.com/corporate/data-and-analysis/ucas-undergraduatereleases/ucas-undergraduate-end-cycle-data-resources/applicants-andacceptances-groups-applicants-2017
UCAS Analysis & Research. (2017, December 14). End of Cycle Report 2017
Patterns by Applicant Characteristics. Retrieved April 17, 2018, from UCAS:
https://www.ucas.com/file/140396/download?token=TC7eMH9W
UCL Institute of Health Equity. (2015). The impact of adverse experiences in the
home on the health of children and young people, and inequalities in prevalence and
effects. Retrieved April 16, 2019, from
http://www.instituteofhealthequity.org/resources-reports/the-impact-of-adverseexperiences-in-the-home-on-children-and-young-people/impact-of-adverseexperiences-in-the-home.pdf
UK Government. (1989). Children Act 1989. Retrieved from
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1989/41/contents
UK Government. (2003). Sexual Offences Act 2003. Retrieved March 7, 2019,
from http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/42/contents
UK Government. (2010). Equality Act 2010. Retrieved April 14, 2018, from
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents
UK Government. (2012a). Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act
2012. Retrieved from
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/10/contents/enacted
UK Government. (2012b). Preventing suicide in England: A cross-government
outcomes strategy to save lives. Mental Health and Disability Division,
Department of Health.
UK Government. (2013, November 25). School workforce in England: November
2012. Retrieved April 17, 2018, from UK Government:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/school-workforce-in-england-november2012
UK Government. (2014). Children and Families Act 2014. Retrieved November 14,
2018, from http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/6/contents/enacted
UK Government. (2015a, August 13). Sex offender sentences hit record levels.
Retrieved April 7, 2019, from https://www.gov.uk/government/news/sex-offendersentences-hit-record-levels
UK Government. (2015b). National curriculum assessments: key stage 2, 2015
(revised). Retrieved April 15, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/national-curriculum-assessments-at-keystage-2-2015-revised
UK Government. (2016a, September 1). National curriculum assessments: key
stage 2, 2016 (provisional). Retrieved April 15, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/national-curriculum-assessments-keystage-2-2016-provisional
UK Government. (2016b, March 29). Prostate cancer risk management
programme: overview. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/prostatecancer-risk-management-programme-overview
UK Government. (2017a, January 28). Gender Pay Gap Reporting. Retrieved
June 18, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/news/gender-pay-gapreporting
UK Government. (2017b, July 20). School workforce in England: November 2016.
Retrieved April 17, 2018, from UK Government:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/school-workforce-in-england-november2016
UK Government. (2017c, June 30). Prison population figures: Population weekly
bulletin 30 June 2017. Retrieved from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/prison-population-figures-2017
UK Government. (2017d, November 28). HIV: annual data tables. Retrieved
August 6, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/hiv-annual-datatables
UK Government. (2018a, March 6). Income and tax, by gender, region and country.
Retrieved June 30, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/incomeand-tax-by-gender-region-and-country-2010-to-2011
UK Government. (2018b, March 8). Policy paper Spring Budget 2017. Retrieved
June 19, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spring-budget2017-documents/spring-budget-2017
UK Government. (2018c, June 18). Search gender pay gap data. Retrieved from
https://gender-pay-gap.service.gov.uk/
UK Government. (2018d, May). Minister for Women and Equalities. Retrieved
April 14, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/ministers/minister-forwomen-and-equalities--3
UK Government. (2018e, January 25). Revised GCSE and equivalent results in
England: 2016 to 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/revised-gcse-and-equivalent-results-inengland-2016-to-2017
UK Government. (2018f, February 5). HPV vaccination programme for men who
have sex with men. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/hpv-vaccination-programme-for-men-whohave-sex-with-men
UK Government. (2018g, June 29). Prison population figures: 2018. Retrieved July
1, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/prison-population-figures2018
UK Government. (2018h, June 27). Secretary of State launches dedicated strategy
to 'break the cycle' of female offending. Retrieved July 3, 2018, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/secretary-of-state-launches-dedicatedstrategy-to-break-the-cycle-of-female-offending
UK Government. (2018j). Child Maintenance Calculator. Retrieved from
https://www.gov.uk/calculate-your-child-maintenance
UK Government. (2018k, April 3). Homelessness data: notes and definitions.
Retrieved December 31, 2018, from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/homelessnessdata-notes-and-definitions
UK Government. (2018m, August 16). Outcomes by offence data tool 2017.
Retrieved April 8, 2019, from Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly:
December 2017: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justicesystem-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
UK Government. (2018n, November 29). Chapter 5: Defendants tables. Retrieved
April 8, 2019, from Women and the criminal justice system 2017:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/women-and-the-criminal-justice-system2017
UK Government. (2018p, April 20). Foreign Secretary launches Platform for Girls'
Education. Retrieved March 18, 2019, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/foreign-secretary-launches-platform-forgirls-education
UK Government. (2018q, July 24). HPV vaccine to be given to boys in England.
Retrieved March 10, 2019, from https://www.gov.uk/government/news/hpvvaccine-to-be-given-to-boys-in-england
UK Government. (2018r, September 5). National HIV surveillance data tables.
Retrieved March 10, 2019, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/hivannual-data-tables
UK Government. (2018s, June 28). Tables: school workforce census 2017.
Retrieved March 28, 2019, from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/school-
workforce-in-england-november-2017
UK Government. (2018t, September 28). Personal pensions: estimated number of
individuals contributing by gender and age. Retrieved March 25, 2019, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/personal-pensions-estimated-number-ofindividuals-contributing-by-gender-and-age
UK Government. (2018u, April). Guide to Determining Financial Eligibility for
Controlled Work and Family Mediation. Retrieved from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/698225/guide-to-determining-controlled-work.pdf
UK Government. (2018v, April 26). Civil legal aid: means testing. Retrieved from
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/civil-legal-aid-means-testing
UK Government. (2019a, March 6). Income and tax, by gender, region and country.
Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/income-and-tax-bygender-region-and-country-2010-to-2011
UK Government. (2019b, January 21). Domestic abuse consultation response and
draft bill. Retrieved April 13, 2019, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/domestic-abuse-consultationresponse-and-draft-bill
UK Government Equalities Office. (2011, June 30). Equality Act 2010: Public
Sector Equality Duty What Do I Need To Know Quick Start Guide for Public
Sector Organisations. Retrieved April 29, 2018, from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/85041/equality-duty.pdf
UK Parliament. (2015, March 12). Impact of changes to civil legal aid under Part 1
of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 - Justice: 4
The domestic violence gateway . Retrieved October 17, 2018, from
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmjust/311/31107.htm
UK Parliament. (2017a, November 14). Westminster Hall hosts debate on
International Men's Day. Retrieved May 8, 2018, from
https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commonsselect/backbench-business-committee/news-parliament-2017/international-mensday-debate-17-19/
UK Parliament. (2017b, April 20). Prisons and Courts Bill 2016-17. Retrieved
October 18, 2018, from https://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-
17/prisonsandcourts.html
UK Parliament. (2017c). Prisons and Courts Bill (HC Bill 170). Retrieved October
18, 2018, from https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/cbill/2016-
2017/0170/cbill_2016-20170170_en_6.htm
UK Parliament. (2018a, May 19). Women and Equalities Committee. Retrieved
April 14, 2018, from https://www.parliament.uk/womenandequalities
UK Parliament. (2018b, May 2). HPV Vaccination for Boys. Retrieved from
Hansard.Parliament.UK: https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2018-05-
02/debates/234E27F7-7D80-4B93-A72F-8F36A733A504/HPVVaccinationForBoys
UK Parliament. (2018c, June 27). Canals and Rivers. Retrieved from
https://www.parliament.uk/about/livingheritage/transformingsociety/transportcomms/canalsrivers/overview/canal-acts/
UK Parliament. (2018d, July 6). Statutory Homelessness in England. Retrieved
December 31, 2018, from
https://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN01164
UK Parliament. (2019, February 7). HPV Vaccination for Boys: Catch-up
Programme. Retrieved March 10, 2019, from
https://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2019-02-07b.395.3#g395.4
UK Statistics Authority. (2017, November). Systemic Review of Public Value:
Statistics on Housing and Planning in the UK. Retrieved December 31, 2017, from
Office for Statistics Regulation: https://www.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2017/11/Systemic-Review-of-Statistics-on-Housing-and-Planningin-the-UK20171110-corrected.pdf
UNAIDS. (2010, April). Neonatal and child male circumcision: a global review.
Retrieved March 14, 2019, from World Health Organisation:
https://www.who.int/hiv/pub/malecircumcision/neonatal_child_MC_UNAIDS.pdf
UNdata. (2015). Youth literacy rate, population 15-24 years (%). Retrieved March
18, 2019, from http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?
d=UNESCO&f=series%3aLR_AG15T24
UNICEF. (2006). Behind Closed Doors The Impact of Domestic Violence on
Children. Retrieved September 3, 2018, from
https://www.unicef.org/media/files/BehindClosedDoors.pdf
University of California Department of Urology. (2018). Phimosis. Retrieved
August 5, 2018, from https://urology.ucsf.edu/patient-care/children/phimosis
US Department of Education. (2004). Educator Sexual Misconduct: A Synthesis of
Existing Literature. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/research/pubs/misconductreview/report.pdf
US Department of Health & Human Services. (2012, December 9). Information on
Poverty and Income Statistics: A Summary of 2012 Current Population Survey
Data . Retrieved November 25, 2018, from https://aspe.hhs.gov/basicreport/information-poverty-and-income-statistics-summary-2012-currentpopulation-survey-data
van Howe. (1997, November). Variability in penile appearance and penile findings:
a prospective study. British Journal of Urology, 80(5), 776-782. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1464-410X.1997.00467.x
van Howe. (2006, July 12). Conservative Treatment of Phimosis:. Retrieved
August 5, 2018, from CIRP: http://www.cirp.org/library/treatment/phimosis/
van Howe. (2013). Sexually Transmitted Infections and Male Circumcision: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. ISRN Urology, 109842. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/109846
Vigil, J. (2007). Asymmetries in the Friendship Preferences and Social. Human
Nature, 18, 143-161. Retrieved May 7, 2018, from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/226106917_Asymmetries_in_the_Friend
ship_Preferences_and_Social_Styles_of_Men_and_Women
Voith et al. (2018, June 30). A Paradigm Shift in Batterer Intervention
Programming: A Need to Address Unresolved Trauma. Trauma, Violence & Abuse.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/1524838018791268
Voyer and Voyer. (2014, April 28). Gender Differences in Scholastic Achievement:
A Meta-Analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 140(4), 1174-1204. Retrieved May 21,
2018, from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/releases/bul-a0036620.pdf
Walker, P. (2018, January 3). White working-class boys should be more
aspirational, says Labour minister. Retrieved May 1, 2018, from The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/education/2018/jan/03/white-working-class-boysshould-be-more-aspirational-says-labour-minister
Walsh. (2009, November 1). Divergence in Contributing Factors for Suicide among
Men and Women in Kentucky: Recommendations to Raise Public Awareness.
Public Health Reports, 124(6), 861-867. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/003335490912400614
Walter. (2012, January 24). The top 30 statistics you need to know when marketing
to women. Retrieved March 21, 2019, from
https://thenextweb.com/socialmedia/2012/01/24/the-top-30-stats-you-need-toknow-when-marketing-to-women/
Ward. (2019, March 24). Lib Dem leadership hopeful Layla Moran admits slapping
boyfriend in row over computer cable. Telegraph. Retrieved from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2019/03/24/lib-dem-leadership-hopeful-laylamoran-admits-slapping-boyfriend/
Warren. (2011, January 22). Intactivist Doctor - John Warren. Retrieved March
15, 2019, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TYTBvTWzM&feature=player_embedded
Watson, L. R. (2014). Unspeakable Mutilations: Circumcised Men Speak Out.
Ashburton, New Zealand.
Weare, Porter and Evans. (June 2017). Forced to Penetrate Cases: Lived
Experiences of Men. Lancaster University Law School. Retrieved April 10, 2019,
from http://wp.lancs.ac.uk/forced-to-penetrate-cases/files/2016/11/ProjectReport-Final.pdf
Wearmouth. (2019, March 26). Most Women In Prison Are 'There Because Of A
Man', Says David Lammy. Huffington Post. Retrieved from
https://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/most-bame-women-in-prison-therebecause-of-a-man-says-david-lammy_uk_5c9a0912e4b07435554a478c
Weitoft et al. (2003, January 25). Mortality, severe morbidity, and injury in
children living with single parents in Sweden: a population-based study. The
Lancet, 361(9354), 289-295. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12324-0
Wellings et al. (2001, December 1). Sexual behaviour in Britain: early heterosexual
experience. The Lancet, 358, Issue 9296(9296), 1843-1850. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(01)06885-4
Wellings et al. (2013, November 30). The prevalence of unplanned pregnancy and
associated factors in Britain: findings from the third National Survey of Sexual
Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3). The Lancet, 382(9907), 1807-1816. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62071-1
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(01)06885-
4/fulltext
Welsh Government. (2015a, July 16). Talk to me 2. Retrieved February 17, 2019,
from Suicide and self harm prevention strategy for Wales 2015-2020:
https://gov.wales/topics/health/publications/health/reports/talk2/?lang=en
Welsh Government. (2018a, February 1). National rough sleeping count. Retrieved
1 3, 2019, from https://gov.wales/statistics-and-research/national-rough-sleepingcount/?lang=en
Welsh Government. (2018b, September 27). Household estimates. Retrieved
January 3, 2018, from https://gov.wales/statistics-and-research/householdestimates/?lang=en
Westervelt, A. (2015, April 30). The medical research gender gap: how excluding
women from clinical trials is hurting our health. Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/30/fda-clinical-trials-gendergap-epa-nih-institute-of-medicine-cardiovascular-disease
Whitcombe, S. (2017). Parental alienation: Psychological distress and mental
health. Male Psychology Conference, 4th June 2017 (University College London).
Retrieved October 19, 2018, from https://www.malepsychology.org.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2017/08/Male-Psych-slides-edited.pdf
White and Witty. (2009, May 1). Men's under use of health services - finding an
alternative approach. Journal of Men's Health, 6(2), 95-97. Retrieved April 30,
2018, from https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1016/j.jomh.2009.03.001
White, H. (2013, January 17). Eliminating feminist teacher bias erases boys' falling
grades, study finds. Retrieved June 12, 2018, from
https://www.lifesitenews.com/news/eliminating-feminist-teacher-bias-erases-boysfalling-grades-study-finds
Wiedersehn, S. (2017, February 8). World Journal of Clinical Pediatrics study finds
evidence in favour of male infant circumcision. Retrieved August 5, 2018, from
News Corp Australia Network:
https://www.news.com.au/lifestyle/parenting/babies/world-journal-of-clinicalpediatrics-study-finds-evidence-in-favour-of-male-infant-circumcision/newsstory/c47339e787d393e247777ab3b543ff5c
Wilder, Mobasher and Hammer. (2004, November 1). Genetic Evidence for
Unequal Effective Population Sizes of Human Females and Males. Molecular
Biology and Evolution, 21(11), 2047-2057. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msh214
Wilkins et al. (2008, November). The Gender and Access to Health Services Study.
Retrieved April 29, 2018, from Ne's Health Forum:
https://www.menshealthforum.org.uk/sites/default/files/pdf/gender_and_access_to
_health_services_study_2008.pdf
Williams and Ceci. (2015, April 28). National hiring experiments reveal 2:1 faculty
preference for women on STEM tenure track. PNAS (Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences), 112(17), 5360-5365. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1418878112
Williams et al. (2006, July 11). The Potential Impact of Male Circumcision on HIV
in Sub-Saharan Africa. PLOS medicine, 3(7), e262. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0030262
Williams, Papadopoulou and Booth. (2012, March). Prisoners' childhood and family
backgrounds Results from the Surveying Prisoner Crime Reduction (SPCR)
longitudinal cohort study of prisoners. Retrieved July 4, 2018, from Ministry of
Justice:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/278837/prisoners-childhood-family-backgrounds.pdf
Windisch, K. (2010, July 6). neonatal circumcision. Retrieved June 27, 2018, from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bXVFFI76ff0&t=3m25s&has_verified=1
Wintour, P. (2008, August 1). DNA testing: One in 500 fathers wrongly identified
by mothers in Child Support Agency claims. Retrieved December 18, 2018, from
The Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/aug/01/freedomofinformation.childprot
ection
Wolford-Clevenger et al. (2015). Prevalence and correlates of suicidal ideation
among court-referred male perpetrators of intimate partner violence.
Psychological Services, 12(1), 9-15. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037338
Wolford-Clevenger et al. (2017, March). A test of the interpersonal-psychological
theory of suicide among arrested domestic violence offenders. Psychiatry
Research, 249, 195-199. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.029
https://doi.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Fa0037338
Women's Aid. (2015). Retrieved October 19, 2018, from
https://www.womensaid.org.uk/childfirst/
Women's Aid. (2016, January). Nineteen Child Homicides. Retrieved October 19,
2018, from https://1q7dqy2unor827bqjls0c4rn-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wpcontent/uploads/2016/01/Child-First-Nineteen-Child-Homicides-Report.pdf
Women's Aid. (2018a). What is domestic abuse? Retrieved September 3, 2018, from
Women's Aid: https://www.womensaid.org.uk/information-support/what-is-domesticabuse/
Women's Aid. (2018b). What we believe. Retrieved September 3, 2018, from Women's
Aid: https://www.womensaid.org.uk/what-we-believe/
Women's Aid. (2018c). How common is domestic abuse? Retrieved September 7, 2018,
from https://www.womensaid.org.uk/information-support/what-is-domestic-abuse/howcommon-is-domestic-abuse/
Woodall. (2019, February 15). Solving Parental Alienation With The Legal and
Mental Health Interlock. Retrieved from Karen Woodall's blog:
https://karenwoodall.blog/2019/02/15/solving-parental-alienation-with-the-legaland-mental-health-interlock/
Woodall, K. (2018, October 14). Fogging the Issue: CAFCASS and The High
Conflict Pathway. Retrieved October 20, 2018, from
https://karenwoodall.blog/2018/10/14/fogging-the-issue-cafcass-and-the-highconflict-pathway/
Woodruff, T. (2010, June 10). Putting gender on the agenda. Nature, 465(7299).
Retrieved June 13, 2018, from https://www.nature.com/articles/465665a.pdf
World Health Organisation. (2008). Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update.
Retrieved January 20, 2019, from
https://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/2004_report_update/en/
World Health Organisation. (2012). Non-surgical male circumcision device.
Retrieved August 3, 2018, from
http://www.who.int/medical_devices/innovation/compendium_med_dev2012_13.pdf
World Health Organisation. (2017, August). Voluntary medical male circumcision
for HIV prevention in 14 priority countries in eastern and southern Africa: Progess
Brief 2017. Retrieved August 6, 2018, from
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/malecircumcision/vmmc-progress-brief-2017/en/
World Health Organisation. (2018a, June). Disease burden and mortality
estimates: DALY estimates, 2000–2016: Global summary estimates. Retrieved
January 20, 2019, from
https://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/estimates/en/index1.html
World Health Organisation. (2018b, July 17). Prevalence of HIV among adults
aged 15 to 49: Estimates by Country. Retrieved August 6, 2018, from Global
Health Observatory data repository: http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.622?
lang=en
Wurtele et al. (2013, November 11). Sexual Interest in Children Among an Online
Sample of Men and Women: Prevalence and Correlates. Sexual Abuse, 26(6), 546-
568 . doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/1079063213503688
Wyder. (2009, August). Separation as a suicide risk factor. J.Affect.Discord, 116(3),
208-213. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2008.11.007
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0165032708004631?
via%3Dihub
Yingying Wang et al . (2013, July 19). Do men consult less than women? An
analysis of routinely collected UK general practice data. BMJ Open, 3, 003320.
Retrieved April 29, 2018, from BMJ Open:
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/bmjopen/3/8/e003320.full.pdf
Yorkshire Dales Trail. (2011, May 19). Ribblehead Viaduct - The Human Story.
Retrieved June 20, 2018, from http://www.yorkshiredalestrail.co.uk/blog/ribblehead-viaduct-the-human-story/
Your Fertility. (2018). Age. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from
https://www.yourfertility.org.au/everyone/age
Zeiss. (1981). Sex Differences in Initiation of and Adjustment to Divorce. Journal
of Divorce, 4(2), 21-33. doi: https://doi.org/10.1300/J279v04n02_02
Zuleyka Zevallos. (2015, Msy 5). The myth about women in science? Bias at work
in the study of gender inequality in STEM. from London School of Economics:
https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2015/05/05/women-in-sciencegender-inequality-stem/
Index
332 Child Homicides / 10.4
A Level, grade inflation / 2.5
A Levels, attainment by sex / 2.3
Academic hiring, favours women / 2.8
Academic posts, female preferencing / 7.3.5
Academic staff, by sex / 2.8
Accidental pregnancies, or maybe not / 15.1.2
ACEs – see Adverse Childhood Experiences /
ADHD – see Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder /
ADHD, drug costs evident in USA statistics / 4.3.1
Adult, education measures versus those at school / 2.6
Adverse Childhood Experiences / 12.2
Adverse Childhood Experiences and parental loss / 12.2.2
Adverse Childhood Experiences and suicide / 12.2.1
Adverse Childhood Experiences, effect upon the adult / 12.2.1
Adverse Childhood Experiences, increased prevalence? / 12.2
Adverse Childhood Experiences, prevalence (in Wales) / 12.2
Affirmative Action / 1.2
AIDS, deaths by sex / 3.2.3
Alcohol abuse / 17.3.1
Allegations of abuse, in private law (child arrangements) / 10.3.3
American Psychological Association – see APA /
Antisocial Personality Disorder, by sex and age / 17.1.2
APA Psychological Practice with Boys and Men / 17.5
APA Psychological Practice with Boys and Men, empirically refuted / 17.5.1
APA Psychological Practice with Girls and Women / 17.5
Apprentices, numbers / 7.3.3
Armed forces, deaths / 7.3.2
Armed forces, numbers by sex / 7.3.2
Arrests, pattern by sex / 8.1.2.4
Assault by penetration / 19.1
Asymmetry, in gendered psychologies / 1.3.2.1
Athena Swan / 2.8
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, adults (anomalous) / 17.1.5
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, children and young adults / 17.2.4
Autism spectrum disorders, by sex, adults / 17.1.3
Autism spectrum disorders, by sex, children and young adults / 17.2.5
Balanitis (glans rash) / 6.2.3
Behavioural disorders, children and young adults / 17.2.3
Bipolar disorder / 17.1.7
Blaming men / 1.3
Borderline Personality Disorder, by sex and age / 17.1.2
Borderline Personality Disorder, defined / 17.1.2
Boys expect to fail (education) / 2.10
Boys' reading interests, disgusting and banal / 2.10
BPS, Power Threat Meaning Framework / 17.5
Breast cancer, kills men / 3.2.2.2
Brit Milah / 5.2
Brit Shalom / 5.2
British Psychological Society – see BPS /
Burdensomeness, perceived (suicide) / 18.3
Cambridge, exam changes to favour women / 2.5
Cancer, premature death from / 3.2.2
Cancer, premature death from, excess male over female / 3.2.2
Cancers, delay in seeking help by sex / 4.1
Cardiovascular diseases / 3.2.1
Cardiovascular diseases, delay in seeking help by sex / 4.1
Carers, unpaid, by sex / 7.10.2
Child arrangement orders, percentage applying / 11.6
Child arrangements, number of cases per year / 10.1
Child arrangements, percentage allegations of domestic abuse / 11.2
Child contact and parental conflict / 12.4
Child prisoners, 97% boys / 8.3.1
Childlessness, increasing proportion of women / 13.2
Children Act 1989 / 10.1
Children and Families Act 2014, woozling of / 12.3
Children, living arrangement statistics / 13.2
Children's Commissioner, lack of concern for boy prisoners / 8.3.1
Children's Commissioner, unconcern for boys / 2.2
Circumcision – see also 'MGM' /
Circumcision Academy of Australia / 6.1
Circumcision and balanitis / 6.2.3
Circumcision and HIV-AIDS / 6.2.5
Circumcision and HPV / 6.2.4
Circumcision and phimosis / 6.2.2
Circumcision and urinary tract infections / 6.2.1
Circumcision benefits v risks, American Academy of Pediatrics / 6.3
Circumcision benefits v risks, British Medical Association / 6.3
Circumcision benefits v risks, Canadian Paediatric Society / 6.3
Circumcision benefits v risks, Centers for Disease Control / 6.3
Circumcision benefits v risks, Central Union for Child Welfare, Finland / 6.3
Circumcision benefits v risks, London Safeguarding Children Board / 6.3
Circumcision benefits v risks, Royal Australasian College of Physicians / 6.3
Circumcision benefits v risks, Royal Dutch Medical Society / 6.3
Circumcision, adult, sexual experience afterwards / 5.5.2.2
Circumcision, adults by force / 5
Circumcision, African rituals / 5
Circumcision, benefit to other diseases? / 6.2.6
Circumcision, claimed medical benefits / 6
Circumcision, current incidence by country / 5.4
Circumcision, damage done by the procedure / 5.3.1
Circumcision, euphemism / 5
Circumcision, false narratives by proponents / 6.1
Circumcision, harm / 5.5
Circumcision, Islamic tradition / 5.2
Circumcision, Judaic tradition / 5.2
Circumcision, maiming / 5
Circumcision, medical benefits, authoritative opinions / 6.3
Circumcision, neonatal, sexual experience afterwards / 5.5.2.1
Circumcision, opinion of Canadian Paediatrics Society / 6.1
Circumcision, prevalence by country / 5.4
Circumcision, proponent Brian Morris / 6.1
Circumcision, purpose to diminish male sexual function / 5.2
Circumcision, risks and deaths / 5.3
Circumcision, risks and deaths / 5.3.1
Circumcision, spurious claims of medical benefit / 5.2
Circumcision, survey evidence of effects / 5.5.3
Circumcision, unregulated / 5.3
Circumcision, videos / 5
Circumcision, videos / 5.3
Circumcision, Western medical tradition / 5.2
Cognitive skills / 2.1
Cohabitation, separation rate / 13.3
Cohabitation, statistics / 13.1
Contact achieved / 11.7
Contact achieved, equal shared care / 11.7
Contact achieved, highly involved fathers / 11.7
Contact order cf that requested / 11.2
Contact ordered and achieved, summarised / 11.9
Contact ordered cf resident parents wishes / 11.2
Contact ordered, lack of enforcement / 11.5
Contact orders, no benefit of PR? / 11.2
Contraception, men's limited options / 15.1.1
Contraception, men's, keep dick in pants / 15
Convictions, by sex / 8.1.2
Cooperative society / 1.3.2.1
Corston report / 8.1.2.6
Court orders, delay / 11.2
Courts, family / 10.1
Crime, child victims / 9.1.1
Crime, decline in number since 1995 / 8.1.1
Crime, incidence by sex of victim / 9.1.1
Criminal justice, false gender narrative / 8.1.2.6
Criminal justice, gender disparity overall / 8.1.2.5
Criminal justice, sex bias by policy / 8.1.2.6
Cross-examination, of alleged victims of abuse / 10.3.4
Custody – see Imprisonment /
DALY / 4.2
Death sex ratio / 3.1
Death, by violence / 3.2
Death, early, by sex / 3.3
Death, early, excess male over female / 3.3
Death, early, leading causes / 3.3
Death, premature, by sex / 3.1
Death, premature, excess male over female / 3.2
Death, premature, leading causes / 3.2
Deaths from partner abuse, including suicide / 18.2.3.2
Deaths in prison / 8.6
Deaths, workplace, current / 3.4.2
Deaths, workplace, historic / 3.4.1
Department for Education, unconcern for boys / 2.2
Department for Education, unconcern for boys / 2.4
Depression / 17.1.1
Digital rectal examination / 3.2.2.2
Disability Adjusted Life Years / 4.2
Disadvantage, being dead / 3
Disciplinary offences in prison, by sex / 8.1.2.2
Disclosure (failure) / 19.7
Diversity quotas / 7.3.5
Divorce, statistics / 13.1
DNA paternity testing, legality / 15.2.3
DNA paternity testing, prevented / 15.2.3
Domestic abuse and patriarchy theory / 9.2
Domestic abuse of children, unrecognised risk of mothers / 9.2.7
Domestic abuse, by sex / 9.2
Domestic abuse, crime survey questions / 9.2.1
Domestic abuse, dependence on age and socioeconomics / 9.2.3
Domestic abuse, dependence on marital status / 9.2.4
Domestic abuse, false narratives / 9.2
Domestic abuse, false narratives / 10.4
Domestic abuse, fathers as victims / 9.2.9
Domestic abuse, finding of facts / 10.3.6
Domestic abuse, finding of facts / 11.2
Domestic abuse, incidence by sex / 9.2.1
Domestic abuse, larger for separated couples / 9.2.4
Domestic abuse, lobbying / 10.4
Domestic abuse, male victims, history / 9.2
Domestic abuse, not "gendered" / 9.2
Domestic abuse, PASK / 9.2.8
Domestic abuse, perpetrator programmes / 9.2.11
Domestic abuse, police reports by sex / 9.2.6
Domestic abuse, prosecutions and convictions by sex / 9.2.6
Domestic abuse, reduction since 1995 / 9.2.1
Domestic abuse, repeat victimisation / 9.2.5
Domestic abuse, service provision by sex / 9.2.10
Domestic abuse, severe physical violence by sex / 9.2.2
Domestic abuse, the gateway to legal aid / 10.3.2
Domestic abuse, worldwide prevalence data / 9.2.8
Domestic homicide of children, sex of perpetrators / 9.2.7
Domestic homicide of children, sex of perpetrators / 10.4
Domestic homicide of children, sex of victims / 9.2.7
Domestic homicides by sex / 9.2.7
Domestic violence – see domestic abuse /
Domestic violence remedy orders / 10.3.6
Drug abuse / 17.3.2
Duluth model / 9.2.11
Dying, sex ratio versus age / 3.1
Early death, by sex / 3.3
Economic inactivity (defined) / 7.2
Education staff numbers / 7.3.1
Education, attainment when adult / 2.6
Education, boys' underperformance, primary school / 2.1
Education, boys' underperformance, secondary school / 2.2
Education, employment or training, not in / 7.1
Education, Key Stages in UK / 3
Education, lack of role models for boys / 2.10
Education, stereotype threat to boys / 2.10
Emotional disorders and family dysfunction / 17.2.2
Emotional disorders, children and young adults / 17.2.2
Empathy Gap, defined / 1.1
Empathy Gap, origin / 1.3
Empathy Gap, elaborated / 1.3.2
Empathy Gap, factors underlying / 1.3.1
Empathy Gap Against Fathers in the Family Courts / 10.5
Empathy Gap Against Non-Resident Fathers / 11.9
Empathy Gap Against Fathers in the Family Courts / 21.7
Empathy Gap Against Paternity and Male Fertility / 15.3
Empathy Gap Against Paternity and Male Fertility / 21.11
Empathy Gap for Fatherless Children / 14.6
Empathy Gap for Fatherless Children / 21.10
Empathy Gap for Men as Victims of Violence / 9.3
Empathy Gap for Men as Victims of Violence / 21.6
Empathy Gap in Accusations of Sexual Assault / 19.8
Empathy Gap in Accusations of Sexual Assault / 21.15
Empathy Gap in Alienation and Shared Care / 12.5
Empathy Gap in Alienation and Shared Care / 21.8
Empathy Gap in Homelessness and Loneliness / 16.5
Empathy Gap in Homelessness and Loneliness / 21.12
Empathy Gap in Men's Health / 4.4
Empathy Gap in Men's Health / 21.2
Empathy Gap in Mental Health Perceptions / 17.6
Empathy Gap in Sexual Assault / 20.12
Empathy Gap in Sexual Assault / 21.16
Empathy Gap in Suicide / 18.4
Empathy Gap in Suicide / 21.14
Empathy Gap on Imprisonment / 8.7
Empathy Gap on Imprisonment / 21.5
Empathy Gap re Male Genital Mutilation / 6.5
Empathy Gap re Male Genital Mutilation / 21.3
Empathy gap towards men causes harm to children / 14.1
Empathy Gap in Mental Health / 17.6
Empathy Gap in Mental Health / 21.13
Empathy Gap in Work and Pay / 7.11
Empathy Gap in Work and Pay / 21.4
Empathy Gap in Education / 2.12
Empathy Gap in Education / 21.1
Employment, gender segregation / 7.3
Equality Act, role of needs / 1.2
Equality and Human Rights Commission / 1.2
Equality, 2010 Act / 1.2
Equality, does not mean equal treatment / 1.2
Equality, does not mean equal treatment / 1.3.2.2
External Locus of Control, greater in women / 14.4
Extra-pair copulations / 15.2.2
False allegations, of rape / 19.6
False allegations, the harm done / 19.6.1
Families Without Fatherhood, Dennis and Erdos / 14.2
Family breakdown, statistics / 13.3
Family courts, are they biased? / 11.9
Family courts, impotence / 11.5
Family courts, impotence / 11.9
Family courts, is being anti-father a myth? / 11.1
Family courts, quotes from judges / 11.3
Family courts, quotes from lawyers / 11.5
Family courts, terminology / 10.1
Father Absence, Causal Effects, McLanahan et al / 14.5
Father benefit, evidence / 12.3
Father, role in child development / 14.3
Fatherhood and child behaviour / 14.3
Fatherhood, benefits to very young children / 14.3
Fatherhood, benefits to very young children / 14.5
Fatherhood, benefits, mini-review / 14.3
Fatherhood, educational benefits to children / 14.3
Fatherhood, false narrative of being inessential / 14.1
Fatherhood, false narrative of being inessential / 14.2
Fatherhood, longitudinal studies of benefits to children / 14.3
Fatherhood, men not allowed to know / 15.2.3
Fatherlessness and imprisonment / 14.3
Fatherlessness, adverse effect on educational attainment / 14.4
Fatherlessness, adverse effect on educational attainment / 14.5
Fatherlessness, Causal Effects, McLanahan et al / 14.5
Fatherlessness, causes / 13
Fatherlessness, causes / 13.5
Fatherlessness, causes / 21.9
Fatherlessness, causes poorer child social development / 14.5
Fatherlessness, causes risky and externalising behaviours / 14.5
Fatherlessness, correlation with boys' poverty as adults / 14.3
Fatherlessness, Dennis and Erdos / 14.2
Fatherlessness, effects on children / 14
Fatherlessness, harmful effects known for decades / 14.2
Fatherlessness, harms, mini-review / 14.3
Female education worldwide / 2.11
Female education, unjustified concern / 2.11
Female preferencing, origin / 1.3.2.2
Female sex offenders – see sex offenders, female /
Female teachers, diminish male pupil effort / 2.10
Feminism, anti-egalitarian / 1.3.2.4
Feminism, critiqued / 1.3.2.4
Feminism, relation to empathy gap / 1.3.1
Feminism, relation to gynocentrism / 1.3.2.4
Fertility by immigrant status / 13.2
Fertility, men's / 15
Fertility, men's challenged by age / 15.1.3
Fertility, men's challenged by falling sperm count / 15.1.3
Fertility, UK average / 13.2
Foreskin, anatomy / 5.1
Foreskin, false narratives about sensitivity / 5.5.1
Foreskin, nerve density / 5.1
Foreskin, retraction problems / 6.2.2
Foreskin, retraction, normal development / 5.1.1
Foreskin, rolling bearing during intercourse / 5.1
Foreskin, sensitivity / 5.5.1
Fragile, the male sex / 3
Frenulum (penis) / 5.1
Frenulum delta / 5.1
GCE/GCSE gender gap versus time / 2.5
GCSE, attainment by sex / 2.2
Gender Equality Paradox / 7.3.4
Gender gap, literacy, school versus adult / 2.6
Gender gap, maths, school versus adult / 2.6
Gender scripts / 1.1
Gendered mindset / 1.1
Gendered mindset / 1.3.2.3
Gendered society / 1
Girls cleverer than boys, everyone agrees / 2.10
Glans (penis) / 5.1
GP consultations by sex / 4.1
GP consultations, effect of demographic / 4.1
GP consultations, effect of full time working / 4.1
Groin hernia / 4.1
Gynocentrism, as corrupted matricentrism / 1.3.2.2
Gynocentrism, introduction / 1.3.1
Gynocentrism, reinterpretation as benign sexism / 20.7
Harding and Newnham, 2015 study deconstructed / 11.4
Health research spending, by sex / 4.3.2
Healthcare of men, worldwide neglect of / 4.2
Healthcare spending by sex, USA / 4.3.1
Healthcare, delay in seeking by sex / 4.1
Healthcare, gender gap in access / 4.1
Healthcare, men's access to / 4.1
Healthcare, public cost / 7.3.1
Heart attack / 3.2.1
Hernia / 4.1
Higher education staff, by sex / 2.8
Higher education, gender gap / 2.4
Histology, of foreskin / 5.1
HIV, deaths by sex / 3.2.3
HIV-AIDS and circumcision / 6.2.5
Home keepers, numbers by sex / 7.2
Homeless, does not mean rough sleeping / 16.1
Homeless, no statutory duty to house / 16.1
Homeless, prevention duty / 16.1
Homeless, priority criteria / 16.1
Homeless, relief duty / 16.1
Homeless, Scotland, applicants, single men dominate / 16.1.2
Homeless, single / 16.1
Homeless, statutory, definition / 16.1
Homeless, UK Nations different processes / 16.1
Homelessness, main duty / 16.1
Homelessness, main duty, England, single mothers dominate / 16.1.1
Homelessness, main duty, non-white / 16.1.1
Homelessness, statutory, England / 16.1.1
Homelessness, statutory, gender issue summarised / 16.1.5
Homelessness, statutory, N. Ireland, applicants single male dominated / 16.1.4
Homelessness, statutory, N.Ireland / 16.1.4
Homelessness, statutory, Scotland / 16.1.2
Homelessness, statutory, Wales / 16.1.3
Homelessness, statutory, Wales, men lower priority / 16.1.3
Homicide, by sex and year / 9.1.1
Homicides, 19 Child (Women's Aid report) / 10.4
Homicide, domestic, by sex / 9.2.7
Household, relevance in homeless classification / 16.1
Households, size versus prevalence / 13.2
Housework, who does it / 7.10.1
HPV and circumcision / 6.2.4
HPV related cancers, sexes compared / 3.2.2.3
HPV vaccination sexism / 3.2.2.3
Human Tissue Act 2004 / 15.2.3
Husband, duty to maintain wife abolished / 1.2
Hypergamy / 13.4
Identity Politics / 1.3.1
Ill-health, greater for men worldwide / 4.2
Imprisonment disparity, USA / 8.1.2.7
Imprisonment, harsher for men / 8.1.2.5
Imprisonment, gender disparity in / 8.1.2.1.1
Imprisonment, gender disparity, MOJ analysis / 8.1.2.1.1
Imprisonment, harsher treatment for men / 8.1.2
Income tax, by sex / 7.8
Inequality, female sex offenders / 20
Infant circumcision, videos / 5
Infant circumcision, videos / 5.3
Infanticide, legalised? / 9.2.7
Infidelity / 15.2.2
In-Group Preference, male lack of / 1.3.1
In-Group Preference, male lack of / 1.3.2.3
Intactivists / 5
Internal Locus of Control, defined / 14.4
International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) / 2.6
International Student Assessment (PISA) at 15 / 2.2
International Student Assessment (PISA) at 18 / 2.5
IQ versus university subject / 2.5
Jobs dominated by women / 7.3
Key Stage 2 (SATS) / 2.1
Knife crime / 9.1.1
Labour force (defined) / 7.1
Labour force participation rate / 7.1
Laddishness, in education / 2.12
LASPO / 10.3.1
LASPO, charter for the false accuser / 10.3.2
LASPO, evidencing requirements / 10.3.5
Legal aid, by sex, before and after LASPO / 10.3.4
Legal aid, domestic abuse evidencing / 10.3.5
Legal aid, in civil court cases (LASPO) / 10.3.1
Legal aid, routes through the gateway / 10.3.5
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 – see LASPO /
Life expectancy / 3.1
Life expectancy, demographic dependence / 3.1
Limitations, of this book / 1.4
LIP – see Litigant In Person /
Litigant In Person / 10.3.4
Lone living, statistics / 13.2
Loneliness, in England, by age / 16.4.1
Loneliness, in England, by marital status / 16.4.1
Loneliness, in England, by sex / 16.4.1
Loneliness, in Wales, by sex and marital status / 16.4.2
Lung cancer, demographic dependence / 3.2.2.1
Lung cancer, mortality by sex / 3.2.2.1
Made to penetrate / 19.1
Male circumcision (MC), usage / 5
Male conception pill / 15.1.1
Male contraception, barrier is commercial / 15.1.1
Male Disposability / 1.3.1
Male feminist / 1.3.2.4
Male Genital Mutilation (MGM), defined / 5
Male primary school teachers / 2.7
Male teacher, disappearing / 2.7
Male teachers versus women in STEMM / 2.9
Male teachers, enhance pupil effort / 2.10
Male teachers, lack of encouragement / 2.9
Male teachers, scarcity, reason / 2.7
Male teachers, unconcern by teaching unions / 2.9
Male Utility / 1.3.1
Male, greater variability hypothesis / 1.2
Males, the fragile sex / 3
Marital status, effect on domestic abuse / 9.2.4
Marital status, percentage of population by age / 13.1
Marriage gap / 13.4
Marriage, age at / 13.1
Marriage, decline / 13.1
Marriage, decline drives fatherlessness / 13.3
Marriage, median duration before divorce / 13.1
Marriage, percentage never married by sex / 13.1
Marriage, socioeconomic dependence / 13.4
Marriage, statistics / 13.1
Matricentrism / 1.3.1
Matricentrism, as evolved trait / 1.3.2.2
McIntosh study 2010 / 12.3
McKenzie friend / 10.3.4
Meissner's corpuscles / 5.1
Men, don't look after themselves / 4
Men's fertility, lack of control over / 15.1
Mental disorders and employment / 17.1.8
Mental disorders, access to treatment, by demographic / 17.1.9
Mental disorders, adults / 17.1
Mental disorders, children and young adults, by sex and age / 17.2.1
Mental disorders, common, adults, by sex and age / 17.1.1
Mental disorders, effect of caring responsibilities / 17.2.7.6
Mental disorders, effect of ethnicity / 17.2.7.2
Mental disorders, effect of family dysfunction / 17.2.7.5
Mental disorders, effect of income / 17.2.7.1
Mental disorders, effect of school exclusion / 17.2.7.4
Mental disorders, effect sexuality / 17.2.7.3
Mental disorders, students in USA / 17.2.8
Mental health medication of children / 17.2.6
MGM – see also 'Circumcision' /
MGM current incidence, by country / 5.4
MGM prevalence, by country / 5.4
MGM, claimed medical benefits / 6
MGM, defined / 5
MGM, harm / 5.5
MGM, illegal in the UK / 6.4.1
MGM, legal challenges in Denmark / 6.4.2.4
MGM, legal challenges in Germany / 6.4.2.1
MGM, legal challenges in Iceland / 6.4.2.3
MGM, legal challenges in Sweden / 6.4.2.2
MGM, legal challenges in the USA / 6.4.2.5
MGM, purpose to diminish male sexual function / 5.2
MGM, religious positions / 6.4.2.6
MGM, survey evidence of effects / 5.5.3
MGM, Western medical tradition / 5.2
Mining deaths, historic / 3.4.1
Misandry / 1.3.1
Misandry / 1.3.2.6
Mispaternity / 15.2
Mispaternity, prevalence, demographic dependence / 15.2.2
Mispaternity, prevalence, disputed paternity / 15.2.2
Mispaternity, prevalence, no prior suspicion / 15.2.2
Mothers, percentage married by income / 13.4
mpMRI test (prostate cancer) / 3.2.2.2
Mutilate, defined / 5
Myocardial infarction / 3.2.1
National Insurance / 7.9.2
National Union of Teachers, sexism / 2.7
NEETs (defined) / 7.1
Neonaticide, undetected / 9.2.7
Nineteen child homicides / 10.4
Non-cognitive abilities / 14.4
Non-cognitive abilities / 2.1
Non-molestation orders / 10.3.6
Non-resident parent, contact ordered / 11.2
Non-therapeutic infant circumcision / 5
Norgrove report / 12.3
Nuclear family, deliberate destruction / 13
NUT, sexism / 2.7
O Levels and origin of gender gap / 2.5
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder / 17.1.1
Occupational cancers, by sex / 3.4.4.5
Occupational health, by sex / 3.4.4
Occupational segregation / 7.3
Occupations dominated by women / 7.3
OCD – see Obsessive Compulsive Disorder / 17.1.1
Offence categories, imprisonment percentages / 8.1.2.1.1
Offence patterns by sex, legal aid data / 8.1.2.4
Offences, patterns of, sexes compared / 8.1.2.4
Oropharyngeal cancer / 3.2.2.3
Oxford, exam changes to favour women / 2.5
Panic attack / 17.1.1
Paramountcy Principle / 10.2
Parental alienation and "high conflict" / 12.1.1
Parental alienation and false allegations / 12.1.1
Parental alienation as child abuse / 12.1
Parental alienation as domestic abuse / 12.1
Parental alienation, definition / 12.1
Parental alienation, prevalence / 12.1.1
Parental Responsibility / 10.2
Parental Responsibility (PR), defined / 15.2.3
Parental support and Adverse Childhood Experiences / 12.2.2
Parenting after separation, where does the bias lie? / 11.9
Parole, gender disparity / 8.1.2.2
Partner Abuse State of Knowledge project / 9.2.8
Partner homicide / 9.2.7
Partner homicide, demographic dependence / 9.2.7
PASK / 9.2.8
Paternity exclusion / 15.2
Paternity fraud / 15.2
Paternity fraud, more common than public realise / 15.2.2
Paternity fraud, type 2 / 15.1.2
Paternity, men not legally entitled to know / 15.2.3
Paternity, option denied / 15.1.2
Paternity, secret / 15.2.3
Paternity, uncertainty maintained / 15.2.3
Patriarchy theory and domestic abuse / 9.2
Patriarchy, as theatre / 1.3.2.5
Patriarchy, correctly understood / 1.3.2.5
Patriarchy, in feminism / 1.3.1
Patterns of offending, sexes compared / 8.1.2.4
Pay, British Social Attitudes / 7.6
Pay, companies paying women more / 7.5
Pay, gender gap, employees, by age / 7.4
Pay, gender gap, employees, full time / 7.4
Pay, gender gap, employees, part time / 7.4
Pay, gender gap, reporting / 7.5
Pay, gender gap, UK nations / 7.4
Pension, State / 7.9.2
Pensions / 7.9
Pensions, defined benefit v defined contribution / 7.9.1
Pensions, gender inequality / 7.9.4
Pensions, numbers / 7.9.3
Pensions, occupational v personal / 7.9.1
Pensions, public v private / 7.9.1
Pensions, public v private inequality / 7.9.1
Pensions, women complain / 7.9.2
Perceived burdensomeness / 18.3
Perpetrator programmes, domestic abuse / 9.2.11
Perpetrators, all violence by sex / 9.1.2
Personality disorders / 17.1.2
Personality, relation to gender equality / 7.3.4
Phimosis and circumcision / 6.2.2
Phimosis, developmental versus problematic / 6.2.2
Phobias / 17.1.1
PIAAC / 2.6
PISA / 2.2
Police cautions, gender disparity / 8.1.2.3
Political Correctness / 1.3.1
Population, by sex and marital state / 13.1
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder / 17.1.6
Power and Control theory of domestic abuse / 9.2.11
Power and Control theory of domestic abuse / 9.2
Power Threat Meaning Framework / 17.5
Pregnancies, planned v accidental / 15.1.2
Premature death, by sex / 3.1
Primary schooling / 2.1
Primary victims of war, are men / 17.5
Prison deaths / 8.6
Prison deaths, "natural" causes / 8.6.2
Prison deaths, men v women / 8.6.2
Prison deaths, men, steep increase / 8.6.2
Prison population, by sex / 8.1.1
Prison population, increase since 1940 / 8.1.1
Prison sentence length, false gender narrative / 8.1.2.1.2
Prison sentence length, gender disparity / 8.1.2.1.2
Prison sentence length, increasing for men / 8.1.2.1.2
Prison suicides / 8.6.1
Prison, disciplinary offences by sex / 8.1.2.2
Prison, sexual abuse of young offenders in / 20.8
Prison, sexual assault against men in / 20.10
Prisoners, an IQ issue? / 8.3.2
Prisoners, as unmarried fathers / 8.4
Prisoners, by offence category and sex / 8.1.2.4
Prisoners, childhood background / 8.3
Prisoners, children, 97% boys / 8.3.1
Prisoners, their families / 8.4
Private law, explained / 10.1
Private law, number of cases per year / 10.1
Private law, prevalence of allegations of abuse / 10.3.3
Probability of dying, relative to sex / 3.1
Professors, female / 2.8
Prostate cancer / 3.2.2.2
Prostate cancer cf breast cancer / 3.2.2.2
Prostate cancer, mpMRI test / 3.2.2.2
Prostate Specific Antigen test / 3.2.2.2
Protected Characteristics / 1.2
PSA Test / 3.2.2.2
Psychotic disorders, sex, age and ethnicity dependence / 17.1.4
PTSD – see Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder /
Public law, explained / 10.1
Public Sector Equality Duty / 1.2
Public sector spending / 7.3.1
Public sector, employees / 7.3.1
Public sector, pensions / 7.9.1
Quranic Path / 5.2
Rape allegation acquittals / 19.2
Rape and incapacity / 19.1
Rape and normal intercourse, interchangeable at will / 19.1
Rape juries, activist lobbying / 19.5
Rape juries, calls to do away with / 19.5.3
Rape juries, increasing acquittals / 19.2
Rape juries, performance / 19.2
Rape trials disclosure and the CPS / 19.7
Rape trials, disclosure failure / 19.7
Rape trials, evidence by video / 19.5.1
Rape versus rape-flagged / 19.2
Rape, attrition by sex of victim / 19.4
Rape, attrition statistics cf VAP / 19.4
Rape, attrition, reasons / 19.4
Rape, biological women cannot rape (English law) / 19.1
Rape, by sex of victims / 19.3.1
Rape, convictions / 19.2
Rape, convictions cf allegations / 19.4
Rape, defined / 19.1
Rape, false allegations / 19.6
Rape, false allegations, identified cases / 19.6
Rape, in war / 20.11
Rape, in war, humiliation of the vanquished / 20.11
Rape, in war, of men / 20.11
Rape, in war, of men, suppression by NGOs / 20.11
Rape, of men by women / 20.9
Rape, prevalence by police reports (increased) / 19.2
Rape, prevalence by sex / 19.2
Rape, prevalence by survey (reduced) / 19.2
Reciprocal altruism / 1.3.2.1
Resident parent, percentage by sex / 11.2
Respect / 1.3.1
Respect, the charity / 9.2.11
Retired persons, numbers by sex / 7.9.3
Ridged bands (penis) / 5.1
Right to choose, is not men's / 15.1.1
Rotherham grooming gangs, boy victims / 20.6
Rough sleepers, by sex (England) / 16.2.1
Rough sleepers, counts in England / 16.2.1
Rough sleepers, counts in London / 16.2.2
Rough sleepers, counts in Wales / 16.2.3
Rough sleepers, deaths 2012 / 16.3.1
Rough sleepers, deaths without names / 16.3.3
Rough sleepers, deaths, BIJ data 2017/18 / 16.3.3
Rough sleepers, deaths, by sex / 16.3.1
Rough sleepers, deaths, by sex / 16.3.2
Rough sleepers, deaths, case histories / 16.3.3
Rough sleepers, deaths, ONS data 2013-2017 / 16.3.2
Rough sleepers, increased numbers / 16.2.1
Rough sleepers, number of, ambiguity / 16.2.1
SATS (KS2) / 2.1
School staff, numbers and sex ratio / 2.7
Secondary school / 2.2
Sectioned, under Mental Health Act, statistics / 17.4
Self-harming, in prison, by sex / 8.5
Self-harming, prevalence by sex, age and cohort / 18.1
Senior STEMM staff, financial coercion to promote women / 2.8
Separating couples, percentage applying to the courts / 11.6
Separation, effect on domestic abuse / 9.2.4
Separation, financial issues / 11.8
Serious Case Reviews / 10.4
Serious crimes, recent increase in police recorded / 9.1.1
Sex offences, sex of victim / 20.6
Sex offenders against minors, sex of / 20.3
Sex offenders against students, sex of / 20.2
Sex offenders, female hebephiles / 20.2
Sex offenders, female on female / 20.2
Sex offenders, female, against youths in custody / 20.8
Sex offenders, female, bibliography for over a century / 20.3
Sex offenders, female, Childline / 20.3
Sex offenders, female, comparison with male cases / 20.2
Sex offenders, female, Kidscape / 20.3
Sex offenders, female, lenient treatment / 20.2
Sex offenders, female, lenient treatment / 20.7
Sex offenders, female, male victims / 20.9
Sex offenders, female, perception of professionals / 20.5
Sex offenders, female, prevalence against minors / 20.3
Sex offenders, female, prosecutions versus imprisonment / 20.1
Sex offenders, female, public perception / 20.2
Sex offenders, female, USA teachers / 20.2
Sex offenders, male, history of abuse as children / 20.4
Sex offenders, sentence length / 20.1
Sex offenders, statistics by sex / 20.1
Sex trafficking, of boys / 20.6
Sexual assault of men in prison / 20.10
Sexual assault of women in prison / 20.10
Sexual assault, women against men, public incredulity / 19
Sexual offences, defined / 19.1
Sexual offences, implications of definition by consent / 19
Sexual offenders, female / 20
Shame / 1.3.1
Shared care, opportunity lost / 12.3
Shared Parenting Consortium / 12.3
SIDS – see Sudden Infant Death Syndrome /
Single homeless, definition / 16.1
Single parent family, percentage / 13.2
Single parenting and children's premature sexual experience / 14.3
Single parenting and increased mental ill-health / 14.3
Single parenting and increased prevalence of suicide / 14.3
Single parents, statistics / 13.2
Social perfectionism / 18.3
Spending by sex, historic / 7.7.1
Spending by sex, recent / 7.7.2
Spending, by sex / 7.7
Sperm count, chief medical officer doesn't care / 15.1.3
Sperm count, falling / 15.1.3
Sperm count, possible false alarm? / 15.1.3
Standard Attainment Tests / 2.1
State pension / 7.9.2
STEM hiring, favours women / 2.8
STEMM academic staff, by sex / 2.8
STEMM, dominance by women / 2.4
Stroke / 3.2.1
Students' perceptions of teacher bias / 2.10
Substance abuse / 17.3
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome / 9.2.7
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome, incidence by marital status / 9.2.7
Suicidal ideation, association with mental disorder / 18.1
Suicidal ideation, by sex and age / 18.1
Suicidal ideation, predictor of domestic homicide / 18.2.3.2
Suicide and child contact, unquantified / 18.2.3.1
Suicide and domestic abuse / 18.2.3.2
Suicide and fatherlessness / 14.3
Suicide and partner separation, by sex / 18.2.3.1
Suicide attempts, by sex and age / 18.1
Suicide in prison / 8.6.1
Suicide, completed rarity cf ideation / 18.2.2
Suicide, completed versus mental disorder by sex / 18.2.2
Suicide, exogenous factors / 18.2.3.1
Suicide, in prison / 8.6.1
Suicide, leading cause of early death in men / 3.3
Suicide, male, association with socioeconomics / 18.2.3
Suicide, male, association with socioeconomics / 18.3
Suicide, male, lack of UK research / 18.2.3.3
Suicide, male, narratives about emotion / 18.3
Suicide, male, narratives about hegemonic masculinity / 18.3
Suicide, male, psychological narratives / 18.3
Suicide, male, sociological narratives / 18.3
Suicide, methods / 18.2.4
Suicide, statistics and trends, by sex, England / 18.2.1
Suicide, statistics and trends, by sex, Wales / 18.2.1
Suicide, steep reduction since 1950 / 18.2.1
Suicide, the so-called paradox / 18.2.2
Teacher bias, expected and actual / 2.10
Teacher bias, primary school / 2.1
Teacher bias, secondary school / 2.2
Teacher bias, students' perceptions / 2.10
Teachers, male, disappearing / 2.7
Title IX, complaint against APA / 17.5
Traditional masculinity, protective / 17.5
Traditional masculinity, traduced / 17.5
Unemployment rate / 7.1
Unemployment versus wanting a job / 7.2
Unemployment, by sex and year / 7.1
University education, worldwide women dominate / 2.11
University entry by sex, race and wealth / 2.4
University entry, dominance by women / 2.4
University staff, by sex / 2.8
University subjects, gender ratio versus IQ / 2.5
University, undergraduates by sex and subject / 2.4
Unpaid caring, by sex / 7.10.2
Urinary tract infections and circumcision / 6.2.1
VAP – see Violence Against the Person /
VAP, pattern of offending by sex / 8.1.2.5
Vas occlusion (male contraception) / 15.1.1
VAWG, does not mean violence against women and girls / 19.2
Victims, of violence / 9.1.1
Violence Against the Person / 9.1.2
Violence Against the Person, pattern by sex / 8.1.2.5
Violence, by relationship with perpetrator / 9.1.1
Violence, crime survey data / 9.1.1
Violence, perpetrators by sex / 9.1.2
Violence, police recorded data / 9.1.1
Violence, reducing since 1995 / 9.1.1
Violence, victims / 9.1.1
Violent men, percentage / 9.1.2
Violent women, percentage / 9.1.2
War rape / 20.11
Wealth, by sex / 7.7.2
White males, bottom of the educational heap / 2.9
White males, bottom of the educational heap / 2.4
Widows and widowers, statistics / 13.1
Wishes and Feelings (of the child) / 12.1
Women and Equalities Committee / 1.2
Women in STEMM / 2.8
Women MPs, in favour of war / 17.5
Women raping men, public incredulity / 20.9
Women's Aid, input to national statistics on domestic abuse / 9.2.1
Women's Aid, view of domestic abuse / 9.2
Woozle, defined / 8.2
Woozle, leniency to women due to offending history / 8.2
Woozle, most women prisoners have dependent children / 8.2
Woozle, women imprisoned for first offence / 8.2
Woozle, women imprisoned for minor offences / 8.2
Woozle, women prisoners non-violent / 8.2
Woozles, imprisonment / 8.2
Woozling shared parenting, a case study in lobbying / 12.3
Workforce, numbers / 7.6
Working hours, paid, by sex / 7.6
Workplace deaths, male dominance / 3.4.2
Workplace injuries, by sex / 3.4.3
Work-related carpal tunnel / 3.4.4.4
Work-related hearing loss / 3.4.4.3
Work-related mental ill-health, by sex / 3.4.4.1
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders, by sex / 3.4.4.2
Work-related white-finger / 3.4.4.4
Young adults, living with parents / 13.2